
Oak Forest, IL Code of Ordinances


CITY OF OAK FOREST, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Code contains:
Local legislation current through 10-23-2018
State legislation current through Pamphlet # 5, 2018




 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE: 2008-12-0208O



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF OAK FOREST,
ILLINOIS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF OAK FOREST AND DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.



WHEREAS, the City of Oak Forest is an Illinois municipal corporation
organized and operated under the laws of the State of Illinois; and



WHEREAS, the City of Oak Forest is a home rule municipality as defined by
Article VII of the Illinois Constitution; and



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Oak
Forest need to be updated, more efficiently arranged and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the
public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for
the proper conduct of its affairs; and



WHEREAS, the Illinois General Assembly has empowered and authorized
municipalities to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing
ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to
incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and



WHEREAS, the Oak Forest City Council has authorized a general compilation,
revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Oak Forest of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
OAK FOREST, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Oak Forest as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Oak Forest,
Illinois."



Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:



   •   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   •   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   •   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   •   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   •   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   •   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   •   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   •   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   •   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Mayor and City Council, and the Clerk of the
City of Oak Forest is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.



Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 8, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



Section 6.   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any
of the other provisions of this Ordinance.



Section 7.   All Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.



Section 8.   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.



This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.



ADOPTED



This 9th Day of December, 2008



APPROVED By Me



This 10th Day of December, 2008



 




Aldermen

 
Aye
 
Nay
 
Abstain
 
Absent


Laura Clemons

First Ward
 
 
 
 
X


Richard D. Simon

Second Ward
 
X
 
 
 


Diane Wolf

Third Ward
 
X
 
 
 


Chuck Toland

Fourth Ward
 
X
 
 
 


Nancy L. Hullinger

Fifth Ward
 
X
 
 
 


Gregory A. Simos

Sixth Ward
 
X
 
 
 


Paul W. Wechet

Seventh Ward
 
X
 
 
 


JoAnn Kelly

Mayor
 
 
 
 




 



   JoAnn M. Kelly    /s/



   JOANN KELLY, MAYOR



ATTEST:



Scott Burkhardt    /s/ 



SCOTT BURKHARDT, CITY CLERK



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter



         10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section headings



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Official time



   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Amendments to code



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Reference to public office or officer



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Ordinances saved



   10.16   Technical codes



   10.17   Historical and statutory references



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification by and for the City of Oak Forest shall be designated
as the Code of Oak Forest, and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   CITY, MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  The City of Oak Forest,
irrespective of its population or legal classification.



   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL.  The Council of the City of Oak Forest.



   COUNTY.  Cook County, Illinois.



   COUNTY BOARD.  The County Board of Cook County, Illinois.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)



   COURT.  Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.



   DECREE.  Synonymous with JUDGMENT. 



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)



   ELECTORS.  Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at
municipal elections.



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  Words used for an executive or ministerial officer
may include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)



   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the
day on which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER
means at any time after that date.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)



   HIGHWAY,ROAD or STREET.  May include any road laid out by authority of
the United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state,
and all bridges thereupon.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)



   ILCS.  Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter
amended.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves, or as a servant, agent or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MAYOR.  The Mayor of the City of Oak Forest.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



   MUNICIPAL CODE.  The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.



   OATH.  Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common
of the whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land
trust which owns property.



   PERSON.  Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate, as well as
individuals.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   POLICE OFFICERS.  Police officers employed and in the service of the
City of Oak Forest. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons
in the employ of a city as members of the Department of Police, who are or
shall hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS. 



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes school districts; units of legal
government; the village, city, county, state or federal governments, officers
and agencies thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes CERTIFIED MAIL and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
REGISTERED MAIL.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use
of pedestrians.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)



   SPECIAL DISTRICTS.  The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)



   STATE.  The State of Illinois.



   STREET.  Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of the premises, alone or with others.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The city code hereby adopted,
and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters or sections.



   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  The meaning established in § 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes printing, electronic  and any other
mode of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any
person is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required
by law, it shall be:



      (1)   In the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he
or she is unable to write, his or her proper mark; or



      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Electronic
Commerce Security Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq., except as
otherwise provided by law.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)



   YEAR.  A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR
alone is equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.” 



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



§ 10.03  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference
purposes only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or
judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.



   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following rules will be followed.



      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)



      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)



      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)



      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the
context admits.



   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be
excluded. If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)



   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more
municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority of the officers or persons.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)



   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision
of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding that
construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code may be
repugnant thereto.



   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor
and City Council may be fully carried out.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)



   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the
same as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of
the prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)



§ 10.05  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the city shall be as set by federal law.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder;



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred
thereunder;



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment. The investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as
if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the
context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or
revised was not intended.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.09  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in
any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of
repealed chapters, sections and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the
omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances
as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima
facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of
ordinances by the City Council.



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section
or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application, and to this end the provisions are severable.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.



   (A)   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to
apply to any office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



   (B)   References shall also include the designee or agent of any
such officer or office, unless the law or the context clearly requires
otherwise.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the
misspelling of any word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary
to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or
words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provision
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.



   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not
limited to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating
to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of
warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating
streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances) as well as any other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances, shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
City Council or a certain city officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.



§ 10.16  TECHNICAL CODES.



   (A)   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by
reference, any subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes
shall automatically become a part of this code and shall be made available
for public inspection by the city.



   (B)   Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the
most restrictive provision shall prevail.



§ 10.17  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section. Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord.
25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same
as the statute. Example: 



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1)



      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



   § 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      The city shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act.



   Statutory reference:



      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et
seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
city for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1



   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter



         30.   GOVERNING BODY



         31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



         32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND PROGRAMS



         33.   REVENUE AND FINANCE



CHAPTER 30:  GOVERNING BODY



Section




City Council




   30.01   Meetings



   30.02   Presiding officer, Mayor pro tem and temporary chairperson



   30.03   Roll call; compelling attendance of absent members



   30.04   Quorum; order of business



   30.05   Powers and duties of presiding officer



   30.06   Powers and duties of members



   30.07   Right of nonmembers to address Council



   30.08   New business; deferment of committee reports



   30.09   Debates



   30.10   Call of member to order



   30.11   Appeals from decisions of chair



   30.12   Question of personal privilege



   30.13   Voting



   30.14   Special order of business



   30.15   Enactment of ordinances and resolutions



   30.16   Reading of motions, resolutions, ordinances, minutes and
correspondence



   30.17   Withdrawal of motions and resolutions



   30.18   Division of questions



   30.19   Record of motions and resolutions



   30.20   Taking and entering votes



   30.21   Announcement and changes of vote



   30.22   Precedence of motions



   30.23   Journal; minutes



   30.24   Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order Revised



   30.25   Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules



   30.26   Censure and expulsion of members



   30.27   Minutes of meetings



   30.28   Verbatim records of closed meetings



   30.29   Style of ordinances



   30.30   Voting



   30.31   Approval or veto of ordinances by Mayor



   30.32   Record of ordinances



   30.33   Publication and display of ordinances



   30.34   Time of taking effect; emergency measures




Code of Conduct




   30.45   Declaration of policy



   30.46   Definitions



   30.47   Prohibited political activities



   30.48   Gift ban



   30.49   Gift ban exceptions



   30.50   Disposition of gifts



   30.51   Prohibited personal financial interest in contracts;
adoption by reference



   30.52   Whistle blower protection



   30.99   Penalty




CITY COUNCIL




§ 30.01  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings of the Mayor and Council shall generally be
held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month; however the Council
will meet a minimum of at least once a month. Each meeting shall be held in
the Council chambers of the City Hall, located at 15440 South Central Avenue.
Meeting dates and times will be scheduled at the discretion of the Council. 
Advanced notice of any council meeting date ro time change will be provided
to the public through the City’s website and posting notice of such time
change in the City Clerk’s office in City Hall.



   (B)   Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be
rescheduled at the discretion of Council.



   (C)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any three
members of Council by filing a written request or notice therefor with the
City Clerk at least 60 hours prior to the time specified for the meeting. At
least 48 hours’ written notice of the special meeting shall be given by the
City Clerk, which notice shall specify the time and purpose of the meeting
and be delivered to each member of Council personally if he or she can be
found, and if he or she cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of the notice
at the home of the Council member in the presence of an adult member of the
family of the member. The City Clerk shall cause an affidavit showing service
of the notice, as provided in this section, to be filed inhis or her office
prior to the time fixed for the special meeting, together with a statement of
compliance with the provisions relating to notices to members of the media,
as provided in the Open Meetings Act, ILCSCh. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
(1993), as amended. Any special meeting attended by all of the members of
Council shall be a regular meeting for the transaction of any business that
may come before the meeting if all members so agree. All meetings of Council
shall be held in the City Hall, including special and adjourned meetings, and
all meetings, except executive sessions, shall be open to the public, as
required by statute.



   (D)   Committee of the Whole meetings may be scheduled when
appropriate. The Committee of the Whole format may be utilized to discuss
general items of business, or discuss legislative matters prior to placement
upon the regular meeting agenda.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.010)  (Ord. 2327, §1, passed --1998; Ord.
2006-08-0050O, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 2010-03-0283O, passed 3-9-2010 )



§ 30.02  PRESIDING OFFICER, MAYOR PRO TEM AND TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of Council, but he or
she shall have a vote only where state statutes or municipal ordinances
require more than a majority vote of Council, or in the event of a tie, or
where one-half of the Council members elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote.



   (B)   During the absence or disability of the Mayor, Council shall
elect one member Mayor pro tem of Council, and he or she shall act as
presiding officer of Council. Where the absence or disability of the Mayor is
to be of a very short duration and no individual is required to be granted
the powers of the Mayor, Council shall elect one member temporary
chairperson. The Mayor pro tem or the temporary chairperson, when acting as
presiding officer, shall vote on all questions on which the vote is taken as
“yeas” and “nays,” his or her name being called last. The Mayor pro
tem shall have all of the powers and duties of the Mayor. The temporary
chairperson shall have only such powers and duties as accrue to a presiding
officer.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.020)



§ 30.03  ROLL CALL; COMPELLING ATTENDANCE OF ABSENT MEMBERS.



   (A)   Each meeting of Council shall convene at the time appointed
for the meeting, as provided in § 30.01 above. The City Clerk or someone
appointed to fill his or her place by the presiding officer shall thereupon
immediately call the roll of members. If no quorum is present, Council shall
not thereby stand adjourned, but the members present shall be competent to
adjourn or recess Council by a majority vote.



   (B)   If no quorum is present and the members present wish to compel
the attendance of absent members, they themselves, or their agents, shall
attempt to communicate the call to the session personally to the absentees.
Any absent member who refuses to attend the meeting after personal notice to
attend may be fined by the members present a sum of not to exceed $25 for
each occurrence.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.030)



§ 30.04  QUORUM; ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a
majority of all Council members entitled by law to be elected.



   (B)   The order of business shall be as follows:



      (1)   Call to order by presiding officer;



      (2)   Pledge of allegiance;



      (3)   Roll call;



      (4)   Establishment of quorum;



      (5)   Establish consent calendar:



      (6)   Motion to approve consent calendar:



         (a)   Reports of commissions;



         (b)   Lists of bills to be paid;



         (c)   Approval of minutes;



         (d)   Acknowledgment of petitions and correspondence; and



         (e)   Resolutions, appointments and ordinances.



      (7)   Consideration of items removed from consent calendar (if
any);



      (8)   Agenda items;



      (9)   Citizens participation;



      (10)   Unfinished business;



      (11)   New business;



      (12)   Executive session; and



      (13)   Adjournment.



   (C)   (1)   Except for matters already under discussion, no new
matter shall be brought up after 11:00 p.m.



      (2)   This provision may be waived by the majority consent of
Council.



      (3)   Items on the agenda not already under discussion are
automatically tabled to the next regular meeting



(2000 Code, § 2.02.040)  (Ord. 2489, § 1, passed - -2000; Ord.
2006-06-0033O, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 30.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, may
speak to points of order in preference to other members and shall decide all
questions of order subject to appeal. If he or she refuses to allow the
members of Council to exercise their right to appeal a decision of the chair,
the members of Council may consider and pass upon the matter in spite of the
chair’s failure to grant them an appeal.



   (B)   In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the
presiding officer shall have the power to require the chambers to be cleared.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.050)



§ 30.06  POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   While the presiding officer is putting a question, no member
of Council shall walk across or out of the Council chambers.



   (B)   Every member, previous to his or her speaking, making a motion
or seconding the same, shall address himself or herself to the presiding
officer and say: “Mr. Mayor,” and shall not proceed with his or her
remarks until recognized and named by the chair. He or she shall confine
himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and
refraining from impugning the motives of any other member’s argument or
vote. When two or more members address the chair at the same time, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is first to speak. The members
may, by a two-thirds vote, expel a member for disorderly conduct. That member
may not be expelled a second time for the same offense.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.060)



§ 30.07  RIGHT OF NONMEMBERS TO ADDRESS COUNCIL.



   Except during the time allotted for public discussion and comment, no
person, other than a member of Council, shall address Council, except with
the consent of two of the members present.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.070)



§ 30.08  NEW BUSINESS; DEFERMENT OF COMMITTEE REPORTS.



   When a member of Council wishes to present a communication, petition,
order, resolution, ordinance or other original matter, he or she shall send
it to the desk of the City Clerk, who shall read such matter when reached in
its proper order. Upon the request of any two members present, any report of
a committee of Council shall be deferred for final action thereon to the next
regular meeting of Council after the report is made.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.080)



§ 30.09  DEBATES.



   (A)   No member shall speak more than twice on the same question,
except by unanimous consent, and then not until every other member desiring
to speak has had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the
proponent of the matter under consideration or the chairperson of the
committee whose report is under consideration, as the case may be, shall have
the right to open and close the debate.



   (B)   No member shall speak longer than five minutes at any one
time, except by consent of Council, and in closing debate on any question, as
provided in this section, the speaker shall be limited to five minutes,
except by special consent of Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.090)



§ 30.10  CALL OF MEMBER TO ORDER.



   A member of Council, when called to order by the chair, shall thereupon
discontinue speaking and take his or her seat, and the order or ruling of the
chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right of appeal.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.100)



§ 30.11  APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF CHAIR.



   (A)   Any member may appeal to Council from a ruling of the chair
and, if the appeal is seconded, the member making the appeal may briefly
state his or her reason for the same, and the chair may briefly explain his
or her ruling, but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other member
shall participate in the discussion.



   (B)   The chair shall then put the question: “Shall the decision
of the chair be sustained?”



   (C)   If a majority of the members present vote “no,” the
decision of the chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.110)



§ 30.12  QUESTION OF PERSONAL PRIVILEGE.



   The right of a member of Council to address Council on a question of
personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her integrity,
character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.120)



§ 30.13  VOTING.



   Every member who is present when a question is stated from the chair
shall vote thereon, unless excused by Council, or unless he or she is
personally interested in the question, in which cases he or she shall not
vote.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.130)



§ 30.14  SPECIAL ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   Any matter before Council may be set down as a special order of
business at a certain time, if two-thirds of the members present vote in the
affirmative, but not otherwise.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.140)



§ 30.15  ENACTMENT OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   No ordinance, resolution or other legislative enactment which
involves an expenditure of city funds will be passed and enacted without
having first been placed on the regular published agenda.



   (B)   In the event of an emergency need, the Council may immediately
place a legislative proposal on the agenda by a two-thirds vote of the
Council members.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.150)  (Ord. 2324, § 1, passed - -1998)



§ 30.16  READING OF MOTIONS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDINANCES, MINUTES AND
CORRESPONDENCE.



   (A)   No motion shall be put or debated in Council or in committee
unless it is seconded.



   (B)   When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding
officer before debate, and every motion in Council, except motions of
procedure, shall be reduced to writing, if required by a member, and the
member who proposed the motion shall be entitled to the floor.



   (C)   The reading of any motion, resolution or ordinance may be
waived, as may the reading of the minutes of a previous meeting.



   (D)   Copies of correspondence received by the City Clerk or the
Mayor shall be distributed before the meeting to all members of Council.



   (E)   Correspondence received by municipal officials need not be
read in full at Council meetings unless pertinent to a matter before
discussion.



   (F)   Correspondence received may be summarized to Council meetings.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.160)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.17  WITHDRAWAL OF MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.



   After a motion or resolution is stated by the presiding officer, it
shall be deemed to be in possession of Council, but it may be withdrawn at
any time before decision, by consent of Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.170)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.18  DIVISION OF QUESTIONS.



   If any question under consideration contains several distinct
propositions, Council may, by a majority vote of the members present, divide
the question.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.180)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.19  RECORD OF MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.



   In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the journal,
the names of the members moving and seconding the same shall be entered.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.190)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.20  TAKING AND ENTERING VOTES.



   (A)   The “yeas” and “nays” upon any question shall be taken
and entered in the journal. When the City Clerk has commenced to call the
roll of Council for the taking of a vote by yeas and nays, all debate on the
question before Council shall be deemed concluded. During the taking of the
vote, a member shall be permitted to briefly explain his or her vote and
shall respond to the calling of his or her name by the City Clerk by
answering yea or nay, as the case may be.



   (B)   The City Clerk, when calling the roll of Council for the
taking of votes, shall always start the roll with the maker of the motion and
continue with the roll from that point (i.e., if the first seated fifth ward
member makes the motion, then he or she shall be the first called upon. The
next seated fifth ward member would be called upon second. This would
continue in order of seating until the last one called upon would be the
second seated fourth ward member).



(2000 Code, § 2.02.200)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.21  ANNOUNCEMENT AND CHANGES OF VOTE.



   The result of all votes by yeas and nays shall be announced by the City
Clerk, and no vote shall be changed after the announcement.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.210)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.22  PRECEDENCE OF MOTIONS.



   (A)   The following chart sets out commonly used motions in the
order of their precedence as determined by Robert’s Rules of Order.



   (B)   The main or principal motion is at the bottom in rank.



   (C)   The other motions may be made while the main motion is pending
and must be dealt with before the main motion.



   (D)   They are arranged according to rank, the highest at the top of
the list.



   (E)   Incidental motions, however, have no rank among themselves,
yet take precedence over subsidiary motions.



   (F)   When any one motion is immediately pending, the motions above
it on the list are in order and those below it are out of order.



      (1)   Privileged motions. The following motions are
undebatable:



         (a)   Fix time to adjourn;



         (b)   Adjourn;



         (c)   Take recess; and



         (d)   Question of privilege.



      (2)   Incidental motions. The following motions are
undebatable, except the motion to appeal:



         (a)   Appeal;



         (b)   Division of assembly;



         (c)   Division of a question;



         (d)   Filling blanks;



         (e)   Objection;



         (f)   Parliamentary inquiry;



         (g)   Point of information;



         (h)   Point of order;



         (i)   Suspend the rules (requires a two-thirds majority
vote); and



         (j)   Withdraw a motion.



      (3)   Subsidiary motions.



         (a)   The following motions are undebatable:



            1.   Lay on the table;



            2.   The previous question (close debate)
(requires a two-thirds majority vote); and



            3.   Limit or extend debate.



         (b)   The following motions are debatable:



            1.   Postpone to a definite time;



            2.   Refer to a committee;



            3.   Amend the amendment;



            4.   Amendment;



            5.   Postpone indefinitely; and



            6.   Main or principal motion.



      (4)   Miscellaneous motions. After action has been taken on a
main or principal motion, the following motions may be made:



         (a)   Take from table (undebatable) (requires two-thirds
vote without notice; majority vote with notice);



         (b)   Rescind (debatable);



         (c)   Reconsider (debatable); and



         (d)   Ratify (debatable).



      (5)   Motion to refer. A motion to refer to a standing
committee shall take precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special
committee.



      (6)   Motion to amend.



         (a)   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order,
but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.



         (b)   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion
shall be in order, but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not
be in order.



         (c)   On an amendment to “strike out and insert,”
the paragraph to be amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words
proposed to be stricken out, then those to be inserted and finally the
paragraph as it will stand if so amended shall be read.



         (d)   An amendment to the main question or another
pending question may be referred to a committee, and neither the main
question nor such other pending question shall be affected thereby.



      (7)   Filling of blanks. When a blank is to be filled, and
different sums or times are proposed, the question shall be taken first on
the last sum or the longest time.



      (8)   Motion to substitute. A substitute for any original
proposition under debate or for any pending amendment to the proposition may
be entertained, notwithstanding that at such time further amendment is
admissible, and if accepted by Council by vote, shall entirely supersede the
original proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all
amendments appertaining thereto.



      (9)   Reconsideration.



         (a)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time
during the same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A
motion for reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the
negative, shall not be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be
reconsidered. No motion to reconsider the approval or denial of the
recommendation of an advisory body required to hold public hearings shall be
entertained, except at the same meeting at which the original action was
taken or after the matter has been referred to the advisory body for a
further hearing and recommendation.



         (b)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded
by members who voted on the prevailing side of the question to be
reconsidered, unless otherwise provided by law. However, where a motion has
received a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on
the ground that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute
for the passage or adoption of the motion, then in such case a motion to
reconsider may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the
affirmative on the question to be reconsidered, so long as the issue
presented is the same, no new information is forthcoming and the rights of
third parties have not intervened.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.220)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.23  JOURNAL; MINUTES.



   The City Clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of Council.
Within not more than ten days after each meeting of Council, the City Clerk
shall supply to each member a typewritten copy of the proceedings.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.230)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.24  ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER REVISED.



   The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published
edition of Robert’s Rules of Order Revised shall govern Council in all
cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent
with the special rules of Council or the statutes or laws of the state.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.240)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.25  TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF RULES; AMENDMENT OF RULES.



   The rules set forth in this chapter may be temporarily suspended or
repealed or amended only by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of
Council entitled by law to be elected.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.250)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.26  CENSURE AND EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.



   Any member acting or appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who
uses opprobius, obscene or insulting language to or about any member of
Council, or who does not obey an order of the chair, shall be, on motion,
censured by a majority vote of the Mayor and Council and, in addition, may be
fined not to exceed $25 for each such occurrence. With the concurrence of
two-thirds of the members elected, Council may expel a member, but not a
second time for the same offense.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.260)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998)



§ 30.27  MINUTES OF MEETINGS.



   Minutes of all meetings of the City Council, whether open or closed,
shall be recorded and kept in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act,
ILCS Ch. 5, Act 120, which Act, as it may be amended from time to time, is
hereby incorporated into this section as if fully set forth herein.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.270)  (Ord. 2324, § 2 (part), passed - -1998; Ord.
2008-03-0162O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 30.28  VERBATIM RECORDS OF CLOSED MEETINGS.



   (A)   Verbatim recording.



      (1)   A verbatim record of all closed meetings of the City of
Oak Forest shall be kept in the form of an audio recording.



      (2)   The City of Oak Forest shall provide the recording
device and only one recording device will be allowed.



      (3)   Individuals shall not be allowed to bring their own
recording device to closed meetings.



   (B)   Operator of recording device.



      (1)   The City Clerk, or his or her designee if he or she is
unavailable, will be responsible for operating the recording device for all
closed meetings of the City of Oak Forest.



      (2)   Each committee of the City of Oak Forest shall designate
in writing the individual responsible for recording closed meetings and
submit the designation to the Clerk of the City of Oak Forest.



   (C)   Maintenance of tapes.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall maintain the audio tapes in a safe
and secure location under lock and key.



      (2)   Access to nonreleased tapes shall be limited to the City
Clerk, or his or her designee, unless otherwise directed in writing by the
Oak Forest City Council.



      (3)   Individuals allowed access shall sign a log indicating
the date and time they listened to a particular tape.



      (4)   Individuals allowed access shall listen to a tape only
under supervision.



      (5)   No copies of any non-released tape shall be made.



   (D)   Destruction of tapes. The verbatim record of a closed meeting
may be destroyed 18 months after the completion of the meeting if the Oak
Forest City Council approves the destruction of the particular recording and
it approves written minutes for the particular closed meeting that contain
the following, as required by § 2.06 of the Open Meetings Act:



      (1)   The date, time and place of the meeting;



      (2)   The members of the public body recorded as either
present or absent; and



      (3)   A summary of discussion on all matters proposed,
deliberated or decided, and a record of any votes taken.



   (E)   Review of tapes. The City Clerk shall, on a periodic basis,
but not less frequently than quarterly, inspect the recordings to check their
quality and completeness and report on any problems, in writing, to the Oak
Forest City Council.



   (F)   Confidentiality of recordings. Unless the Oak Forest City
Council has determined that a recording no longer requires confidential
treatment, or otherwise consents to disclosure, the verbatim recording of
closed meetings made pursuant to division (A) above shall not be either open
for public inspection or subject to discovery in any administrative
proceeding other than one brought to enforce the provisions of the Open
Meetings Act. In a civil action brought to enforce the provisions of the Open
Meetings Act, a recording will be made available to the court or in camera
examination for the purpose of determining whether a violation of the Open
Meetings Act exists. In the case of a criminal proceeding, a recording will
be made available to the court for in camera examination for the purpose of
determining what provisions, if any, must be made available to the parties
for use as evidence in the prosecution.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.070)  (Ord. 2819, § 1, passed - -2004)



§ 30.29  STYLE OF ORDINANCES.



   The style of all ordinances shall be: “BE IT ORDAINED BY the City
Council of the City of Oak Forest, County of Cook, State of Illinois...,”
as provided by statute.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.280)



§ 30.30  VOTING.



   (A)   The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all
ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability against the city,
or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases
at the request of any member of Council. The vote shall be entered on the
journal of the proceedings, as provided by statute.



   (B)   “Yea” and “yes” shall be used interchangeably in this
chapter. “Nay” and “no” shall be used interchangeably in this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.290)



§ 30.31  APPROVAL OR VETO OF ORDINANCES BY MAYOR.



   (A)   An ordinance passed by Council, before it takes effect, shall
be deposited with the City Clerk, and if the Mayor approves it, he or she
shall sign the same, and if he or she does not approve it, he or she shall
return it to Council, with his or her objections thereto, in writing, at the
next regular meeting occurring not less than five days after the passage
thereof. The veto may extend to any one or more items or appropriations
contained in any ordinance making an appropriation, or to the entire
ordinance. If the veto only extends to a part of the ordinance, the residue
thereof shall take effect and be in force. If the Mayor fails to return any
ordinance with his or her objections thereto by the time set forth in this
section, he or she shall be deemed to have approved the ordinance and the
same shall take effect accordingly.



   (B)   Upon the return of any ordinance by the Mayor, the vote by
which the same was passed shall be reconsidered by Council. If, after the
reconsideration, two-thirds of all the members elected to Council agree, by
yeas and nays, to pass the same, it shall go into effect notwithstanding that
the Mayor may refuse to approve thereof.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.300)



§ 30.32  RECORD OF ORDINANCES.



   The City Clerk shall keep a record of all ordinances passed in an
ordinance book for that purpose.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.310)



§ 30.33  PUBLICATION AND DISPLAY OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   An ordinance imposing any penalty for a violation thereof or
making any appropriation shall be published, as required by statute, either
in a newspaper or in pamphlet form.



   (B)   If published in pamphlet form, the ordinance, in its pamphlet
form, shall be displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in the
City Hall.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.320)



§ 30.34  TIME OF TAKING EFFECT; EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   (A)   No ordinance which must be published as set forth in § 30.33
above shall go into effect until ten days after it is so published, unless a
statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it and it achieves
passage by a two-thirds vote of the members of Council.



   (B)   In all other cases, the ordinance shall go into effect upon
the passage thereof, as provided by statute, even though the operation of the
ordinance may not take effect until a later date.



(2000 Code, § 2.02.330)




CODE OF CONDUCT




§ 30.45  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city that in all cases its elected and
appointed officers and employees perform their duties for the benefit of the
citizens of the city.



   (B)   They shall conduct the affairs of the city with integrity and
impartiality, without allowing prejudice, favoritism or the opportunity for
personal gain to influence their decisions or actions or to interfere with
serving the public interest.



   (C)   Continuing observance of this policy is essential to
maintaining the public trust necessary for good government. This subchapter
establishes guidelines for an ethical standard of conduct for those to whom
it applies.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 30.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE.  Any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination or election of
Presidential or Vice Presidential electors, but does not include activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s
official duties.



   CANDIDATE.  A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code, ILCS
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 1-3.



   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.  Has the same meaning as that term is defined
in § 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3.



   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of §§
30.45 through 30.52, does not include any designated holidays, vacation
periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee
is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours
are not fixed, COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer
is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of
location.



   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF.  Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.



   CONTRIBUTION.  Has the same meaning as that term is defined in §
9-1.4 of the Election Code, ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person employed by the City of Oak Forest, whether on a
full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the
material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.



   EMPLOYER.  The City of Oak Forest.



   GIFT.  Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or
the official position of an officer or employee.



   LEAVE OF ABSENCE.  Any period during which an employee does not
receive:



      (1)   Compensation for employment;



      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and



      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.



   OFFICER.  Any person holding any elected or appointed office of the
city created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether compensation is
provided. The terms OFFICIAL and OFFICER are used interchangeably in this
subchapter and shall have the same meaning.



   POLITICAL ACTIVITY.  Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s
official duties.



   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any
political meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other
political event.



      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to
the purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for
any political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.



      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing
any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.



      (4)   Planning, conducting or participating in a public
opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf
of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.



      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or
actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection
with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.



      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any
political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.



      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question
or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.



      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating,
reviewing or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.



      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for
elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for
elective office.



      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate
questionnaires.



      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing
campaign literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.



      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against
any referendum question.



      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.



      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a
political party convention.



      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the
outcome of any election.



   PROHIBITED SOURCE.  Any person or entity who:



      (1)   Is seeking official action by either an officer or an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;



      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business with either the
officer or employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;



      (3)   Conducts activities regulated either an officer or by an
employee or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or



      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or
employee.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 30.47  PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein.
No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of
the City of Oak Forest in connection with any prohibited political activity.



   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require
any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:



      (1)   As part of that officer or employee’s duties;



      (2)   As a condition of employment; or



      (3)   During any compensated time off, including holidays,
vacation or other personal time off.



   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or
her participation in any prohibited political activity.



   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her
official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee
on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by §§ 30.45 through 30.52.



   (E)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized
merit principles of public employment or in a position the salary for which
is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable
to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee,
of a political party, or of a political organization or club.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 30.48  GIFT BAN.



   No officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member
living with any officer or employee, shall intentionally solicit or accept
any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally
offer or make a gift that violates this section, except as otherwise
permitted in § 30.49 below.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 30.49  GIFT BAN EXCEPTIONS.



   Section 30.48 above does not apply to the following:



   (A)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public;



   (B)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her
spouse or immediate family, pays the fair market value;



   (C)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code;



   (D)   Any activities associated with a fundraising event in support
of a political organization or candidate;



   (E)   Educational materials and missions;



   (F)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;



   (G)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
officer or employee as a first cousin or closer, including, but not limited
to grandparents, grandchildren, immediate family in-laws, immediate
step-families, and the individual’s fiancé or fiancée;



   (H)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the officer or employee, spouse or immediate family member
living with the officer or employee has reason to believe that, under the
totality of the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official
position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate
family member, rather than because of the friendship. In determining whether
a gift is provided on the basis of friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, including the history of
the relationship, whether any previous gifts of comparable value had been
exchanged between the individuals in question, whether the recipient is aware
whether the gift giver paid for the gift personally or sought a tax deduction
or business reimbursement for the gift, or whether the recipient is aware
that the gift giver gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or
employees, or their spouses or immediate family members;



   (I)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on
a single calendar day, provided that the food or refreshments are either
consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared, or on
the premises to which the items were catered or delivered;



   (J)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the
official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances;



   (K)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts, including
those gifts given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee
or any gifts given by an officer or employee of another governmental entity;



   (L)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; or



   (M)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total of less than $100.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 30.50  DISPOSITION OF GIFTS.



   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member
living with the officer or employee, does not violate §§ 30.45 through
30.52 if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from
a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate 501(c)(3) tax-exempt charitable organization.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 30.51  PROHIBITED PERSONAL FINANCIAL INTEREST IN CONTRACTS; ADOPTION BY
REFERENCE.



   The regulations and exceptions enumerated in § 3 of the Public Officer
Prohibited Activities Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 105, § 3, governing prohibited
pecuniary interests in contracts, are hereby adopted in full by reference and
made applicable to the officers of the City of Oak Forest.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 30.52  WHISTLE BLOWER PROTECTION.



   (A)   No complainant, or employee acting on behalf of a complainant
shall be discharged, threatened or otherwise discriminated against regarding
compensation, terms, conditions, location or privileges of employment when
the complainant, or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, reports; or
is about to report, verbally or in writing, a violation or suspected
violation of this subchapter, or when the complainant is requested to
participate in an investigation, hearing or inquiry held pursuant to this
subchapter or in any related court action.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to a complainant, or employee
acting on behalf of a complainant, who knowingly makes a false report.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



§ 30.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of
§ 30.47 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution
other than a penitentiary for a period less than one year, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed $2,500.



      (2)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of
§§ 30.48 through 30.50 may be punished by a fine greater than $1,000 but
less than $5,000.



      (3)   Any person who intentionally violates any provision of
§ 30.51 is guilty of a Class 4 felony and any office or official position
held by any person so convicted shall become vacant.



      (4)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of §§ 30.45 through 30.52 to local
enforcement authorities, the State’s Attorney, City Attorney or other law
enforcement official, may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of less than one year, and
may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.



      (5)   A violation of § 30.47 shall be prosecuted as a
criminal offense by an attorney for the City of Oak Forest by filing in the
circuit court information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The
prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure.



      (6)   A violation of §§ 30.48 through 30.50 may be
prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the City of Oak
Forest, or using existing administrative adjudication procedures.



      (7)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable,
whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates
any provision of §§ 30.45 through 30.52 is subject to discipline or
discharge, at the discretion of the corporate authorities. If the violator is
a member of the corporate authorities, he or she must recuse himself or
herself from any deliberations on the matter.



(Ord. 2008-01-0148O, passed 1-8-2008)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section




Officers and Employees Generally




   31.001   Nondiscrimination and affirmative action



   31.002   Information regarding elective offices



   31.003   Mayor-nominated appointments



   31.004   Oath of office



   31.005   Bonds



   31.006   Access to records; reports from officers



   31.007   Successors in office



   31.008   General duties of city officers



   31.009   Compensation



   31.010   Deferred compensation



   31.011   Use of seat belts by city employees



   31.012   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund



   31.013   Retirement incentive bonus



   31.014   Sexual harassment policy



   31.015   Mayor as Liquor Control Commissioner; review and appeal




City Administrator




   31.030   Establishment of position, compensation, and bond



   31.031   Removal and severance pay



   31.032   Resignation and severance pay



   31.033   Vacating of position



   31.034   Responsibilities, powers and duties



   31.035   Continuity of programs and policies



   31.036   Hearing Officer for the purpose of the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act



   31.037   Superior authority of Mayor




City Clerk




   31.050   Bond



   31.051   Keeper of corporate seal; records



   31.052   Record of ordinances



   31.053   Duties



   31.054   Deputy



   31.055   Register of dogs; license book



   31.056   Filing and preservation of records



   31.057   Acting clerk



   31.058   Clerk as Business License Commissioner




City Treasurer




   31.070   Bond



   31.071   Term of office



   31.072   Compensation



   31.073   Accounts; warrants



   31.074   Books; separate accounts for funds and appropriations



   31.075   Special assessments



   31.076   Council approval required before payment or transfer of
money



   31.077   Reports



   31.078   Cancellation of warrants; documentation of expenditures



   31.079   Register of warrants



   31.080   Records



   31.081   Balancing of accounts



   31.082   Depository banks



   31.083   Responsibilities upon expiration of term of office



   31.084   Misuse of funds; removal from office




Finance Director




   31.095   Establishment of position; appointment, status and
compensation



   31.096   Duties



   31.097   Chain of command




City Collector




   31.110   Establishment of office



   31.111   Duties



   31.112   City Clerk to be City Collector



   31.113   Compensation




City Attorney




   31.125   Appointment and term of office; removal



   31.126   Compensation; duties



   31.127   Special counsel




City Health Inspector




   31.140   Position of Health Inspector created



   31.141   Appointment of City Health Inspectors



   31.142   General duties of Health Inspectors



   31.143   Regulation; adoption of code



   31.144   Compliance procedures



   31.145   License required; application



   31.146   License fee



   31.147   Issuance of permit, license or certificate



   31.148   Suspension or denial of permit, license or certificate



   31.149   Revocation of permit, license or certificate



   31.150   Service of notices



   31.151   Hearings



   31.152   Appeals



   31.153   Inspection frequency



   31.154   Access



   31.155   Report of inspections



   31.156   Correction of violations



   31.157   Examination and condemnation of food



   31.158   Submission of plans



   31.159   Procedure when infection is suspected



   31.160   Reinspection costs



   31.161   Conditional permit, license or certificate




Taxpayer Advocate




   31.205   Office created



   31.206   Qualifications for office



   31.207   Nonpartisan office



   31.208   Powers and duties



   31.209   Prohibition of private payment or charge



   31.210   Expenses



Human Resources Manager



   31.220   Establishment of position



   31.221   Duties



   31.222   Compensation



   31.223   Chain of command




Network Administrator




   31.225   Establishment of position



   31.226   Duties



   31.227   Compensation



   31.228   Chain of command




City Historian




   31.240   Establishment



   31.241   Duties of City Historian



   31.999   Penalty




OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY




§ 31.001  NONDISCRIMINATION AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.



   The city will comply with Title VI of the United States Civil Rights
Act of 1964 (Pub. Law No. 88-352), as amended (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.), and
the city will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment with the city because of race, creed, color, age, sex or national
origin. The city will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are
employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to
their race, creed, color, age, sex or national origin. That action shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading,
demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or
termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for
training, including apprenticeship.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.010)



§ 31.002  INFORMATION REGARDING ELECTIVE OFFICES.



   The following information shall be made available by the City Clerk’s
office to any resident of the city who is running for an elective municipal
office within the city:



   (A)   Photostatic copies of Illinois Compiled Statutes which pertain
to election laws;



   (B)   Certificates of nomination and nomination papers; and



   (C)   A letter signed by the City Clerk informing the resident of
the city of the number of signatures required on nomination papers for each
elective office.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.020)



§ 31.003  MAYOR-NOMINATED APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   A mayoral nominee for appointment failing to receive a
majority vote of all elected aldermen may serve as a temporary appointment
for a period of 30 days.



   (B)   At the expiration of this 30-day period, the Mayor may
resubmit the same nominee for appointment. If the nominee again fails to
receive a majority vote of all elected aldermen, the nominee will remain in
his or her position for a second 30-day period.



   (C)   At the expiration of the second 30-day period, the Mayor must
submit a new name for consideration by Council.



   (D)   No temporary appointment of any one person shall be made more
than twice in any one fiscal year.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.030)



§ 31.004  OATH OF OFFICE.



   All elected or appointed officers of the city shall, before entering
upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the
following oath:



      I _______ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support,
protect and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of
the State of Illinois, the Codes and Ordinances of the City of Oak Forest,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of _______ for the City of Oak
Forest according to the best of my abilities.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.040) (Am. Ord. 2017-04-0643O, passed 4-25-2017)



§ 31.005  BONDS.



   (A)   All official bonds given by the officers of the city shall
have two or more sureties, shall be for such sum as has been, in each case,
ordered by the Mayor and Council and shall be conditioned on the faithful
performance of the duties of the officer giving the bond and the payment of
all public moneys received by him or her, according to law, and on compliance
with all ordinances, resolutions and orders of Council. No officer shall be
accepted as a surety on any bond. Each bond shall be in a form and with the
such sureties as have been approved by the Mayor and Council.



   (B)   Before entering upon the duties of an office, all officers of
the city shall post a bond as required in division (A) above. If any officer
does not take the oath required and does not present the bond to the City
Clerk within ten days after notification by the City Clerk of his or her
election or appointment and of the necessity of taking the oath and giving
the bond, his or her office may be declared vacant. The bond, however, if not
approved by the Mayor and Council, shall, when presented to the City Clerk,
be received by the City Clerk subject to the approval thereof by the Mayor
and Council. If the Mayor and Council, at their next regular meeting, do not
approve the bond, the City Clerk shall immediately notify the officer filing
the bond of the disapproval thereof and of the changes required therein. If a
new bond is not filed within ten days after the notification, complying with
those requirements, the office of the principal on the bond may be declared
vacant by the Mayor and Council.



   (C)   No bond shall be required of Council members. The bond of the
City Clerk shall be filed with the City Treasurer. The bonds of all other
officers shall be filed with the City Clerk. Those bonds may provide that the
obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the
insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and operating either
under the laws of the State or of the United States wherein the officer has
placed funds in his or her custody, if the bank has been approved by the
corporate authorities as a depository for those funds.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.050)



§ 31.006  ACCESS TO RECORDS; REPORTS FROM OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Mayor or any member of Council shall, at any time, if
desired, have free access to and the right to examine all books, papers,
vouchers, warrants, entries or accounts of each and every officer.



   (B)   Upon a written resolution adopted by Council, the Mayor may
demand from any officer a written report on any matter designated in the
resolution which is within the scope of the duties of the officer, within the
time set forth in the resolution, or within such further time as may be
allowed by the Mayor.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.060)



§ 31.007  SUCCESSORS IN OFFICE.



   Any city officer whose term of office has expired shall, within five
days after notification and request by the City Clerk, deliver to his or her
successor in office all books, property and effects of every description
belonging to or pertaining to the city or to the office.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.070)



§ 31.008  GENERAL DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   Each officer of the city shall perform such other and further duties,
besides the specific ones set forth in these codified ordinances, that may be
imposed upon him or her by law, and shall be subject to other rules and
regulations as Council may from time to time establish.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.080)



§ 31.009  COMPENSATION.



   Council shall establish the compensation of the various officers and
employees of the city, from time to time, except as may be otherwise provided
by state law.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.090)



§ 31.010  DEFERRED COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The city adopts a deferred compensation plan and appoints the
ICMA Retirement Corporation to serve as administrator thereunder.



   (B)   The city executes the ICMA retirement trust, adopts the trust
agreement, appoints the ICMA Retirement Corporation as trustee thereunder and
directs the corporation, as trustee, to invest all funds held under the
deferred compensation plan through the retirement trust as soon as is
practicable.



   (C)   The City Treasurer shall be the coordinator for this program,
shall receive necessary reports, notices and the like from the corporation as
administrator, and shall cast, on behalf of the city, any required vote under
the program. Administrative duties to carry out the plan may be assigned to
appropriate departments of the city.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.100)



§ 31.011  USE OF SEAT BELTS BY CITY EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   While operating or riding in the front seat of a private
vehicle on official business for the city, or a municipal vehicle, all
municipal employees shall use a safety belt restraining system in the manner
prescribed by the manufacturer, in compliance with the Illinois Vehicle Code,
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-603.1.



   (B)   This policy shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Persons unable to use the safety belt system for medical
or physical reasons, as evidenced by a physician’s statement;



      (2)   Persons occupying a seating position or a vehicle not
equipped with a safety belt assembly;



      (3)   Persons operating a motor vehicle in reverse; or



      (4)   Persons operating a motor vehicle with a model year
prior to 1965.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.110)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed - -1999)



§ 31.012  ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.



   (A)   The Mayor and Council elect that the municipality participate
in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, effective January 1, 1962.



   (B)   The Mayor and Council elect to exclude from participation in
the fund all officials and employees in positions normally requiring
performance of duty for less than 1,000 hours per year. This exclusion shall
apply only to officials and employees who first occupy offices or positions
under the fund after adoption of the resolution codified in this section.



   (C)   Employee contributions to the fund shall be paid by the city
on behalf of all of the employees enrolled in the fund. The payment shall be
made by reducing the amount of the gross earnings payable to employees by the
amount of the contributions and making payment of this amount directly to the
fund.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.120)



§ 31.013  RETIREMENT INCENTIVE BONUS.



   (A)   Qualifications. Each full-time employee who has qualified for
a pension under the terms of his or her respective service, Police Department
or Fire Department, with at least 20 years of active duty service, shall be
eligible for the retirement incentive bonus program.



   (B)   Date and method of exercise.



      (1)   Any qualified employee shall exercise his or her option
to invoke the retirement incentive bonus program at any time after becoming
qualified.



      (2)   The method of exercise shall be in writing. Three copies
shall be served. One copy shall be delivered to the department head. One copy
shall be delivered to the City Treasurer. One copy shall be delivered to the
respective pension board. Delivery may be done either by personal service or
by mailing a copy to the individuals. The date of posting the mail shall be
the operative date of service.



      (3)   At present the fiscal year of the city is May 1 through
April 30. This may be changed by the City Council as otherwise allowed by law.



   (C)   Date of retirement. Any full-time employee may retire at any
time following the exercise of the option to retire.



   (D)   Date of receipt of incentive.



      (1)   Any full-time employee who is eligible for and has
exercised his or her option to retire shall receive his or her incentive
payment minus all legal deductions within 60 days of the date of his or her
respective retirement.



      (2)   As an alternative method of payment, the employee may
request the incentive bonus to be paid over a period of 12 months in equal
installments.



      (3)   This election must be made at the date of the exercise
of the options to retire.



   (E)   Incentive amount.



      (1)   Generally.



         (a)   Any full-time Police Department employee will be
entitled to an incentive amount in the amount equal to 55% of an officer's
annual salary and 58% of a sergeant's or higher ranking officer's annual
salary, minus the amount received from the current budget. [(Annual salary -
salary received during fiscal year) * Appropriate percentage)].  Any
full-time Fire Department employee will be entitled to an incentive amount in
the amount equal to 59% of a firefighter's annual salary, 60% of an
engineer's annual salary and 63% of a lieutenant's or higher ranking
firefighter's annual salary minus the amount received from the current
budget. [(Annual salary - salary received during fiscal year) * appropriate
percentage)].



         (b)   The employee will be entitled to the following
percentages of the above-calculated amount, depending on the year following
eligibility in which retirement actually occurs:



 

Percentage
 
Year of Eligibility




100
 
First


90
 
Second


80
 
Third


70
 
Fourth


60
 
Fifth


50
 
Sixth


40
 
Seventh


30
 
Eighth


20
 
Ninth


10
 
Tenth




 



      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         ANNUAL SALARY.  The salary of the employee as reflected in
last year’s budget. In the event there are any retroactive salary raises
allowed, these amounts shall be included in setting the annual salary. It
expressly does not include incentive overtime pay, worker’s compensation
permanent partial disability benefits or other extraordinary payments.



   (F)   Pension rights. No additional pension rights are herein
created.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.130) (Am. Ord. 2011-08-0351O, passed 8-23-2011)



§ 31.014  SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.



   (A)   Intent; sexual harassment defined; findings.



      (1)   The city is committed to maintaining a work environment
that encourages and fosters appropriate conduct among employees and respect
for individual values and sensibilities. Accordingly, the city intends to
enforce this sexual harassment policy at all levels within the work place in
order to create an environment free from discrimination of any kind,
including sexual harassment.



      (2)   Sexual harassment, according to the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and the State Department of Human Rights, and for the
purposes of this policy, consists of unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors or other verbal, nonverbal or physical acts of a sexual or
sex-based nature, where:



         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment;



         (b)   An employment decision affecting an employee is
based on that individual’s acceptance or rejection of the conduct; or



         (c)   The conduct interferes with an individual’s work
performance or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive working
environment.



      (3)   Sexual harassment can occur between men and women or
members of the same gender. This behavior is unacceptable in the work place
itself and in other work-related settings, such as business trips, court
appearances and business-related social events.



      (4)   Sexual harassment affects the victim and other employees
as well. Each incident of harassment contributes to a general atmosphere in
which everyone suffers the consequences. Sexually-oriented acts or sex-based
conduct has no legitimate business purpose. Where the conduct is directed by
a supervisor (or someone in a management position) toward a subordinate, the
former will be held to a higher standard of accountability because of the
degree of control and influence he or she has or is perceived to have over
the employment conditions and benefits of the subordinate.



   (B)   Prohibited conduct.



      (1)   Prohibited acts of sexual harassment can take a variety
of forms, ranging from subtle pressure for sexual activity or contact to
physical contact. At times the offender may be unaware that his or her
conduct is offensive or harassing to others. Examples of conduct that could
be considered sexual harassment include:



         (a)   Persistent or repeated unwelcome flirting,
pressure for dates, sexual comments or touching;



         (b)   Sexually suggestive jokes, gestures or sounds
directed toward another, or sexually oriented or degrading comments about
another;



         (c)   Preferential treatment of an employee, or a
promise of preferential treatment to an employee, in exchange for dates or
sexual conduct, or the denial or threat of denial of employment, benefits or
advancement for refusal to consent to sexual advances;



         (d)   The open display of sexually-oriented pictures,
posters or other material offensive to others; and



         (e)   Retaliation against an individual for reporting or
complaining about sexually harassing conduct.



      (2)   It is unlawful to retaliate in any way against anyone
who has complained about sexual harassment or discrimination, whether that
concern relates to the harassment of or discrimination against the individual
raising the concern or against another individual.



   (C)   Application of policy; reports. This policy covers all
employees and officers of the city. The city will not tolerate, condone or
allow sexual harassment, whether engaged in by fellow employees, supervisors,
associates or partners, or by outside clients or other nonemployees who
conduct business with the city. The city supports and encourages the
reporting of all incidents of sexual harassment, regardless of who the
offender may be, and will promptly investigate all reported incidents. Where
the alleged offender is not an employee or officer of the city, the city
administration, in consultation with the complainant, will review the
complaint and make every effort to identify a reasonable remedy if sexual
harassment has been confirmed.



   (D)   Complaint process. Though the city encourages individuals who
believe that they are being harassed to firmly and promptly notify the
offender that his or her behavior is unwelcome, the city also recognizes that
power and status disparities between an alleged harasser and a target may
make a confrontation impossible. In the event that the informal, direct
communication between individuals is either ineffective or impossible, or
even when the communication has occurred, the following steps shall be taken
to report a sexual harassment complaint:



      (1)   Reporting of incidents. All employees are urged to
report any suspected sexual harassment to their department head, except if
that person is the individual accused of harassment. In that case, the
complaint shall be reported to the Mayor or an alderman. If the victim
prefers to report the suspected harassment to someone of the opposite gender
from that of the suspected harasser, the complaint can be reported to any
other elected or appointed individual in a position of authority. The report
may be made initially either orally or in writing, but reports made orally
must be reduced to writing before an investigation can be initiated and a
resolution achieved.



      (2)   Investigation of complaints. When a complaint has been
reduced to writing, the individual informed pursuant to division (D)(1) above
will initiate an investigation of the suspected sexual harassment within five
working days of notification. The city representative receiving the complaint
shall designate another official or employee to assist him or her in the
investigation. If any of those individuals is the subject of the
investigation, the investigation will be conducted by the Mayor. The
investigation will include an interview with the employee who made the
initial report, the person towards whom the suspected harassment was directed
and the individual accused of the harassment. Any other person who may have
information regarding the alleged sexual harassment may also be interviewed.



      (3)   Reports. The person responsible for investigating the
complaint shall prepare a written report within ten working days of his or
her notification of the suspected harassment, unless extenuating
circumstances prevent him or her from doing so. The report shall include a
finding that sexual harassment occurred, that sexual harassment did not occur
or that there is inconclusive evidence as to whether or not sexual harassment
occurred. A copy of the report will be given to the employee who made the
initial report, the employee to whom the suspected harassment was directed
and the individual accused of the harassment.



      (4)   Records: confidentiality. Employees who report incidents
of sexual harassment are encouraged to keep written notes in order to
accurately record the offensive conduct. Every effort shall be made to keep
all matters related to the investigation and various reports confidential. In
the event of a lawsuit, however, the city advises that records that it
maintains and that the complainant maintains may not be considered privileged
from disclosure. Written records will be maintained for a period of time as
required by the Local Records Act.



      (5)   Time frame for reporting of complaints. The city
encourages a prompt reporting of complaints so that rapid response and
appropriate action may be taken. However, because of the sensitivity of these
problems and because of the emotional toll the misconduct may have on the
individual, no limited time frame will be instituted for reporting sexual
harassment complaints. Delayed reporting of complaints will not in and of
itself preclude the city from taking remedial action.



      (6)   Protection against retaliation. The city will not in any
way retaliate against an individual who makes a report of sexual harassment,
nor permit any officer or employee to do so. Retaliation is a serious
violation of this policy and shall be reported immediately. Any person found
to have retaliated against another individual for reporting sexual harassment
will be subject to the same disciplinary action provided for sexual
harassment offenders.



      (7)   Appeals. If a party directly involved in a sexual
harassment investigation is dissatisfied with the outcome or resolution, that
individual has the right to appeal the decision. The dissatisfied party shall
submit his or her written comments in a timely manner to Council.



   (E)   Disciplinary action.



      (1)   Disciplinary action will be taken against any employee
found to have engaged in the sexual harassment of any other employee. The
extent of sanctions may depend, in part, upon the length and conditions of
employment of the particular employee, the nature of the offense and the
limitations of state law and union contracts. The city has the right to apply
any sanction or combination of sanctions, up to and including termination, to
deal with unreasonable conduct or discrimination.



      (2)   Where a hostile work environment has been found to
exist, the city will take all reasonable steps to eliminate the conduct
creating such an environment. If an investigation results in a finding that
the complainant falsely accused another of sexual harassment, knowingly or in
a malicious manner, the complainant will be subject to appropriate sanctions,
including the possibility of termination.



   (F)   Policy not contractual; amendments. This policy is not
intended as a contractual obligation. The city reserves the right to amend
the policy from time to time.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.140)



§ 31.015  MAYOR AS LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER; REVIEW AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Unless and until otherwise provided by Council, the Mayor
shall be the Liquor Control Commissioner of and for the city.



   (B)   Effective upon the passage of the resolution codified in this
section, all reviews or appeals of the actions or orders of the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall be made by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission
on the official record made before the Liquor Control Commissioner, as
provided by law.



(2000 Code, § 2.22.150)



CITY ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION, COMPENSATION, AND BOND.



   (A)   Establishment. There is established in and for the city the
position of City Administrator, which office shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. He/she shall be chosen on
the basis of their operative and administrative qualifications with special
reference to their actual experience in, or his/her knowledge of, accepted
practice to the duties of their office herein set forth. Such appointment
shall be for an indefinite period as provided by law.



   (B)   Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive
compensation as determined from time to time by the Mayor with the consent of
Council. The compensation shall include, at a minimum, sick pay and vacation
pay as per city policy.



   (C)   Bond. The City Administrator shall furnish a surety bond in
such sum and form as required by Council, the bond to be conditioned on the
faithful performance of his or her duties. The premium of the bond shall be
paid by the city.



(Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012)



§ 31.031  REMOVAL AND SEVERANCE PAY.



   (A)   Removal. The City Administrator may, at any time, be removed
from his or her position by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of
Council.



   (B)   Severance. The City Administrator shall be entitled to six
months’ severance pay upon removal from the position or as otherwise
provided by contract between the city and the City Administrator.



(2000 Code, § 2.04.020)



§ 31.032  RESIGNATION AND SEVERANCE PAY.



   (A)   Notification. The City Administrator may resign from his or
her position upon 60 days’ prior written notice to the Mayor.



   (B)   Limited severance. The City Administrator shall be entitled to
severance pay as provided by contract in the event of resignation.



(2000 Code, § 2.04.030)



§ 31.033  VACATING OF POSITION.



   (A)   Declaration of vacancy. Immediately upon removal or
resignation, or for any other reason the City Administrator ceases to perform
the duties of his or her position, the Mayor shall declare the position of
City Administrator vacant.



   (B)   Time limitation. Within a six-month period from the
declaration of vacancy, a new City Administrator may be appointed in
accordance with this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 2.04.040)



§ 31.034  RESPONSIBILITIES, POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Administrator shall execute, on behalf of the City Council and
at the direction of the Mayor, its administrative supervision and control of
the affairs of the City in accordance with policy set by the City Council.
This includes the supervision and coordination of all departments of the
city, the assistance of the budget preparation and presentation,
representation of the city in matters concerning the city, and
recommendations to the Mayor for adoption of measures that concern the
health, safety and welfare of the community of administrative service.



(Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012)



§ 31.035  CONTINUITY OF PROGRAMS AND POLICIES.



   The City Administrator shall inform succeeding Mayors and Councils of
the general principles of administrative programs and policies of previous
administrations so that a continuity of programs and policies may be possible.



(2000 Code, § 2.04.070)  (Am. Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012)



§ 31.036  HEARING OFFICER FOR THE PURPOSE OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE
BENEFITS ACT.



   The City Administrator shall act as a Hearing Officer under the Public
Safety Employee Benefits Act. The Administrator shall, as Hearing Officer,
conduct hearings and make determinations as to whether or not any employee of
the city, who is subject to the act, is entitled to the benefits provided by
that act. The decision of the Administrator shall be a final administrative
determination of the city and may be appealed to the circuit court under the
administrative review act.



(Ord. 2017-09-0659O, passed 9-12-2017)



§ 31.037  SUPERIOR AUTHORITY OF MAYOR.



   All responsibilities, duties and functions conferred, imposed or
delegated upon the City Administrator shall be subject to the superior right
and authority of the Mayor to supervise and administer the government and
affairs of the city through executive and legislative authority.



(2000 Code, § 2.04.080)  (Am. Ord. 2012-05-0379O, passed 5-8-2012; Am. Ord.
2017-09-0659O, passed 9-12-2017)



CITY CLERK



§ 31.050  BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City Clerk
shall execute and deliver a bond to the city as provided in § 31.005.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.010)



§ 31.051  KEEPER OF CORPORATE SEAL; RECORDS.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep the corporate seal and all city
papers.



   (B)   He or she shall attend all meetings of Council and shall keep
a full record of the proceedings thereof in the journal.



   (C)   Transcripts from the journal and other records and files of
his or her office, certified by him or her under the corporate seal, shall be
evidence in all courts in a like manner as if the originals were produced.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.020)



§ 31.052  RECORD OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall record, in a book to be kept for that
purpose, all the ordinances passed by Council.



   (B)   At the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, the
Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and of the
publishing or posting of the ordinance.



   (C)   The record and memoranda, or a certified copy thereof, shall
be prima facie evidence of the passage and legal publication or posting of
the ordinance for all purposes.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.030)



§ 31.053  DUTIES.



   The City Clerk shall, in addition to the duties set forth in §§
31.051 and 31.052 above, perform the following duties:



   (A)   Issue notices to members and all officers of Council and other
persons when directed to do so by Council or by the chairperson of any
committee of Council;



   (B)   Attest all licenses granted by the Mayor and Council under the
ordinances of the city;



   (C)   Deliver to the officers of the city and to all committees of
Council all resolutions and communications referred to those officers or
committees by Council;



   (D)   Deliver to the Mayor, without delay, all ordinances or
resolutions under his or her charge which are required to be approved or
otherwise acted upon by the Mayor, with all papers on which the same are
founded; and



   (E)   Within five days after the result of any election is declared
or appointment made, notify the person so elected or appointed to any city
office of his or her election or appointment.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.040)



§ 31.054  DEPUTY.



   The City Clerk may appoint a deputy, by and with the consent of
Council, who, in the absence of the City Clerk, because of sickness or
otherwise, shall be authorized to perform all duties of the City Clerk.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.050)



§ 31.055  REGISTER OF DOGS; LICENSE BOOK.



   The City Clerk shall keep a register of dogs and the license book
provided for by the ordinances of the city.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.060)



§ 31.056  FILING AND PRESERVATION OF RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall file and preserve in a convenient form for
reference and use, according to the date of filing and subject matter, all
official bonds, oaths of office, written reports of officers and committees,
vouchers and all papers and documents filed with him or her or deposited in
his or her care and promptly turn the same over to his or her successor in
office upon receiving a receipt therefor.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.070)



§ 31.057  ACTING CLERK.



   When a vacancy in the office of City Clerk occurs, the Mayor and
Council, voting jointly may appoint an acting clerk, who shall perform the
duties of the City Clerk until the vacancy is filled at an election as
provided by law.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.080)



§ 31.058  CLERK AS BUSINESS LICENSE COMMISSIONER.



   Unless and until otherwise provided by Council, the City Clerk shall be
the Business License Commissioner of and for the city.



(2000 Code, § 2.06.090)



CITY TREASURER



§ 31.070  BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City
Treasurer shall execute and deliver a bond to the city as provided in §
31.005.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.010)



§ 31.071  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The City Treasurer shall hold his or her office for a term of four
years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.020)



§ 31.072  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of the City Treasurer shall be as provided by
ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.030)



§ 31.073  ACCOUNTS; WARRANTS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer, in addition to the duties prescribed by
law, shall keep a true and accurate account showing all moneys paid into the
city treasury, by whom paid and on what account received. He or she shall pay
out all sums of money as may be ordered by the Mayor and Council, but only on
warrants therefor signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk.



   (B)   In all cases, the warrants shall state upon what particular
fund they are drawn. Any bond or interest coupon issued by the city shall be
considered as a warrant duly authorized for payment by the Treasurer.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.040)



§ 31.074  BOOKS; SEPARATE ACCOUNTS FOR FUNDS AND APPROPRIATIONS.



   (A)   The books kept by the City Treasurer shall, at all times, show
the correct condition of moneys under his or her control, of each account and
appropriation and of all receipts and disbursements.



   (B)   Those books, together with all others in his or her custody
and belonging to the city shall be handed over to his or her successor.



   (C)   He or she shall keep a separate account for each fund or
appropriation, stating at the head of each account the amount so appropriated
and giving the several debits and credits belonging thereto.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.050)



§ 31.075  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall keep an account of each special
assessment under its general description and number, and the account shall
show at its head the amounts assessed for public benefits and special
benefits.



   (B)   All moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by
the Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the
improvement for which the assessment was made, and the money shall be used
for no other purpose, except as may be provided in the ordinance for the
improvement.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.060)



§ 31.076  COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED BEFORE PAYMENT OR TRANSFER OF MONEY.



   No moneys shall be paid by the City Treasurer upon any warrant, bond or
coupon except from the moneys belonging to the particular fund or
appropriation upon which the warrant has been drawn, and no money shall be
transferred by the Treasurer from one fund to another after it has been
received by him or her, nor shall any money be appropriated to any other
purpose than that for which it has been collected or paid, without the vote
of a majority of Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.070)



§ 31.077  REPORTS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall make a report, in writing, to the
Mayor and Council at its first regular meeting in each and every month,
showing all moneys that have been turned over to and received by him or her
from any and all persons, the disbursements, if any, during the next
preceding month, the funds to which those moneys in his or her hands have
been distributed, the separate items of each account of the funds and the
balance remaining, if any, in such funds.



   (B)   He or she shall, further, make an annual report, in writing,
to the Mayor and Council, in the manner provided by state statutes, which
report the City Clerk shall immediately cause to be published as required by
law.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.080)



§ 31.078  CANCELLATION OF WARRANTS; DOCUMENTATION OF EXPENDITURES.



   The City Treasurer shall cancel all warrants paid and redeemed by him
or her and, upon the rendering of any monthly report, he or she shall cause
the same to be accompanied by all warrants, duplicate receipts in detail for
all moneys received and such other vouchers as will fully and entirely cover
all of his or her transactions for the month of the report. Upon examination
and approval thereof by the Finance Commission, the City Clerk shall take
charge of the Treasurer’s report, warrants and vouchers and shall keep the
same on file in his or her office.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.090)



§ 31.079  REGISTER OF WARRANTS.



   The City Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and
paid, which register shall describe the warrants and show their dates, their
amounts, their serial numbers, the fund from which they are paid, the name of
the person to whom they are paid and the date of payment.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.100)



§ 31.080  RECORDS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall keep all books, papers, vouchers,
warrants, documents and other written instruments pertaining to his or her
office at the city building, which books and documents shall be open to the
inspection of the Mayor, Council and the City Clerk.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall keep, in addition to the books of accounts
provided for in this subchapter, such additional books of accounts as the
Mayor and Council from time to time direct.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.110)



§ 31.081  BALANCING OF ACCOUNTS.



   The City Treasurer’s books of accounts shall be properly balanced at
least once in each month in a manner that the same, when so balanced, shall
show the true status and condition of each and every account entered therein.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.120)



§ 31.082  DEPOSITORY BANKS.



   The City Treasurer shall keep all moneys belonging to the city that are
in his or her hands in regularly organized bank or banks as may, from time to
time, be designated by resolution or ordinance of Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.130)



§ 31.083  RESPONSIBILITIES UPON EXPIRATION OF TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Whenever the City Treasurer’s term of office expires,
whether by resignation, removal from the city, removal from office or
otherwise, the Treasurer shall at once deliver to his or her successor in
office, or to such other person as may be specifically designated by
resolution of Council, all moneys, property, books and effects of every
description in his or her possession belonging to the city or pertaining to
his or her office.



   (B)   He or she shall also, at once, account for and pay over to
such successor or other person so designated all moneys that he or she is
accountable for and owes to the city in his or her capacity as Treasurer.



   (C)   Any person who, having acted as Treasurer, on the expiration
of his or her term of office, violates this section, shall be liable for all
damage caused thereby, in addition to the penalty provided in § 10.99.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.140)



§ 31.084  MISUSE OF FUNDS; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall keep all moneys belonging to the city
that are in his or her hands, separate and distinct from his or her own
moneys, and he or she is expressly prohibited from using, either directly or
indirectly, any city moneys or warrants in his or her custody and keeping for
his or her own use and benefit or for the use and benefit of any other person.



   (B)   Any violation of this section shall subject the Treasurer to
immediate removal from office by the Mayor and Council.



   (C)   In the case of his or her removal, the Mayor and Council,
voting jointly, shall appoint a successor, who shall hold office for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



(2000 Code, § 2.08.150)



FINANCE DIRECTOR



§ 31.095  ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION; APPOINTMENT, STATUS AND COMPENSATION.



   There is established the position of Finance Director. The Finance
Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
Council. The position of Finance Director shall be exempt from the classified
civil service. The Finance Director shall be an employee of the city and
shall earn a salary determined from time to time by ordinance or resolution
of Council.



(Ord. 2008-05-0184O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 31.096  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall:



      (1)   Work closely with and assist the City Treasurer in the
execution of the City Treasurer’s duties;



      (2)   Be responsible for all day-to-day fiscal activities of
the city;



      (3)   Direct, coordinate and be responsible for the
collection, investment and disbursement of city funds;



      (4)   Apply for and secure financial grants for the city;



      (5)   Advise the Mayor, the City Administrator and Council on
all matters relating to municipal finance;



      (6)   Assign and supervise the work of clerical employees of
the City Clerk’s office in the recording, receipting and posting to proper
accounts of revenue received;



      (7)   File, record and be familiar with all contracts
involving the city;



      (8)   Receive all invoices from suppliers and check with
department heads to see that all items on purchase orders have been delivered
to the city before preparing vouchers for payment of the invoices;



      (9)   Keep a bond register showing all outstanding bonds of
the city; the number and the date of issuance and expiration of the bonds;
the rate of interest and the date of each interest payment on the bonds; the
name and address of persons to whom the bonds are issued; the identity of the
fund out of which the bonds are payable, and, if payable out of a special
assessment fund, the installment number to which the bonds belong; and any
city bonds that are purchased, paid or cancelled;



      (10)   The Finance Director shall prepare an annual report
describing the bonds sold or paid during the year and the terms of the sales
or the amount paid, with each and every item of expense thereof;



      (11)   Exercise general supervision over all the officers of
the city charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement
of city revenue, with the collection and return of city revenue or with the
collection and return of municipal revenue into the city treasury;



      (12)   Submit to the corporate authorities a report of his or
her estimate, as nearly as possible, of the money necessary to defray the
expenses of the city during the current fiscal year. For the purpose of
making this report, the Finance Director is authorized to require all
officers to submit statements of the condition and expenses of their
respective offices or departments, with any proposed city improvements and
the probable expense thereof, all unperformed contracts and the amount of all
unexpended appropriations of the preceding year. In this report the Finance
Director shall:



         (a)   Classify the different objects and purposes of
expenditure, giving, as nearly as possible, the amount required for each;



         (b)   Show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal
year from all sources;



         (c)   Show the amount of liabilities upon which interest
is to be paid;



         (d)   Show the bonds and debts payable during the year,
when due and payable; and



         (e)   Give such other information to the corporate
authorities as is necessary so that the Mayor and City Council may fully
understand the demands upon the city for the current fiscal year.



(Ord. 2008-05-0184O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 31.097  CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   The Finance Director shall report immediately to the City Administrator
and then to the Mayor, and shall coordinate with the City Treasurer on all
fiscal matters.



(Ord. 2008-05-0184O, passed 5-27-2008)



CITY COLLECTOR



§ 31.110  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE.



   There is established in and for the city the office of City Collector.



(2000 Code, § 2.12.010)



§ 31.111  DUTIES.



   The City Collector shall receive municipal revenues from sources other
than taxes and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by state law
or assigned from time to time by the City Administrator and Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.12.020)  (Ord. 2943, § 2, passed --2005)



§ 31.112  CITY CLERK TO BE CITY COLLECTOR.



   The City Clerk shall serve as the City Collector until the city’s
officers elected at the April, 2017 consolidated election are installed in
office in May, 2017.



(Ord. 2013-05-0442O, § 1, passed 5-14-2013)



§ 31.113  COMPENSATION.



   The person appointed to the office of City Collector shall receive
compensation as established from time to time by the Mayor and City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.12.040)  (Ord. 2943, § 5, passed --2005)



CITY ATTORNEY



§ 31.125  APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL.



   (A)   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of Council, and shall hold his or her office for a term of one year
and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.



   (B)   The City Attorney shall be subject to removal for cause by the
Mayor and Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.14.010)



§ 31.126  COMPENSATION; DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Attorney’s compensation shall be as fixed by
ordinance. For such compensation he or she shall perform the following
services:



      (1)   Draft all ordinances, specifications, contracts (except
special assessments or special taxation), deeds, leases and other legal
papers or documents pertaining to the business of the city, as may be
required of him or her by the ordinances thereof or by the Mayor and Council
or by any committee thereof;



      (2)   Prepare and submit oral and written opinions upon any
legal question relating to the business of the city, as may be required of
him or her by the Mayor and Council;



      (3)   Give legal advice to the Mayor and Council, and to any
committee or member thereof and to any officer of the city, upon any question
or matter pertaining to the business of the city;



      (4)   Attend all regular and special meetings of the Mayor and
Council, when previously requested by them in writing; and



      (5)   Prepare and submit such annual or other reports in
regard to the legal business of the city as is required of him or her by
ordinance.



   (B)   The City Attorney shall also be paid out of the city treasury
such costs and expenses as may be necessary in the performance of his or her
duties as City Attorney.



(2000 Code, § 2.14.020)



§ 31.127  SPECIAL COUNSEL.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting Council
from employing special counsel to represent the city from time to time, or
from paying such compensation to the special counsel as Council may, from
time to time, determine.



(2000 Code, § 2.14.030)



CITY HEALTH INSPECTOR



§ 31.140  POSITION OF HEALTH INSPECTOR CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created the position of City Health Inspector.



   (B)   The City Health Inspector(s) shall be part of the Oak Forest
Building Department.



   (C)   The city shall have full-time or part-time Health Inspectors
as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council from time to time.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.141  APPOINTMENT OF CITY HEALTH INSPECTORS.



   The City Health Inspectors shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the City Council. City Health Inspectors may be City
employees or contracted out as determined by the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.142  GENERAL DUTIES OF HEALTH INSPECTORS.



   City Health Inspectors shall enforce all regulations containing
provisions for the protection of the public health; other duties and
functions as may be required by this code, statutes or ordinances; and
additional duties as may be assigned him or her, from time to time, by the
corporate authorities of the city.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.143  REGULATION; ADOPTION OF CODE.



   (A)   Regulation. The issuance, suspension and revocation of the
permits, licenses or certificates to operate retail food establishments; the
prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink; and the
enforcement shall be governed by this subchapter.



   (B)   Inspections; codes adopted.



      (1)   The inspection of food service establishments shall be
regulated in accordance with the 1998 and all subsequent editions of, or
amendments to, the Illinois Department of Public Health’s publication
currently titled, “Food Service Sanitation Code,” on file with the
Secretary of State.



      (2)   The inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated
in accordance with the 1992 and all subsequent editions of, or amendments to,
the Illinois Department of Public Health’s publication currently titled,
“Retail Food Store Sanitation Code,” on file with the Secretary of State.



      (3)   Three copies of each of the Illinois Department of
Public Health’s publication currently titled, “Food Service Sanitation
Code” and “Retail Food Store Sanitation Code” shall be on file at the
City Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.144  COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have
a valid permit, license or certificate issued to them by the city. Only a
person who complies with the requirements of this subchapter shall be
entitled to receive or retain a permit, license or certificate.



   (B)   Permits, licenses or certificates are not transferable. A
valid permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every food
establishment.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.145  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do
business in the city without first having secured a license.



   (B)   Applications for the licenses shall be made in compliance with
the general provisions of this code relating thereto and shall state the kind
of food intended to be sold or handled.



   (C)   Applications shall be made in writing to the City Clerk’s
Office.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 31.999



§ 31.146  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for food dealer’s licenses shall be established by the
City Council.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.147  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a food establishment or seeking
to be a food dealer shall make written application for a permit, license or
certificate on forms provided by the City Clerk. The application shall
include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the
proposed food establishment, and signature of each applicant.



   (B)   Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license or
certificate, the city shall inspect the proposed food establishment to
determine compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (C)   The city shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the
applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment
complies with the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.148  SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   (1)   The City Health Inspectors may, without warning,
notice or hearing, suspend any permit, license or certificate to operate a
food establishment if the holder of the permit, license or certificate does
not comply with the requirements of this subchapter, or if the operation of
the establishment does not comply with the requirements of this subchapter,
or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health.



      (2)   When a permit, license or certificate is suspended, food
operations shall immediately cease. Within seven days of a suspension, the
Health Inspector shall call a hearing for the purposes of determining whether
the license should be revoked.



   (B)   Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended or
denied, the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in
charge shall be notified in writing that the permit, license or certificate
is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended or denied and that an
opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is
filed with the city by the holder of the permit, license or certificate
within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days,
the suspension or denial is sustained. The city may end the suspension or
permit denial at any time if reasons for the suspension or denial no longer
exist.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.149  REVOCATION OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   The city may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke
the permit, license or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any
of the requirements of this subchapter or for the interference with the city
in the performance of duty.



   (B)   (1)   Prior to revocation, the city shall notify, in
writing, the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in
charge, of those specific reasons for which the permit, license or
certificate is to be revoked and that the permit, license or certificate
shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of the notice
unless a written request for hearing is filed with the city by the holder of
the permit, license or certificate within the ten-day period.



      (2)   If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day
period, the revocation of the permit, license or certificate becomes final.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.150  SERVICE OF NOTICES.



   A notice provided for in this subchapter is properly served when it is
delivered to the holder of permit, license or certificate, or person in
charge, or when it is sent registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license or
certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.151  HEARINGS.



   (A)   The hearings provided for in this subchapter shall be
conducted by the Hearing Officer.



   (B)   Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported
verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient
copies of the transcript.



   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall make a final finding based upon the
complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or
order considered in the hearing.



   (D)   A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to
the holder of the permit, license or certificate by the city.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.152  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Hearing Officer
shall have the right to appeal to the corporate authorities.



   (B)   The appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk,
within ten days after notice of a denial of an application or a revocation of
a license, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the
grounds for appeal.



   (C)   The corporate authorities shall thereupon set the time and
place for a hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given
to the applicant or licensee. The appeal shall be final.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.153  INSPECTION FREQUENCY.



   (A)   An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at a
frequency prescribed by the city.



   (B)   Additional inspections of food establishment shall be
performed as often as necessary for enforcement of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.154  ACCESS.



   (A)   Duly authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted
to enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of the
making inspections to determine compliance with this subchapter.



   (B)   The representatives shall be permitted to examine the records
of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies
purchase, received or used.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.155  REPORT OF INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the
findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form. The inspection
report form shall summarize the requirements of this subchapter and shall set
forth a weighted point value for each requirement.



   (B)   Inspectional remarks should be written to reference, by item
number, the item violated and should state the correction to be made.



   (C)   The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of
the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of
the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in
charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.



   (D)   The completed inspection report form is a public document that
shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it
according to law.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.156  CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The completed inspection report form shall specify a
reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found; and
correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period
specified, in accordance with the following provisions.



      (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as lack of
refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment
shall immediately cease food operations. Operations shall not be resumed
until authorized by the Health Inspector.



      (2)   All violations of four- or five-point weighted items
shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days
following inspection. A follow-up inspection to confirm correction may be
conducted at the discretion of the Health Inspector.



      (3)   All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected
as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine
inspection.



      (4)   When the rating score of the establishment is less than
60, the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified
violations within 48 hours. One or more reinspections may be conducted at
reasonable time intervals to assure correction.



      (5)   In the case of temporary food establishments, all
violations shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not
corrected within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food
operations until authorized to resume by the Health Inspector.



   (B)   The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with
any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food operations.
An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations
or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the city within
10 days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is
received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the request.



   (C)   Whenever a food establishment is required to cease operations,
it shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that
conditions responsible for the order to cease operation no longer exist.
Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.157  EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.



   (A)   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Inspectors as
often as necessary for enforcement of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Health Inspector may, upon written notice to the owner or
person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a
hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of §§ 750.100,
750.110, 760.100 or 760.110 of the Illinois Department of Public Health’s
“Food Service Sanitation Code,” or the “Retail Food Store Sanitation
Code,” respectively, or any other section of this subchapter.



      (1)   The Health Inspector shall tag, label or otherwise
identify any food subject to hold order.



      (2)   No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served or
moved from the establishment.



      (3)   A Health Inspector shall permit storage of the food
under conditions specified in a hold order, unless storage is not possible
without risks to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall
be ordered and accomplished.



      (4)   The hold order shall state that a request for hearing
may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food
shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall
be held within 20 days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence
produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or
person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or
destroy the food or to bring it into compliance with provisions of the
subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.158  SUBMISSION OF PLANS.



   (A)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively
remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for the
construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to a City Health
Inspector for review and approval before construction, remodeling or
conversion is begun.



   (B)   The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed
layout, arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work
areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.



   (C)   The city shall approve the plans and specifications if they
meet the requirements of this subchapter.



   (D)   No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively
remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by a City Health Inspector.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.159  PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.



   (A)   When the city or Cook County Department of Public Health has
reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission by an employee of a
food establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected
employee or make any other investigation as indicated and shall take
appropriate action.



   (B)   The Cook County Department of the Public Health may require
any or all of the following measures:



      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment
in food establishments;



      (2)   The immediate closing of the food establishment
concerned until, in the opinion of the County Department of Public Health, no
further danger of disease outbreaks exist;



      (3)   Restriction of the employee’s services to some area of
the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; and



      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the
employee and of other employees and of his or her body and their body
discharges.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.160  REINSPECTION COSTS.



   In the event a reinspection is deemed necessary by the inspector, the
cost of any and all subsequent inspections shall be borne by the holder of
the permit, license or certificate.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 31.161  CONDITIONAL PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation or similar
defects exist in an established food facility that may require significant
expenditures to correct, but are not considered to be imminent health
hazards, a conditional permit, license or certificate may be granted at the
discretion of the city.



   (B)   Under no circumstances will a conditional permit, license or
certificate be issued for more than two consecutive 12-month periods.



   (C)   The purpose of the conditional license or permit is to allow a
reasonable period of time for correction of existing defects.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



TAXPAYER ADVOCATE



§ 31.205  OFFICE CREATED.



   There is created the office of City of Oak Forest Taxpayer Advocate.



(2000 Code, § 2.20.010)  (Ord. 2353, § 1, passed --1998)



§ 31.206  QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICE.



   (A)   The office shall be elected on a citywide basis. The times of
elections shall be as scheduled in ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 2A-1.2 entitled
“Consolidated Schedule of Elections — Offices Designated.”



   (B)   The qualifications of minimum age and residency shall be as
designated as ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-14-1.



   (C)   The required number of signatures shall be as listed in ILCS
Ch. 10, Act 5, § 10-3 entitled “Independent Candidates; Nominating
Papers.” The nominating papers shall include the following papers:



      (1)   Statement of candidacy;



      (2)   Petition for election;



      (3)   Loyalty oath, at the option of the candidate; and



      (4)   Statement of economic interest.



   (D)   (1)   The place and times of filing shall be identical to
those of other citywide municipal offices.



      (2)   The election to the office shall also be subject to
State Board of Election procedures.



(2000 Code, § 2.20.020)  (Ord. 2353, § 2, passed --1998)



Statutory reference



   The statute cited in division (B) of this section has been repealed. 
Qualifications for elective municipal offices are currently set forth in ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5.



§ 31.207  NONPARTISAN OFFICE.



   (A)   The Taxpayer Advocate is created as a nonpartisan office. The
officer in the performance of the duties of taxpayer advocate shall not take
any partisan or political position or advocate any partisan or political goal.



   (B)   Nothing in this provision is intended to nor shall limit any
individual’s right to maintain their individual or personal beliefs.



(2000 Code, § 2.20.030)  (Ord. 2353, § 3, passed --1998)



§ 31.208  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Taxpayer Advocate shall perform the following advisory duties:



   (A)   Assist individual city taxpayers in their preparation of real
estate tax appeals;



   (B)   Publicize real estate tax relief programs;



   (C)   Advocate for legislation to secure state and countywide real
estate tax relief;



   (D)   Organize taxpayer education programs and workshops; and



   (E)   Act as a liaison between the taxpayers of the city and taxing
bodies located within the city limits to promote efficiency in government and
eliminate waste.



(2000 Code, § 2.20.040)  (Ord. 2353, § 4, passed --1998)



§ 31.209  PROHIBITION OF PRIVATE PAYMENT OR CHARGE.



   The Taxpayer Advocate shall not directly or indirectly solicit nor
receive any payment, stipend, bonus or any remuneration from any
individualtaxpayer for services performed as Taxpayer Advocate.



(2000 Code, § 2.20.050)  (Ord. 2353, § 5, passed --1998)



§ 31.210  EXPENSES.



   The Taxpayer Advocate may be entitled to the reimbursement of
reasonable and necessary expenses as allowed by City Council approval.



(2000 Code, § 2.20.060)  (Ord. 2353, § 6, passed --1998)



HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER



§ 31.220  ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION.



   (A)   There is an established position for the  Human Resources
Manager of the City of Oak Forest.



   (B)   The Human Resources Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council.



(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)



§ 31.221  DUTIES.



   The Human Resources Manager position shall include the prompt and
efficient performance of all of the following functions:



   (A)   Manage the implementation and administration of various
employee benefit programs;



   (B)   Assist City Administrator and Finance Director with risk
management decisions;



   (C)   Conduct salary and fringe benefit surveys, staffing, and other
organizational studies;



   (D)   Receive, process and track workers compensation claims to
resolution with insurance carriers, forward wage reports when necessary,
maintain files involving employee inquiries, and work with insurance claims
adjusters and attorneys to ensure proper claim processing; formulate programs
and strategies to reduce workers compensation, liability and property damage
claims;



   (E)   Create and implement city-wide training programs encouraging
professional development;



   (F)   Participate in the preparation and negotiation of collective
bargaining agreements;



   (G)   Maintain personnel policy manual and employee safety manual to
insure documents are current and relevant;



   (H)   Manage and monitor the city loss prevention and safety
programs;



   (I)   Assist departments with implementation of safety related
initiatives;



   (J)   Serve as staff liaison to the employee safety committee;



   (K)   Research and recommend action on personnel and employment
related questions and resolve employee questions and complaints;



   (L)   Perform special projects for the City Administrator and
department heads;



   (M)   Perform other duties as may be assigned.



(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)



§ 31.222  COMPENSATION.



   The Human Resources Manager shall be an employee of the city and earn a
salary determined from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City
Council.



(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)



§ 31.223  CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   The Human Resources Manager shall report to the City Administrator and
then to the Mayor.



(Ord. 2016-08-0617O, passed - -2016)



NETWORK ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.225  ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION.



   (A)   There is established the position of Network Administrator of
the City of Oak Forest.



   (B)   The Network Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.21.010)  (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)



§ 31.226  DUTIES.



   The Network Administrator position shall include the prompt and
efficient performance of each of the following functions:



   (A)   Identify, install and maintain networking solutions for all
departments;



   (B)   Perform daily tasks including tape backups, virus definitions
and critical patches;



   (C)   Provide a safe and secure network system;



   (D)   Install personal computers, printers, servers and related
peripherals;



   (E)   Upgrade hardware and software as needed;



   (F)   Provide a backup solution and/or problem resolution for all
network components in a timely manner;



   (G)   Train and assist network users;



   (H)   Monitor, update and improve the City of Oak Forest’s website;



   (I)   Develop yearly technology budget;



   (J)   Communicate with all city departments to identify technology
needs;



   (K)   Understand users’ daily processes to develop automated
solutions;



   (L)   Research and make recommendations regarding upgrades and
replacement of information technology;



   (M)   Keep current with technological advances related to the City
of Oak Forest operations; and



   (N)   Provide other computer related services as may be directed by
the Mayor and City Administrator.



(2000 Code, § 2.21.020)  (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)



§ 31.227  COMPENSATION.



   The Network Administrator shall be an employee of the City of Oak
Forest and earn a salary determined from time to time by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.21.030)  (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)



§ 31.228  CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   The Network Administrator shall report to the City Administrator and
then to the Mayor.



(2000 Code, § 2.21.040)  (Ord. 2846, § 2 (part), passed --2004)



CITY HISTORIAN



§ 31.240  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There is established a volunteer position of City Historian.



   (B)   The City Historian shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
advice and consent of the City Council.



(Ord. 2007-06-0109O, passed 6-12-2007)



§ 31.241  DUTIES OF CITY HISTORIAN.



   The Historian shall:



   (A)   Keep records of the history of the city, in both written and
digital form;



   (B)   Gather and solicit local historical resources for purposes of
research and preservation;



   (C)   Conduct meetings, training, presentations and other
opportunities to discuss Oak Forest historical resources;



   (D)   Investigate and apply for appropriate funding sources for
historic preservation;



   (E)   Coordinate efforts of any volunteers seeking to assist
historic preservation in Oak Forest; and



   (F)   Submit an annual report to the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 2007-06-0109O, passed 6-12-2007)



§ 31.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 31.140
through 31.161 shall be fined not more than $750 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation continues.



      (2)   The city shall have the right to enjoin any person or
establishment in the event violations occur on a continuing basis.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND PROGRAMS



Section



Departments; Code Hearing Department; System of Administrative Adjudication



   32.001   Purpose



   32.002   Definitions



   32.003   Non-exclusivity



   32.004   Code Hearing Department; establishment; jurisdiction



   32.005   Code Hearing Department; organization



   32.006   Compensation of code hearing personnel



Hearings



   32.020   Commencement of hearings



   32.021   Hearing procedures



   32.022   Non-resident hearing procedures



   32.023   Enforcement of judgment; penalties



Rules Applicable to Motor Vehicle Citations



   32.035   Enforcement of motor vehicle violations; citations



   32.036   Determination of liability; motor vehicle citations



   32.037   Lessor of vehicle; liability



   32.038   Immobilization program



   32.039   Driver’s license suspension



Police Department



   32.050   Establishment of offices, organization, function of offices
and chain of command



   32.051   Appointments and dismissals



   32.052   Authority of Civil Service Commission regarding radio
operators and community relations personnel



   32.053   Training program



   32.054   Rules and regulations; review by Chief of Police



   32.055   Auxiliary police



   32.056   School crossing guards



   32.057   Police pension fund



   32.058   Deputy Chief(s) of Police



   32.059   Police liaison and counselor



   32.060   Part-time police officers; certification and hiring
standards



   32.061   Fee for bail/bond administration



Fire Department



   32.070   Establishment; composition



   32.071   (Reserved)



   32.072   (Reserved)



   32.073   Establishment of offices, organization, function of offices
and chain of command



   32.074   Appointments



   32.075   Fire Chief



   32.076   Deputy Chief



   32.077   (Reserved)



   32.078   Lieutenant



   32.079   (Reserved)



   32.080   Firefighters



   32.081   Compensation



   32.082   Bureau of Fire Prevention



   32.083   Assistance of Police Department



   32.084   Participation in state training course



   32.085   Command of department; rules and regulations



   32.086   Reports to State Fire Marshal; investigations; enforcement
of state law



   32.087   Suspension of firefighters



   32.088   Having or making keys to engine house or fire alarm boxes



   32.089   Approval of building plans



   32.090   Inspections



   32.091   Investigations



   32.092   Records



   32.093   Overcrowding



   32.094   Control and extinguishment of fires



   32.095   Repairs to equipment; bidding required



   32.096   Salvage from fires; proof of ownership



   32.097   Uniforms



   32.098   Compensation of injured firefighters



   32.099   Service outside city; fees



   32.100   Delivery of books and equipment to Fire Chief’s successor



   32.101   Firefighter’s pension fund



   32.102   Fire Department cost recovery program



Department of Public Works



   32.115   Establishment; composition



   32.116   Assistant Director and Street Superintendent



   32.117   Disqualification of applicants for certain offenses



Community/Commercial Economic Development Department



   32.130   Establishment of department



   32.131   Position of Director



   32.132   Duties of department



   32.133   Organization of department



Board of Fire and Police Commissioners



   32.145   Establishment and composition; terms of office



   32.146   Oath and bond; requirements of members



   32.147   Appointments to Police and Fire Departments



   32.148   Rules; powers and duties



   32.149   Secretary



Board of Trustees of Police Pension Fund



   32.160   Establishment



   32.161   Composition



   32.162   Terms of office



   32.163   Powers and duties



Board of Local Improvements



   32.175   Establishment; composition



   32.176   Powers and duties



   32.177   Meetings



   32.178   Secretary



   32.179   Expenditures



Emergency Telephone System Board



   32.190   Establishment



   32.191   Purpose



   32.192   Composition



   32.193   (Reserved)



   32.194   Powers and duties



   32.195   Emergency telephone system fund



Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board



   32.210   Establishment



   32.211   Purpose



   32.212   Composition; appointments



   32.213   Terms of office; compensation



   32.214   Powers and duties



Foreign Fire Insurance Board



   32.225   Establishment



   32.226   Composition



   32.227   Election of officers; terms



   32.228   Firefighter employment status required



   32.229   Duties and powers of officers



   32.230   Terms of office of officers



   32.231   Rules and regulations



   32.232   Payment of funds



   32.233   Budget



   32.234   Annual audit



Citizens Advisory Commission



   32.245   Establishment



   32.246   Membership



   32.247   Powers and duties



Civil Service Commission



   32.260   Composition



   32.261   Classification of employees



   32.262   Rules



   32.263   Organization



   32.264   Expiration of candidate lists



Consumer Protection Commission



   32.275   Establishment and composition; terms of office



   32.276   Powers and duties



   32.277   Existing rights and remedies



Crime Prevention Commission



   32.290   Recitals



   32.291   Creation of the Crime Prevention Commission



   32.292   Objective



   32.293   Qualifications



   32.294   Duties and responsibilities



Finance Commission



   32.320   Establishment; composition



   32.321   Powers and duties



   32.322   Annual budget in lieu of appropriation ordinance



   32.323   Adoption of annual budget



   32.324   Capital improvement, repair or replacement fund



   32.325   Revision of annual budget



   32.326   Moneys for contingencies



   32.327   Public inspection of budget



   32.328   Application of state statutes



   32.329   Meetings



Planning and Zoning Commission



   32.340   Created



   32.341   Purpose



   32.342   Composition; appointments



   32.343   Term of office



   32.344   Chairperson



   32.345   Meetings



   32.346   Duty of chairperson; applications



   32.347   Rules of procedure



   32.348   Minutes of proceedings



   32.349   Removal from office



Senior Citizen Commission



   32.360   Establishment



   32.361   Membership



   32.362   Reserved



   32.363   Powers



Youth Commission



   32.375   Establishment; composition



   32.376   Appointment; terms of office



   32.377   Residency requirement



   32.378   Duties



   32.379   Election of Secretary; meetings



   32.380   Reimbursement of expenses; establishment of line item in
city’s budget



Community Pool Commission



   32.382   Establishment



   32.383   Duties



   32.384   Election of positions; meetings



   32.385   Reimbursement of expenses; establishment of line item in
city’s budget



Emergency Management Agency



   32.395   Establishment; composition



   32.396   Director



   32.397   Interpretation of chapter



   32.398   Functions and duties



   32.399   Mobile support team



   32.400   Mutual aid agreements



   32.401   Emergency action



   32.402   Compensation



   32.403   Reimbursement by state



   32.404   Volunteers



   32.405   Integration of city officers and employees



   32.406   Purchases and expenditures



   32.407   Oath



   32.408   Office space



   32.409   Appropriations; levy of taxes



   32.410   Credentials of authority



   32.411   Violations



Bureau of Fire Investigation



   32.425   Preambles



   32.426   Establishment



   32.427   Control and authority; liaison



   32.428   Purposes and duties



   32.429   Jurisdiction



   32.430   Fire investigator qualifications



Economic Advisory Council



   32.445   Establishment; purpose



   32.446   Composition; terms of office



   32.447   Volunteers



   32.448   Expenditures



   32.449   Facade Improvement Grant Program



Safety Committee



   32.460   Introduction



   32.461   Mission statement



   32.462   Executive Safety Committee



   32.463   Departmental Safety Committee



   32.464   Responsibilities



   32.465   Sample Safety Committee agenda



Streetscape Advisory Council



   32.480   Establishment; purpose



   32.481   Composition; terms of office



   32.482   Volunteers



   32.483   Expenditures



Gazebo Committee



   32.495   Establishment



   32.496   Membership



   32.497   Officers of the Gazebo Committee



   32.498   Duties of the chair



   32.499   Gazebo Committee meetings



   32.500   Powers and duties



Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee



   32.515   Establishment



   32.516   Membership



   32.517   Officers of the Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee



   32.518   Duties of the chair



   32.519   Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee meetings



   32.520   Powers and duties



Youthful Fire Danger Awareness Program



   32.535   Establishment



   32.536   Purposes



   32.537   Personnel



Medicare-Only Coverage



   32.560   Establishment; purpose



   32.561   Coverage of eligible employees; authorization



   32.562   Withholdings from salaries and wages



   32.563   Employer contributions



   32.564   Records and reports; required



Veterans Commission



   32.575   Creation



   32.576   Composition



   32.577   Terms of office



   32.578   Goals and charges



Building Department



   32.590   Establishment of Department



   32.591   Position of Building Commissioner



   32.592   Duties of Department



   32.593   Organization of Department



Green Steps Commission



   32.605   Establishment



   32.606   Membership



   32.607   Duties and responsibilities



DEPARTMENTS; CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION



§ 32.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for a fair and efficient
system of enforcement of city ordinances as may be allowed by law and
directed by ordinance, through the administrative adjudication of violations
of the city ordinances and by establishing a schedule of fines and penalties,
and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CODE.  Any municipal ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code,
inclusive, except ordinances for which the potential penalty described
therein includes a period of incarceration.



   HEARING OFFICER.  A person recommended by the Police Chief and then
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council to
preside over administrative hearings as set forth in this subchapter.



   OWNER.



      (1)   For the purpose of a violation relating to real
property, the person to whom the County Collector sent the last ascertainable
tax bill; and



      (2)   For the purpose of a violation relating to motor
vehicles, the person to whom the motor vehicle is registered, as provided by
the records of the Secretary of State of Illinois. Any person so described
herein may present evidence to overcome the presumption that the person is
the OWNER of the property and/or motor vehicle for which the person received
a notice of violation. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter or as
circumstances reasonably dictate, all notices described in this subchapter
shall be sent to the owner at the following address:



         (a)   For the purpose of a violation relating to real
property, the address to where the County Collector sent the last tax bill;
and



         (b)   For the purpose of a violation relating to motor
vehicles, the address to where the motor vehicle is registered, as provided
by the records of the Secretary of State of Illinois.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-11-0357O, passed
11-8-2011)



§ 32.003  NON-EXCLUSIVITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not preclude the city from
using other methods or proceedings to enforce the city code, including, but
not limited to, the institution of any action in the Circuit Court of Cook
County, Illinois, or any administrative proceeding; provided, for any person
who has received 20 or more standing and/or parking violations the city shall
enforce the citations only via the Circuit Court of Cook County.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.004  CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ESTABLISHMENT; JURISDICTION.



   There is hereby created within the City of Oak Forest a Code Hearing
Department, which is authorized to provide for and operate a system of
administrative adjudication, as more fully described herein, which shall have
jurisdiction over the adjudication and enforcement of any violation of the
city code.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.005  CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ORGANIZATION.



   The Code Hearing Department shall be comprised of a Hearing Officer, an
Adjudication Hearing Administrator, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed necessary for
the efficient administration of the Code Hearing Department, with the
following powers and authority.



   (A)   Hearing Officer. All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided
over by a Hearing Officer. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication
hearings, the Hearing Officers shall have successfully completed a formal
training program which includes the following:



      (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the
administrative adjudication hearings that they will conduct and preside over;



      (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the code for which
they may adjudicate a violation;



      (3)   Observation of administrative adjudication hearings;



      (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders; and



      (5)   In addition, a Hearing Officer must be an attorney
licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years. A
Hearing Officer may not be an inspector or law enforcement officer employed
by the city. Hearing Officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed
to:



         (a)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is
relevant to the existence of an ordinance violation;



         (b)   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and
give relevant testimony or tangible items at an administrative adjudication
hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;



         (c)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the
administrative adjudication hearings, including all exhibits and evidence
introduced at the hearing;



         (d)   Issue a determination, based on the evidence
presented at the administrative adjudication hearing, of whether a code
violation occurred or exists. The Hearing Officer’s determination shall be
in writing and shall include written findings of fact and law, a decision,
and an order including the fine, penalty or other action with which the
respondent must comply; and



         (e)   Impose penalties consistent with the applicable
code and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the alleged violation,
except, however, that in no event shall the Hearing Officer have authority to
impose a penalty of incarceration, or impose a fine in excess of $50,000. The
maximum monetary fine under this division (A)(5)(e) shall be exclusive of
costs of enforcement or costs incurred by the city to secure compliance with
the code and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the collection of
any tax imposed and collected by the city.



   (B)   Adjudication Hearing Administrator. The Adjudication Hearing
Administrator shall either be an employee of the City of Oak Forest appointed
by the Police Chief with the consent of the City Administrator, an
independent contractor or agency contracted by the city to perform such
duties as enumerated herein. The Adjudication Hearing Administrator is hereby
authorized, empowered and directed to:



      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative
adjudication of all code violations as may be permitted by law and directed
by ordinance;



      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be
required under this subchapter or as may reasonably be required to carry out
the purpose of this subchapter;



      (3)   Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed
after a final determination of liability;



      (4)   Certify copies of final determinations of all code
violations adjudicated pursuant to this subchapter, and any factual reports
verifying the final determination of any violation liability which were
issued in accordance with this subchapter or the laws of the State of
Illinois, including ILCS Ch. 625, Act5, § 11-208.3, as from time to time
amended;



      (5)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning
initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter and those of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5;



      (6)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary
for the efficient operation and maintenance of the system of administrative
adjudication hereby established; and



      (7)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties either directly or
through private collection agencies that may be retained by the city or by
requesting the City Prosecutor to act on behalf of the city in filing
complaints in the Cook County Circuit Court, seeking judgments for unpaid
fines or penalties and pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under
current law.



   (C)   Automation. The Adjudication Hearing Administrator is hereby
further authorized, empowered and directed to operate and maintain a computer
program for the system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on
a day-to-day basis, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Inputting of violation notice information;



      (2)   Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;



      (3)   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;



      (4)   Issuing payment receipts;



      (5)   Issuing succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability, issuing notices of impending immobilization,
issuing notices of impending impoundment, and issuing notices of impending
driver’s license suspension as may be required, in accordance with the
Illinois Vehicle Code. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the
Adjudication Hearing Administrator from including one or more of the above
notices in the same notice report; and



      (6)   Keeping accurate records of appearances and
non-appearances at administrative adjudication hearing, pleas entered and
fines and other penalties assessed and paid.



   (D)   Police personnel. The Chief of Police shall appoint and/or
designate a police officer to provide security for the administrative
adjudication hearings, and the officers are hereby authorized and directed to:



      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum;



      (2)   Execute authority as granted to courtroom deputies of
the Circuit Court; and



      (3)   Perform other duties or acts as may be reasonably
required and as directed by the Hearing Officer or the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.006  COMPENSATION OF CODE HEARING PERSONNEL.



   (A)   Authorization for compensation for each of the above-stated
positions shall be made by the City Council through the annual budget or
appropriation process.



   (B)   Compensation shall be determined by the City Administrator
within approved budget or appropriation limitations.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



HEARINGS



§ 32.020  COMMENCEMENT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   (1)   A proceeding before a Hearing Officer shall be
instituted upon the filing with the Adjudication Hearing Administrator of a
written sworn pleading, complaint or citation by any authorized official of
the city, including police officers, code enforcement officers, and such
other employees as authorized.



      (2)   In the event a complaint causing the initiation of a
hearing is filed by a tenant or occupant of a dwelling who is not also the
owner thereof, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible
entry and detainer or other similar proceeding, whether it be civil or
criminal, shall be threatened or instituted against the tenant or occupant
solely because the tenant or occupant files the complaint or agrees to
testify or present tangible evidence at an administrative adjudication
hearing. The foregoing sentence shall not apply if the owner proves by a
preponderance of the evidence that the tenant or occupant is the proximate
cause of the violation for which the hearing is commenced.



   (B)   Respondents shall be served with a copy of the written sworn
pleading, complaint or citation along with a notice of hearing in a manner
reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted
against them, by one or more of the following means:



      (1)   Personal service upon a party or its authorized agent;



      (2)   Service by certified mail, return receipt requested;



      (3)   Service by first class mail, postage prepaid; or



      (4)   If the applicable violation relates to the condition,
operation or location of a motor vehicle, by posting a copy of the sworn
pleading, complaint or citation in a conspicuous place upon the property or
motor vehicle where the violation is found.



      (5)   Any notice presented by first class or certified mail,
or by posting, shall be deemed served three days after the deposit of the
notice in the U.S. mail or the posting of the notice.



   (C)   Notices of hearing shall include:



      (1)   The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be
adjudicated, including a citation to the appropriate section of the code;



      (2)   The date and time of the administrative adjudication
hearing;



      (3)   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held;



      (4)   The applicable fines, late payment fees and penalties
for failure to appear at the hearing;



      (5)   Any witnesses or complainants who may be called to
testify for the city who are not employees or officers thereof; and



      (6)   An explanation that payment of the indicated fine, and
of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final
disposition of the violation.



   (D)   Administrative adjudication hearings shall be scheduled and
docketed by the Adjudication Hearing Administrator not less than 15 nor more
than 30 days after the notice of hearing is served on the respondent.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.021  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Opportunity. Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for
a hearing before or during which they may exercise any or all of the
following rights:



      (1)   Be represented by counsel, although respondents shall
not be entitled to have an attorney appointed to represent them;



      (2)   Present and cross-examine witnesses; and



      (3)   Request the Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct
the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses or the production of
relevant tangible evidence.



   (B)   Rules of evidence shall not govern. The formal and technical
rules of evidence shall not apply in an administrative adjudication hearing
authorized under this subchapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be
admitted only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs.



   (C)   Standard of proof. Administrative adjudication hearings are
civil in nature. The city shall bear the standard of proof to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence the occurrence or existence of a violation of
the code. A sworn, written pleading, complaint or citation, or a copy
thereof, containing information to support all the elements of the alleged
violation shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.



   (D)   Defenses. It shall be a defense to a code violation charged
under this subchapter if the owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent
or representative proves to the Hearing Officer’s satisfaction that:



      (1)   The code violation alleged in the notice did not in fact
exist at the time of the citation, pleading or complaint;



      (2)   The code violation has been caused by the current
property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to
maintain the dwelling free of the violations, the current occupants continue
to cause the violations; or



      (3)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused
entry to the owner or his or her agent to all or a part of the dwelling for
the purpose of correcting the code violation(s).



      (4)   The code violation alleged in the notice occurred when
the respondent was not the owner or lessee of the subject real or personal
property. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, any existing order to
correct a code violation and/or sanctions imposed by the city as a result of
a finding of a code violation under this subchapter shall attach to the
property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code
violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring
the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of the
property takes the same subject to the findings, decision and order of a
Hearing Officer under this subchapter.



   (E)   Continuances. No continuances shall be authorized by a Hearing
Officer for any administrative adjudication hearing commenced under this
subchapter except in cases where a continuance is necessary to protect the
rights of the respondent or owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds
for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a Hearing Officer shall not
exceed 28 days.



   (F)   Judicial review. Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that
a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101
et seq., or as hereinafter amended. Any person filing for judicial review
under the Administrative Review Law shall be subject to the assessment of
costs for the preparation and certification of the record of proceedings
before the Hearing Officer. The cost shall be assessed as $100 for the first
page of the transcript and $25 for each page thereafter. Any failure to pay
the fee shall subject the party seeking review to the provisions of ILCS Ch.
735, Act 5, § 3-109, including dismissal of the complaint on motion of the
city.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.022  NON-RESIDENT HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Persons who are not residents of the city may contest the
merits of the alleged violation without attending a hearing as provided in §
32.021 above by submitting a waiver of hearing and a notarized statement of
facts specifying grounds for challenging the notice of violation.



   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall issue to the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator a finding and order based on the citation and notarized
statement of facts.



   (C)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall notify the
respondent on the Hearing Officer’s finding and order at the address
provided by the non-resident.



   (D)   In all other respects, the procedures and rules set forth in
this subchapter shall apply to non-residents.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.023  ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT; PENALTIES.



   (A)   The owner or responsible party charged with any violation of
the code, upon a finding of liability, shall be fined an amount set forth in
the Fine Schedule attached to Ord. 2007-03-00900, passed 3-27-2007 as Table
A. For each violation not expressly described in the Fine Schedule, the
applicable penalty set forth in the code shall apply, provided that where no
specific penalty is described the general penalty provisions of the code
shall apply. Separate fines shall be imposed against a person for each and
every finding of liability of each and every violation of the code.



   (B)   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any
fine, other sanction or cost imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the City of Oak Forest and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.



   (C)   Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty after
the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under
the Illinois Administrative Review Law may result in, if applicable:



      (1)   The immobilization of the person’s vehicle for failure
to pay fines or penalties for five or more parking violations; and



      (2)   The suspension of the person’s driver’s license for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more parking violations.



   (D)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under
the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the Hearing
Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court
of competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a
judgment ordering that respondent to correct an ordinance violation or
imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation,
any expenses incurred by the city to enforce the judgment entered against
that respondent, including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, court
costs and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are
fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, shall be a
debt due and owing the city and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the Hearing Officer
pursuant to this division (E), the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall
serve a notice to the respondent that states that respondent shall appear at
a hearing before the Hearing Officer to determine whether the respondent has
failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set forth the date for
the hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date service is
effective, as provided in § 32.020 above.



   (F)   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of
the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et
seq.), or by the Uniform Commercial Code (ILCS Ch. 810, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et
seq.), a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal property, or
both, of the respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the city
under this subchapter. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (G)   (1)   The Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment
entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the
respondent within 15 days after the issuance of the order of default, if the
Hearing Officer determines that the respondent’s failure to appear at the
hearing was for good cause, or at any time if the respondent establishes, by
a preponderance of the evidence, that the city did not provide proper service
of process.



      (2)   In addition, for the purpose of motor vehicle
violations, the grounds for the petition may include:



         (a)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of
the cited vehicle on the date the parking violation notice was first issued;
or



         (b)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty
for the parking violation in question.



      (3)   If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this division,
the Hearing Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any
lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the city as a result
of the vacated default judgment.



      (4)   The petitioner shall appear with appropriate evidence,
so that if the petition is granted, he or she is prepared to proceed
immediately with a hearing on the merits.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



RULES APPLICABLE TO MOTOR VEHICLECITATIONS



§ 32.035  ENFORCEMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE VIOLATIONS; CITATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision
of the code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking or standing, the
owner shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to the
penalty therefor.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision
of the code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking or standing, any
police officer, traffic control aide, other designated member of the Police
Department, parking enforcement aide or other person designated by the
Adjudication Hearing Administrator observing the violation may issue a
parking violation notice, and serve the notice on the owner of the vehicle by
handing it to the operator of the vehicle, if he or she is present, or by
affixing it to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. The issuer of the notice
shall specify on the notice his or her identification number, the particular
parking regulation allegedly violated, the make and state registration number
of the cited vehicle, and the place, date, time and nature of the alleged
violation and shall certify the correctness of the specified information by
signing his or her name as provided in § 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3, as amended.



   (C)   The parking violation notice shall contain the information
required under the previous division. In addition, the notices shall state
the applicable fine as provided herein, the monetary penalty which shall be
automatically assessed for late payment, the vehicle immobilization and
driver’s license suspension that may be imposed if fines and penalties are
not paid in full, that payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable
penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the
violation, and information as to the availability of an administrative
adjudication hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits
and the manner in which the hearing may be had.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of
the vehicle or his or her designee, to remove from a vehicle a parking
violation notice affixed pursuant to this subchapter.



   (E)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall distribute
parking violation notices to parking enforcement aides, other persons
authorized to issue parking violating notices, and the Department of Police
for issuance pursuant to these provisions. The Chief of Police shall be
responsible for the distribution of the notice forms within the Department of
Police, shall maintain a record of each set of notices issued to individual
members of the department and shall retain a receipt for every set so issued.



   (F)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall compile and
maintain complete and accurate records relating to all parking violation
notices issued and the dispositions thereof, whether by payment of the fine
or by final determination of the Hearing Officer. In addition, the traffic
compliance administrator shall make certified reports to the Secretary of
State pursuant to § 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.036  DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY; MOTOR VEHICLE CITATIONS.



   (A)   Any person on whom a parking violation notice has been served
pursuant to this subchapter shall within seven days from the date of the
notice: pay the indicated fine; or request an administrative adjudication
hearing as provided by this subchapter to contest the charged violation. A
response by mail shall be deemed timely if postmarked within seven days of
the issuance of the notice of violation.



   (B)   If the respondent requests an administrative hearing to
contest the cited violation, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall
notify the owner in writing of the location and time for a hearing in
accordance with provisions of § 32.020 above.



   (C)   If no response is made in accordance with division (A) of this
section, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall set a hearing and cause
a notice of violation to be sent to the respondent in accordance with §
32.020 above. The notice shall specify that the respondent may avoid a
hearing by paying the fine described in the notice prior to the date of the
hearing and that payment of the fine shall constitute a final disposition of
the citation.



   (D)   Where a respondent either fails to pay the indicated fine
prior to the hearing or fails to appear at a hearing, a final determination
of parking violation liability shall be entered in the amount of the fine
indicated on the notice of violation. Failure to pay the fine within 21 days
of issuance of a Hearing Officer’s final determination of liability will
result in the imposition of a late payment penalty pursuant to division (E)
herein. Upon the occurrence of a final determination of parking violation
liability and after expiration of the period in which judicial review under
the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the city. The notice of
violation issued under divisions (B) or (C) above shall provide the above
information.



   (E)   Failure by any respondent to pay or mail payment of the fine
for a parking violation within 21 days of the issuance of the final
determination of liability will automatically subject the respondent to a
penalty for late payment. The penalty for late payment shall be $10.



   (F)   A person charged with a parking violation may contest the
charge through an administrative adjudication hearing limited to one or more
of the following grounds with appropriate evidence to support:



      (1)   That the respondent was not the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle at the time of the violation;



      (2)   That the cited vehicle or its state registration plates
were stolen at the time the violation occurred;



      (3)   That the relevant signs prohibiting or restricting
parking were missing or obscured:



      (4)   That the relevant parking meter was inoperable or
malfunctioned through no fault of the respondent;



      (5)   That the facts alleged in the parking violation notice
are inconsistent or do not support a finding that the specified regulation
was violated.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.037  LESSOR OF VEHICLE; LIABILITY.



   In accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1306, the Illinois
Vehicle Code, no person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written
lease agreement shall be liable for a violation of any standing or parking
regulation of this subchapter involving the vehicle during the period of the
lease if upon receipt of a notice of violation he or she shall, within 60
days thereafter, provide to the Adjudication Hearing Administrator the name
and address of the lessee. Upon receipt of a lessor’s notification of the
name and address of his or her lessee, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
11-1305 or 11-1306, the Illinois Vehicle Code, the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator shall cause a notice of violation to be sent to the lessee as
provided herein. If the lessor fails to provide the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator with the name and address of the lessee within 60 days of
receiving notice, the lessor shall be liable for the full amount of the
violation and late penalties after being provided with the opportunity for a
hearing.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007)



§ 32.038  IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM.



   (A)   The Adjudication Hearing Administrator is hereby authorized to
direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization for the purpose of
enforcing the parking regulations of the code. The program of vehicle
immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle registered
to the owner by immobilizing in place or towing, as defined in division (C)
below.



   (B)   If the eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation of any
provision of the Traffic Code for which the vehicle is subject to an
immediate tow, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or hazard,
or where it impedes city workers during such operations as snow removal, the
vehicle may be towed to a vehicle pound or relocated to a legal parking place
and there restrained.



   (C)   (1)   When the registered owner of any vehicle has
accumulated three or more final determinations of parking violation or
automated traffic law enforcement system liability for which the fines and
penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in full, the Adjudication
Hearing Administrator shall cause a notice of impending vehicle
immobilization to be sent as prescribed in this subchapter.



      (2)   The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall
state the name and address of the registered owner, the state registration
number of the vehicle or vehicles registered to the owner, and the serial
numbers of parking violation notices which have resulted in final
determination of liability for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.



      (3)   Failure to pay the fines and penalties owed within 21
days from the date of the notice will result in the inclusion of the state
registration number of the vehicle or vehicles of the owner on an
immobilization list.



      (4)   A person may challenge the validity of the notice of
impending vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in
person to submit evidence which would conclusively disprove liability. Upon a
request for a hearing, the Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall schedule
the hearing for the next regular hearing date.



      (5)   Documentary evidence which would conclusively disprove
liability shall be based solely on the following grounds:



         (a)   That all fines and penalties for the parking
violations cited in the notice have been paid in full; or



         (b)   That the registered owner has not accumulated
three or more final determinations of parking violation or automated traffic
law enforcement system liability which were unpaid at the time the notice of
impending vehicle immobilization was issued.



      (6)   The hearing on eligibility for impoundment shall not
provide a venue for a collateral attack on the original determinations of
liability except to contest service of process.



   (D)   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a post
immobilization and towing notice shall be sent to the owner, or if the
vehicle is immobilized in place, affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous
place.



      (1)   The affixed notice shall warn that the vehicle is
immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its
damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or
damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§§ 16-1 and 21-1, the Illinois Criminal Code, The notice shall also provide
information specifying how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had,
and how the registered owner may obtain a post-immobilization hearing. If the
restraint has not been released within 24 hours of its placement, the
restraint shall be released and the vehicle towed and impounded.



      (2)   A post-towing notice shall be mailed to the registered
owner of a vehicle immobilized by towing. The notice shall contain:



         (a)   The date and time the vehicle was towed;



         (b)   The location from which it was towed;



         (c)   The case number;



         (d)   Reference to the cause of the tow for
immobilization;



         (e)   A statement that the vehicle is subject to towing
and storage charges;



         (f)   The name, address, telephone number, and hours of
operation of the storage facility where the vehicle can be claimed upon
payment of towing, storage fees, fines and penalties owed.



   (E)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person
may secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing
and storage fees provided in division (H) herein, and all fines and penalties
remaining due on each final determination of parking violation liability
issued to that person.



   (F)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a
post-immobilization hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any
subsequent towing and impoundment was erroneous, if the owner files a written
request for a hearing with the Adjudication Heating Administrator within 14
days after immobilization or 14 days of the date of the notice sent pursuant
to division (G) herein, whichever is later. The determination of the Hearing
Officer regarding the validity of the immobilization shall become final for
the purpose of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of
Illinois upon issuance.



   (G)   Within ten days after a vehicle has been impounded, a notice
of impoundment shall be sent by first class mail, to the address of the
registered owner as listed with the Secretary of State. The notice shall
state that the owner has the right to request a post-immobilization and
post-towing hearing as provided in division (E) herein, and that if the
vehicle is not claimed within 30 days from the date of the notice, the
vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 4-208, the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (H)   The fee for immobilization in place shall be $50 and/or a fee
for towing subsequent to the immobilization and a storage fee for every
24-hour period the vehicle is retained shall be assessed. No fees shall be
assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be
erroneous.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained
by an immobilization device without the approval of the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator or his or her designee. The registered owner of the immobilized
vehicle and any person who relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of
this division shall each be subject to a penalty of $750 for the violation.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-01-0321O, passed
1-11-2011)



§ 32.039  DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSION.



   (A)   When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing pursuant to this subchapter on ten or more parking violations or five
or more automated traffic law violations, the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator shall cause a notice of impending driver's license suspension
to be sent in the form as required by the Secretary of State. The notice
shall state that failure to pay the amount owing within 45 days of the date
of the notice will result in the city's notifying the Secretary of State that
the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 625, Act. 5, § 6-306.5,  Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (B)   If a person sent a notice pursuant to division (A) above fails
to pay the amount owing within the time stated on the notice, the
Adjudication Hearing Administrator may file with the Secretary of State, a
certified report, in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act. 5, § 6-306.5(c),
Illinois Vehicle Code, that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings. The Adjudication Hearing Administrator shall assess a
$20 filing fee against the person named in the certified report to reimburse
the city for the expense of preparing and filing the certified report with
the Secretary of State.



   (C)   A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to
division (B) above may, within 21 days of the date of the notice sent by the
Secretary of State pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act. 5, § 6306.5(b),  Illinois
Vehicle Code, file with the Adjudication Hearing Administrator a written
statement and supporting documentation to challenge the report; provided,
however, the grounds for such challenge shall be limited to: the person not
having been the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles receiving ten or
more parking violations notices on the date or dates the notices were issued;
or the person having already paid the fine and penalty for the ten or more
violations indicated on the report. The Adjudication Hearing Administrator
shall send notice of the decision on the challenge of the report after
receipt thereof. The challenge to the eligibility for suspension proceedings,
and any hearing requested under division (E) below, shall not provide a venue
for a collateral attack on the original determinations of liability except to
contest service of process.



   (D)   If a person named in a certified report, has paid the
previously reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the
Adjudication Hearing Administrator to be in error, the Adjudication Hearing
Administrator shall notify the Secretary of State in accordance with ILCS Ch.
625, Act. 5, § 6-306.5(d), Illinois Vehicle Code. A certified copy of the
notification shall be given, upon request and at no charge, to the person
named therein.



   (E)   An administrative hearing to contest an impending suspension
or suspension may be had upon filing a written request with the Secretary of
State, The filing fee for this hearing shall be $20, to be paid at the time
the request is made. The city shall reimburse the Secretary of State for all
reasonable costs incurred by the Secretary as a result of filing a certified
report, including but not limited to the costs of providing the required
notice and the costs incurred by the Secretary in any hearing conducted with
respect to the report and any appeal from a hearing.



(Ord. 2007-03-0090O, passed 3-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2011-01-0321O, passed
1-11-2011)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.050  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICES, ORGANIZATION, FUNCTION OF OFFICES AND
CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   There is established the full-time offices of Police Chief, Deputy
Police Chief, Police Lieutenant, Police



Sergeants, Police Patrol Officers and any other special officers and
employees in the Police Department. The Police Department shall be organized
and the offices thereof shall function as provided by the rules and
regulations and shall be subject to the control fo the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners and the Mayor and City Council where in each case, the
control is provided by law. The chain of command shall be in the following
order: Police Chief, Deputy Police Chief, Police Lieutenant, Police
Sergeants, Police Patrol Officers and other special officers and employees
and part-time/auxiliary Police Officers who shall be directly under the
command of the Police Chief. In the event that the Police Chief or Deputy
Police Chief is discharged from that position without cause, he or she shall
revert to and be established in whatever rank he or she held immediately
prior to that he or she was removed from, except for previously appointed
positions, and thereafter to all the benefits of that rank without regard as
to whether a vacancy then exists in that rank.



(Ord. 2014-07-0504O, passed 7-22-2014)



§ 32.051  APPOINTMENTS AND DISMISSALS.



   (A)   The Police Chief, Deputy Police Chief and the part-time police
officers shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent
of the City Council. The Chief of Police shall have full authority to
discipline or discharge part-time officers, provided any discharge is with
the Mayor’s consent.



   (B)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the
authority to appoint to the offices of Sergeant and Patrol Officer to the
full-time Police Department, with the approval of Mayor and City Council.



   (C)   Part-time officers shall be subject to the direction and
control of the Chief of Police at all times during the performance of their
duties.



   (D)   Part-time Police Officers shall further abide by all rules,
regulations, policies, procedures and orders of the Oak Forest Police
Department.



(Ord. 2014-07-0504O, passed 7-22-2014)



§ 32.052  AUTHORITY OF CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION REGARDING RADIO OPERATORS
AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS PERSONNEL.



   Any radio operator supervisor, radio operator or community relations
person who has been performing his or her duties prior to the effective date
of this section (Ord. 733, passed 11-6-1973), shall become subject to the
jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission immediately. The appointment of
any other radio operator supervisor and/or radio operator shall be made by
the Commission in accordance with Commission regulations.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.030)



§ 32.053  TRAINING PROGRAM.



   (A)   The city elects to participate in the program provided for in
the Illinois Police Training Act.



   (B)   Before an individual may commence regular employment as a
police officer, he or she shall be certified by the Illinois Local
Governmental Law Enforcement Officers Training Board as having successfully
completed an approved training course as provided in the Act.



   (C)   The basic training must be completed by the trainee within his
or her probationary period of one year.



   (D)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall require that
any person appointed to the department, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
10-2.1-29 and the Act, shall not become a regular member of the Department
unless and until he or she has completed the approved training course within
one year of the date of his or her initial employment.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.040)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.054  RULES AND REGULATIONS; REVIEW BY CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The rules and regulations of the Police Department, as
revised, dated January 24, 1977, are adopted.



   (B)   The rules and regulations of the Police Department shall be
reviewed on a regular basis, and the Chief of Police is the proper official
to recommend any correction and/or deletion which may become necessary from
time to time.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.050)



§ 32.055  AUXILIARY POLICE.



   (A)   Appointment and termination. The Mayor, with the advice and
consent of Council, may appoint auxiliary police officers in such number as
the Mayor and Council from time to time deem necessary. The appointment of
any or all auxiliary police officers may be terminated by the Mayor subject
to the advice and consent of Council.



   (B)   Status in Police Department. Auxiliary police officers shall
not be considered to be members of the regular Police Department and shall
not supplement members of the Department in the performance of their assigned
and normal duties, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.



   (C)   Qualifications. Prior to appointment, all auxiliary police
officers shall:



      (1)   Be fingerprinted and the fingerprints shall be checked
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation for any possible criminal record;



      (2)   Be 21 to 35 years of age, except that if the applicant
is over 35 years of age, the age limit may be extended one year for each year
of previous police experience of the applicant;



      (3)   Be examined and approved as physically fit by a medical
doctor designated by the Mayor and Council;



      (4)   Possess at least a high school diploma;



      (5)   Pass a physical agility test, which test shall be per
the specifications and under the direction of the Chief of Police;



      (6)   Pass a personality test, which test shall be per the
specifications and under the direction of the Chief;



      (7)   Pass a written aptitude test, which test shall be per
the specifications and under the direction of the Chief;



      (8)   Pass background checks as might be requested by the
Chief; and



      (9)   Take and pass an oral examination to be given by a board
of regular and auxiliary police officers, which board shall be appointed by
and be under the direction of the Chief.



   (D)   Identification symbols; control by Chief. Identification
symbols worn by auxiliary police officers shall be different and distinct
from those used by the regular Police Department and shall be selected and
chosen by the Chief of Police. Auxiliary police officers shall, at all times
during the performance of their duties, be subject to the direction and
control of the Chief.



   (E)   Powers and duties. An auxiliary police officer shall be a
conservator of the peace and shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   To aid or direct traffic within the municipality;



      (2)   To aid in the control of natural or human-made disasters;



      (3)   To aid in cases of civil disorder as directed by the
Chief of Police. In cases which render it impractical for the members of the
regular Police Department to perform normal and regular police duties, the
Chief is authorized to assign auxiliary police officers to perform normal and
regular police duties;



      (4)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without
process, all persons who break the peace or are found to be violating any
municipal ordinance or any criminal law of the state;



      (5)   To commit arrested persons for examination;



      (6)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody
overnight or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before a
proper judicial officer;



      (7)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the
peace that the Mayor and Council may prescribe; and



      (8)   To serve and execute all warrants for violations of
municipal ordinances or state criminal laws within the city limits, and for
this purpose to have all the common law and statutory power of sheriffs.



   (F)   Carrying firearms. Auxiliary police officers shall not carry
firearms, except with the permission of the Chief of Police, and then only
when in uniform and in the performance of their duties.



   (G)   Weapons training.



      (1)   Auxiliary police officers, prior to entering upon any of
their duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and
other police procedures by the Chief of Police.



      (2)   The course shall be not less than ten hours in duration.



      (3)   Upon completion of the course, the Chief shall file with
the City Clerk a certificate attesting to the auxiliary police officer’s
completion of the course.



   (H)   Compensation. Auxiliary police officers shall be paid for each
hour of service performed, at a rate set by Council, provided that the
service is performed at the direction of the Chief of Police.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.060)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.056  SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.



   (A)   The Mayor, with the consent of Council and on the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, is authorized and directed to appoint
special officers, to be known as school crossing guards, in numbers as he or
she may deem necessary, to perform school crossing duties under the direction
of the Chief of Police and in compliance with the rules and regulations as
the Chief promulgates.



   (B)   The guards shall wear badges, dress and insignia as the Chief
directs and shall be equipped in a manner which the Chief deems necessary for
the proper discharge of their duties.



   (C)   The Chief shall promulgate rules relating to the
qualifications and duties of the guards. The Mayor, with the consent of
Council and on the recommendation of the Chief, is responsible for the
appointment and removal of the guards. Those persons shall serve with
compensation as may be provided for by the Mayor and Council.



   (D)   No school crossing guard shall exercise his or her authority
as a guard, or wear the uniform or insignia, or display his or her badge in
an attempt to exercise his or her authority, except during the performance of
actual authorized duty.



   (E)   No person not duly appointed and sworn in as a school crossing
guard shall impersonate an officer or wear, carry or display the badge,
designated dress or insignia of a guard.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.070)



§ 32.057  POLICE PENSION FUND.



   There is established a police pension fund in and for the city, as
provided by state law. That fund shall be financed and administered as
provided in ILCS Ch.40, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.080)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.058  DEPUTY CHIEF(S) OF POLICE.



   (A)   (1)   There is established the position(s) of Deputy
Chief(s) of Police and the number of such position(s) shall be set by the
Council. The Deputy Chief position(s) shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. The term of the appointment(s) shall begin
at the start of the fiscal year, May 1, and expire on April 30, the final
date of the fiscal year.



      (2)   In the event of failure to appoint a Deputy Chief(s),
the person or persons so qualified shall continue the position(s) until a
successor or successors has/have been chosen and approved, until the
position(s) has/have been eliminated or until the Deputy Chief(s) has/have
been removed, whichever comes first.



   (B)   In addition to salary and benefits otherwise paid, the Deputy
Chief(s) shall be paid an amount set by Council each year as compensation for
service in the position of Deputy Chief(s).



   (C)   Any Deputy Chief(s) may be removed from the position during
his or her term by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The
grounds for removal may include job performance, alternate administrative
procedures, efficiency or otherwise. Deputy Chief(s) shall have the right to
a hearing before the City Council regarding the basis for removal.



   (D)   Subject to the direction of the Chief of Police, Deputy
Chief(s) shall be responsible for the management, administration, general
supervision and direction of all personnel of the Police Department and for
the coordination of all staff functions within the Police Department. The
Deputy Chief(s) shall also be responsible for the general good order of the
Department and for attaining and retaining maximum efficiency and
effectiveness from the personnel, equipment and facilities of the Department.



   (E)   In the absence of the Chief of Police, a Deputy Chief shall be
designated by the Chief of Police and serve as the administrative officer of
the Police Department.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.090)  (Ord. 2013-07-0454O, § 2, passed 7-9-2013)



§ 32.059  POLICE LIAISON AND COUNSELOR.



   (A)   Creation of the office.



      (1)   There is created the position of police liaison and
counselor.



      (2)   Eligible persons for appointment shall be submitted by
the Chief of Police to the Mayor.



      (3)   The police liaison and counselor shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.



      (4)   The term of appointment shall begin at the start of the
fiscal year, May 1, and expire on April 30, the final date of the fiscal year.



      (5)   In the event that there is a failure to appoint the
police liaison and counselor, the person so qualified shall continue in the
position until a successor has been chosen and approved, until the position
has been eliminated or until the person holding the position has been
removed, whichever comes first.



   (B)   Objectives.



      (1)   The objectives of the program include the creation of a
liaison between students, schools, the Police Department and other law
enforcement agencies.



      (2)   The program is intended to be beneficial to the youth of
the community and their parents who have encounters with the law.



      (3)   The program is created to increase the citizens of Oak
Forest awareness of the law.



      (4)   The police liaison and counselor will serve as a
consultant to the school staff and students.



      (5)   The police liaison and counselor will assist in the
development of programs and give recommendations for those young people who
have law-related problems.



      (6)   In the event of law violations in and about the school
or community, the police liaison and counselor shall refer those violations
to the appropriate Police Department or agency.



   (C)   Qualifications. The Police Chief shall screen any and all
persons and review their qualifications for the position. These
qualifications shall include the following:



      (1)   Masters degree in education or counseling;



      (2)   Police officer with at least five years’ experience as
a youth officer;



      (3)   Minimum of three years as a youth/family counselor with
a recognized agency or equivalent experience; and



      (4)   An interest and understanding of people, as well as a
personality which will command respect. The Police Chief shall have the
ability to waive one or more of the criteria for any applicant.



   (D)   Duties. The police liaison and counselor shall serve at the
direction of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The police liaison
and counselor shall have the following duties and responsibilities:



      (1)   Serve as liaison between the school and community
agencies;



      (2)   Coordinate any necessary police coverage for extra
curricular activities requiring the police at any school within the
jurisdiction of Oak Forest;



      (3)   Keep records and report to the Chief of Police as
requested;



      (4)   Conduct scheduled office hours for counseling youth and
meeting with parents at the Police Department or other designated location;



      (5)   Refer any criminal activities which may occur in or
about the school as well as the community to the Police Department;



      (6)   Assist in the development of fire and disaster
procedures at local schools. The police will direct and advise police and
fire officials who are called in to handle emergencies;



      (7)   Use reasonable means to prevent or control any violence
in the school or the community;



      (8)   Serve as liaison officer between the school and the
legal authorities and promote effective communication between the school and
the local Police Department and/or other law enforcement agencies;



      (9)   Work with appropriate school personnel in the general
area of crime prevention on school property; and



      (10)   Participate in counseling youth, processing cases of
truancy, local ordinance or state statute violations, and preventing
loitering and trespassing on school property as well as the community.



   (E)   Compensation. The rate of compensation shall be determined
from time to time by Council and shall be subject to the city budget and
appropriations ordinance in the respective year.



   (F)   Removal. The police liaison and counselor may be removed from
the position during his or her term by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council. The grounds for removal may include job performance, alternate
administrative procedures or efficiencies or otherwise. The police liaison
and counselor shall have the right to a hearing before the City Council
regarding the basis for removal.



   (G)   Position defined. Council declares the position herein created
is not an office as defined in state statute. Nothing herein stated is
intended to prohibit any individual appointed from continuing to serve as a
police officer as described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1 or the Oak
Forest Board of Fire and Police Commissioners rules and regulations for an
auxiliary police officer as described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-20.



(2000 Code, § 2.34.100)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.060  PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS; CERTIFICATION AND HIRING STANDARDS.



   (A)   All applicants for the position of part-time police officer
must comply with all state laws requiring certification standards and must
meet the following hiring standards of the City of Oak Forest:



      (1)   The applicant must be a currently employed full-time
police officer in good standing with a certificate from the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training and Standards Board.



      (2)   The applicant must have a minimum of three years
full-time experience as a police officer.



      (3)   The applicant must be of good character without a
conviction for a felony or crime involving moral turpitude and pass a
thorough background examination.



      (4)   The applicant must be in good physical condition and
pass a physical examination, drug test and any other exams as directed by the
Chief of Police to determine fitness for duty.



      (5)   The applicant must successfully complete the Field
Training and Evaluation Program.



   (B)   Part-time police officers shall not be assigned under any
circumstances to supervise or direct full-time police officers of the police
department, nor shall part-time police officers be used as permanent
replacements for permanent full-time police officers.



   (C)   Part-time police officers shall not count as "manpower" as
defined in the police officers union contract.



   (D)   Part-time police officers shall not work more than 1,000 hours
annually.



(Ord. 2006-06-0036O, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2007-02-0084O, passed
2-13-2007)



§ 32.061  FEE FOR BAIL/BOND ADMINISTRATION.



   The Police Department will charge an administrative fee of $50 for the
processing of bail or bond of an individual in any legal process, civil or
criminal, or on any bookable arrest, including any arrest on a warrant.  Any
fee not paid within 30 days of posting bail or bond, shall be subject to a
fee of $200.



(Ord. 2011-01-0324O, passed 1-25-2011)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.070  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   There is established in and for the city a Fire Department. The
Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, a Bureau of Fire Prevention and
such other officers and personnel as may be provided for in this subchapter
and from time to time by Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.010)  (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord.
2009-01-0217O, passed 1-27-2009)



§ 32.071  (RESERVED).



§ 32.072  (RESERVED)



§ 32.073  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICES, ORGANIZATION, FUNCTION OF OFFICES AND
CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   There is established the full-time offices of Fire Chief, Deputy Fire
Chief, Lieutenant and Firefighter in the Fire Department. The Fire Department
shall be organized and the offices thereof shall function as provided by the
rules and regulations an shall be subject to the control of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners and the Mayor and City Council where in each case,
the control is provided by law. The chain of command shall be in the
following order: Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief, Lieutenants, Firefighters and
part-time firefighters who shall be directly under the command of the Fire
Chief. In the event that the Fire Chief or Deputy Fire Chief is discharged
from that position without cause, he or she shall revert to and be
established in whatever rank he or she held immediately prior to that he or
she was removed from, except for previously appointed positions, and
thereafter be entitled to all the benefits of that rank without regard as to
whether a vacancy then exists in that rank.



(Ord. 2014-07-5003O, passed 7-2-2014)



§ 32.074  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Fire chief and the Deputy Chief shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of Council.



   (B)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the
authority to appoint certified mobile intensive care unit
technician/certified firefighters to the full-time Fire Department, with the
approval of Mayor and City Council.



   (C)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the
authority to appoint full-time members of the Department to promotional
positions according to the Fire Department promotional Act (ILCS Ch. 50, Act
742) upon recommendation of the Fire Chief, with the approval of the Mayor
and City  Council.



   (D)   The Mayor, with consultation with the Fire Chief, shall have
the authority to appoint part-time Fire Department positions.



(Ord. 2014-07-5003O, passed 7-2-2014)



§ 32.075  FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   Duties. The Fire Chief shall have the management and control
of all matters and things pertaining to the Fire Department and of all
personnel in the Department. All personnel shall be under the direction and
supervision of the Chief.  The Fire Chief shall report immediately to the
City Administrator and then to the Mayor.



   (B)   Investigation of fires. The Chief shall cause all fires to be
investigated, where the causes are undetermined or where the use of
incendiaries is suspected, and shall maintain a record of the investigation
and of the evidence in each case.



   (C)   Annual report. At the end of each calendar year, the Chief
shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council a report of all fires that
have taken place during the year, with the causes thereof, if ascertainable,
and the number, a description and the value of all buildings damaged or
destroyed.



   (D)   Records. The Chief shall maintain complete records of all
business transactions in the Department and of all property placed in his or
her custody or charge.



   (E)   Apparatus inspection. The Chief shall cause an inspection to
be made at least annually, of all fire apparatus, equipment and houses and
shall make his or her report findings and recommendations to the Mayor and
Council in time for their consideration of the budget.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.060)  (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord.
2009-01-0217O, passed 1-27-2009)



§ 32.076  DEPUTY CHIEF.



   There is established the position of Deputy Chief.  The Deputy Chief
shall perform all duties delegated to him or her in the manner prescribed by
law or ordinance, or by the rules and regulations of the Fire Department. 
In the absence of his or her superior officer, the Deputy Chief shall take
command of companies, and the authority, powers, duties and responsibilities
of such superior officer shall be vested in such Deputy Chief.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.070)  (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord.
2009-01-0217O, passed 1-27-2009)



§ 32.077  (RESERVED)



§ 32.078  LIEUTENANT.



   There is established the position of lieutenant of the Fire
Department.  In the absence of his or her immediate superior officer, the
lieutenant shall take command of companies, and the authority, powers, duties
and responsibilities of such superior officer shall be vested in such
lieutenant.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.090)  (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord.
2009-01-0217O, passed 1-27-2009)



§ 32.079  (RESERVED)



§ 32.080  FIREFIGHTERS.



   There is established the position of firefighter in the Fire
Department. Appointments to the full-time and part-time positions shall be
made as provided in § 32.074 above.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.110)  (Ord. 2008-12-0213O, passed 12-9-2008; Ord.
2009-01-0217O, passed 1-27-2009)



§ 32.081  COMPENSATION.



   The Fire Chief and members of the Fire Department shall receive for
their services such salary and compensation as are established by ordinance
of the city.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.120)



§ 32.082  BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.



   (A)   There is established a Bureau of Fire Prevention. It shall
consist of officers, members, part-time firefighters and employees as are
provided for by ordinance. The Bureau shall be under the direction and
supervision of the Fire Chief and all fire inspection work of the Bureau
shall be under his or her authority.



   (B)   The Chief or his or her subordinates within the Bureau shall
interpret the Fire Prevention Code of the city in harmony with the Building
Code of the city and shall make no requirement inconsistent with or contrary
to the Fire Prevention Code.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.130)



§ 32.083  ASSISTANCE OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The Fire Chief or his or her subordinates may call upon the Police
Department for aid in the enforcement of any fire regulation.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.140)



§ 32.084  PARTICIPATION IN STATE TRAINING COURSE.



   (A)   The city elects to participate in the programs provided for in
the Illinois Fire Protection Training Act.



   (B)   Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment
as a firefighter, he or she must be certified by the State Fire Marshal as a
Firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved training course
as provided in such act.



   (C)   The Firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee
within his or her probationary period of 12 months, except for volunteers and
part-time and paid on-call personnel.



   (D)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall require that
any person appointed to the Fire Department shall not become a regular member
of the Department unless and until he or she successfully completes, pursuant
to such Act, the approved training course within 12 months of the date of his
or her initial employment.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.150)



§ 32.085  COMMAND OF DEPARTMENT; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall have the sole and absolute control and
command over all persons on duty connected with the Fire Department.



   (B)   He or she shall possess full power and authority over the
organization, government and discipline of the Department and the direction
and control of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.



   (C)   To that end, the Chief may, from time to time, prescribe and
establish rules and regulations as he or she deems advisable, subject to the
provisions of the Police and Fire Commissioners Act and the codes and
ordinances adopted by the Mayor and Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.160)



§ 32.086  REPORTS TO STATE FIRE MARSHAL; INVESTIGATIONS; ENFORCEMENT OF
STATE LAW.



   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for keeping records and for making
necessary reports to the State Fire Marshal. He or she shall assist the Fire
Marshal in any investigation the Fire Marshal deems expedient or necessary to
make. The Chief shall further be responsible for the enforcement of state
laws concerning fire protection.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.170)



§ 32.087  SUSPENSION OF FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall have the management and control of all
matters and things pertaining to the Fire Department. He or she may suspend
any firefighter from duty, but he or she shall report the suspension to the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners at its next regular meeting, and the
reasons for his or her action.



   (B)   When the report is made, the Board shall take such action
thereon as it deems to be just and right. Any firefighter so suspended shall
not be entitled to compensation while so suspended, nor until he or she is
returned to duty by the proper authority.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.180)



§ 32.088  HAVING OR MAKING KEYS TO ENGINE HOUSE OR FIRE ALARM BOXES.



   No person shall have in his or her possession or make or cause to be
made any key to any engine or truck house or fire alarm telegraph box, or use
or cause to be used any such key, without the consent of the proper authority.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.190)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.089  APPROVAL OF BUILDING PLANS.



   The Fire Chief or his or her subordinates shall examine the plans of
all proposed buildings, except single-family dwellings, and shall pass on all
questions relating to the safety of life and property from fire. No permit
for a building shall be issued until plans are approved by the Chief or his
or her subordinate.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.200)



§ 32.090  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief or his or her subordinates are authorized to
enter a building, structure or premises for the purpose of determining
whether or not the building, structure or premises have been or are being
constructed and maintained in accordance with the fire regulations of the
city.



   (B)   The Chief or his or her subordinates shall make or cause to be
made frequent regular inspections to secure efficient supervision of all
buildings, structures or places used for either manufacturing or commercial
purposes, or occupied or frequented by large numbers of people, and all
school buildings, public halls, churches, institutional buildings, theaters,
multiple dwellings and places of amusement, recreation or employment for the
purpose of:



      (1)   Determining the safety of the occupants in the event of
a fire, panic or accident;



      (2)   Examining the working order and repair of doors, fire
escapes and firefighting appliances; the condition and maintenance of exits,
corridors, stairways and fire escapes and their approaches with respect to
obstructions; the disposition, quantity, arrangement and protection of stock,
combustible material, rubbish, heating devices, ovens, flammable liquids and
explosives with regard to safety from fires; and the protection of hazardous
machinery, appliances and apparatus; and



      (3)   Ascertaining whether or not the fire regulations or the
city are being efficiently complied with.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.210)



§ 32.091  INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated
all complaints of violations of the fire regulations of the city.



   (B)   Where it is found that the fire regulations are being
violated, or that any building, structure or premises are in a condition as
to be a probable cause of fire, or are likely to endanger life or safety in
case of fire, panic or other accident, compliance may be attempted to be
secured first by informal action.



   (C)   Where compliance is not obtained by the informal action within
a reasonable time, a complaint for the violation, of the regulations shall be
initiated by the Chief or such subordinate as he or she may designate.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.220)



§ 32.092  RECORDS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall cause to be made and shall maintain, in a
proper manner, records of all inspections made and a summary of violations,
together with memoranda on the disposition of all violations found to exist.



   (B)   The records shall be open for inspection by the City Clerk,
the Mayor, Council, the Chief of Police, the Building Commissioner and
building inspectors.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.230)



§ 32.093  OVERCROWDING.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall not allow more persons to enter any place
of public assembly than the number of persons certified to by the Building
Commissioner, which number of persons appears on the license issued for the
place or for the premises.



   (B)   Any place of public assembly that is in violation of this
section shall be closed until the violation is corrected.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.240)



§ 32.094  CONTROL AND EXTINGUISHMENT OF FIRES.



   (A)   Orders of Chief.



      (1)   All persons in the vicinity of a fire or other emergency
shall be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or other members of the Fire
Department in charge of the control and extinguishment of the fire.



      (2)   The Chief or other member in charge shall have the power
to arrest any person refusing to obey lawful orders issued in accordance with
this section and no person shall persist in refusing to obey an order.



   (B)   Cordons. The Fire Chief or other member in charge at a fire or
other emergency may prescribe and maintain the limits in the vicinity thereof
within which no person shall enter without the permission of the Chief or
other member.



   (C)   Removal and destruction of property. The Chief or other member
in charge at a fire or other emergency may cause the removal or destruction
of any property whenever, in his or her judgment, it becomes necessary to do
so to prevent the destruction of property by the communication of fire.



   (D)   Power of arrest. The Chief or other member in command at the
scene of a fire or other emergency, or while in charge of fire apparatus or
companies, may, at the time an offense is committed, or at any time
thereafter, arrest any person suspected of arson, incendiarism or malicious
mischief or who conducts himself or herself in a disorderly manner, or who
refuses to obey that member while acting in the discharge of duty, or who
illegally gives or transmits false alarms, or who wilfully, maliciously or
negligently causes damage to fire apparatus or houses.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.250)



§ 32.095  REPAIRS TO EQUIPMENT; BIDDING REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall, whenever any fire engine, hose, cart or
other apparatus or equipment requires immediate emergency repairs to be made,
in order to avoid delay in keeping the equipment ready for immediate service,
cause repairs to be made. The Chief shall immediately report, in writing, to
the Mayor and Council, the facts relating to the defective equipment and the
estimated cost of the repairs.



   (B)   (1)   Except as to the emergency repairs, the Fire Chief
shall, whenever any fire engine, hose, cart, truck or other equipment or
apparatus requires repairs, report that fact to the Mayor and Council, in
writing, with competitive bids, indicating the amount and nature of repairs
required to be made.



      (2)   If authorized by the Mayor and Council, the Fire Chief
shall cause the repairs to be made.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.260)



§ 32.096  SALVAGE FROM FIRES; PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.



   No person shall be entitled to take away any property in the possession
of the Fire Department that was saved from a fire until proof of ownership is
offered to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief or his or her subordinate.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.270)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.097  UNIFORMS.



   The officers and employees of the Fire Department, including the Fire
Chief, shall, at all times when on duty, wear suitable uniforms as the Chief
may prescribe.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.280)



§ 32.098  COMPENSATION OF INJURED FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   Any full-time member of the Fire Department sustaining an
accidental injury arising out of and in the course of his or her employment
or in the discharge of his or her duty shall be entitled to his or her usual
salary during the time of temporary disability, not to exceed a period of six
months, less the amount received by the injured firefighter as workers’
compensation benefits or other income for temporary total disability paid by
any insurer of the city.



   (B)   Any part-time firefighter, authorized by the Fire Chief, the
Mayor and Council, who sustains an accidental injury arising out of and in
the course of his or her service as a part-time firefighter, shall be
entitled to and only to those benefits, rights and privileges set forth in
any group accident insurance policy in force at that time covering the
Department.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.290)



§ 32.099  SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY; FEES.



   (A)   Members of the Fire Department are authorized to go outside
the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of rendering aid to other
Fire Departments, cities or municipalities in accordance with written
mutual/automatic aid agreements. However, the Department may not provide
service outside the corporate limits except on orders of the Fire Chief, the
Fire Department officer in charge or the Mayor, unless the city has
undertaken, by contract, to render service to property outside the corporate
limits of the city, in which case the Department may leave the corporate
limits in fulfillment of the contract.



   (B)   Members of the Fire Department are authorized and directed to
render emergency services to owner(s) or occupant(s) of premises outside the
corporate limits of the city, within the area described in division (C)
below, on the terms and conditions set forth in this section.



   (C)   The area covered by this section shall include all the land
lying within the boundaries which have been designated to be in the general
geographical response area as established by the Fire Department .



   (D)   The service shall be rendered to owner(s) of premises who have
signed an agreement to abide by and accept the terms of this section and who
have paid the rates prescribed in division (E) below.



   (E)   The rate for the service shall be $250 per year for
single-family homes. For multi-family dwellings, the rate shall be $300 per
year, per unit, and $500 per year for each business, to cover the use of
emergency services of the Fire Department. All annual fees shall be billed
the first of May of each fiscal year.



   (F)   Members of the Fire Department shall render emergency services
to owner(s) or occupant(s) of premises outside the corporate limits of the
city, within the area described in division (C) above, even though the owners
or occupants have not signed an agreement with the city.



   (G)   The city shall assess the following rates for Fire Department
emergency services to property owner(s) or occupant(s) of property who do not
have a current fire protection contract with the city:



      (1)   Per fire engine per hour: $250.



      (2)   Per truck company per hour: $250.



      (3)   Per ambulance per hour: $250.



      (4)   Per administrative vehicle per hour: $100.



      (5)   Per service vehicle per hour: $100.



      (6)   Per personnel per hour: $70.



      (7)   Five hundred dollars for extrication of person(s) from
vehicle involved in motor vehicle crash.**



      (8)   Five hundred dollars for the extinguishment of a motor
vehicle fire.**



      (9)   Five hundred dollars for debris removal, hazmat removal,
fluid removal, or any mitigation or other operational task performed by the
fire company at the scene.**



      ** These costs shall also include the costs of all materials and
equipment used, expended, depleted, destroyed, or removed from service as a
result of the service provided.



      (10)   A minimum of one hour shall be charged. Subsequent
hours shall be billed at 15-minute increments. These fees shall be paid to
the city within 30 days from the date the services were rendered.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.300)  (Ord. 2412, § 1, passed - -1999; Am. Ord.
2018-04-06880, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.100  DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND EQUIPMENT TO FIRE CHIEF’S SUCCESSOR.



   Upon the expiration of his or her term of office and failure to be
reappointed, or upon his or her resignation or removal, the Fire Chief shall
deliver to his or her successor in office all books, records, equipment and
property of every description in his or her possession and belonging to the
city or pertaining to his or her office, without delay.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.310)



§ 32.101  FIREFIGHTER’S PENSION FUND.



   (A)   Establishment. There is established a firefighter’s pension
fund in and for the city, as provided by state law.



   (B)   Sources of fund. The fund shall consist of taxes,
accumulations, assessments and deductions as are provided by state statute
and shall include an assessment or deduction of six and three-fourths percent
plus one and one-half percent per month from the salary of each firefighter.



(2000 Code, § 2.36.320)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.102  FIRE DEPARTMENT COST RECOVERY PROGRAM.



   (A)   Ambulance service cost recovery program.



      (1)   Ambulance service.



         (a)   The Fire Department may provide ambulance and
rescue service in case of emergency requiring the pre-hospital care and
transportation of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless at the time of the dispatch of a Fire Department
vehicle.



         (b)   The response area shall be limited to the
territory within the corporate limits of the city.



         (c)   Service outside corporate limits shall be limited
to:



            1.   Municipal code § 32.099 and circumstances
governed by automatic/mutual-aid agreement; and



            2.   Extreme life-saving necessity.



         (d)   Except when personnel or equipment are needed for
continued life-saving support, the Fire Chief shall assure that neither
personnel nor equipment are unduly delayed in:



            1.   Dispatch to, or departure from, the scene;



            2.    Transportation to and from the hospital; or



            3.   Within a hospital.



      (2)   Fees for ambulance service shall be provided as follows:



         (a)   Fees for "Basic Life Support" services (BLS) shall
be as follows:



 

 
 
Resident
 
Non-resident


Basic rate
 
$800
 
$900


Mileage per mile
 
$20
 
$20



 



         (b)   Fees for "Advanced Life Support" services (ALS)
shall be as follows:



 

 
 
Resident
 
Non-resident


Basic rate
 
$900
 
$1,050


Mileage per mile
 
$20
 
$20



 



         (c)   Fees for "Advanced Life Support 2" services (ALS2)
shall be as follows:



 

 
 
Resident
 
Non-resident


Basic rate
 
$1,100
 
$1,250


Mileage per mile
 
$20
 
$20



 



         (d)   Additional fees provided at any level of care
shall be as follows:



 

Immobilization
 
$100


King blades
 
$50


IO needles
 
$50



 



         (e)   Fees, other than basic rate, shall be on an as
needed/if used basis. The above rates will automatically increase 3% annually.



   (B)   Cost recovery, other.



      (1)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         CARELESS. Not taking ordinary or reasonable care, including
the disregard of the safety of others.



         CONTRACT. An oral or written agreement to have work
performed by a contractor.



         CONTRACTOR.  Person or entity who has a contract to
perform a task or service.



         EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Any call requiring the Fire Department
to respond.



         INCENDIARY ACT. A fire purposely set by a person or persons.



         INCIDENT. Any request, by any person, for the services of
the Fire Department.



         MALICIOUS ACT. A wrongful act intentionally done without
legal justification or excuse, an unlawful act done willfully and purposely.



         NEGLIGENCE. Failure to exercise the standard of care that a
reasonably prudent person would use under similar circumstances, including
the doing of something which a reasonable prudent person would not do.



      (2)   Acts requiring cost reimbursement. The following acts
are subject to the fees enumerated in division (B)(3) of this section:



         (a)   Negligence/careless acts. Any contractor, whose
negligence or careless actions or conduct cause an incident resulting in an
emergency response, shall be required to make restitution, pursuant to
division (B)(3) of this section to the city for the costs of that emergency
response.



         (b)   Malicious or incendiary acts. Any person whose
malicious or incendiary act causes an incident resulting in an emergency
response, shall be required to make restitution, pursuant to division (B)(3)
of this section, to the city for costs of that emergency response.



         (c)   Driving under the influence. Every person found
guilty, including an order of supervision or probation of "DUI", who
proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency
response, shall make restitution pursuant to the fees in division (B)(3) of
this section to the city for the city's costs of that emergency response.



         (d)   Salvage operations. A fee of $300 shall be charged
for Fire Department salvage operations including but not limited to tarping
personal property and smoke or water removal.



         (e)   Fire company standby. When a fire company (engine,
truck or ambulance) is requested or required to stand by for a non-city
sponsored event, the person responsible shall be required to make restitution
pursuant to division (B)(3) of this section to the city for the costs of such
fire company standby. No other fire company standby services can be provided
within the city other than through the city's Fire Department unless the city
is unable to provide such services.



      (3)   Fees.



         (a)   The following fees shall apply to all acts
enumerated to division (B)(2) of this section:



            1.   Per fire engine per hour: $250.



            2.   Per truck company per hour: $250.



            3.   Per ambulance company per hour: $250.



            4.   Per administrative vehicle per hour: $100.



            5.   Per service vehicle per hour: $100.



            6.   Per each personnel per hour: $70.



         (b)   A minimum of one hour shall be charged. Subsequent
hours will be billed at 15-minute increments.



      (4)   Additional fees. The following fees shall apply as
indicated:



         (a)   A fee of $500 for the extrication of persons from
vehicles involved in traffic accidents.*



         (b)   A fee of $500 for the extinguishment of a motor
vehicle fire.*



         (c)   A fee of $500 for debris removal, hazmat removal,
fluid removal, or any other mitigation or operational tasks performed by the
fire company at the scene.*



         *These costs shall also include the costs of all materials
and equipment used, expended, depleted, destroyed or removed from service as
a result of the service provided.



      (5)   Waiver of fees. The Fire Chief or his/her designee may
waive or reduce fee, upon his or her discretion based on mitigating
circumstances.



      (6)   Claims. A claim shall be filed to the responsible party
through their insurance carrier. In some circumstances, the responsible party
will be billed directly.



      (7)   False fire alarms.



         (a)   First and second false fire alarm in a rolling
12-month period; warning letter (no fine).



         (b)   Each additional false fire alarm in a rolling
12-month period after two results in a false alarm charge of $50 with each
charge increasing by $50 for each false alarm, not to exceed a fine of $500
per incident.



         (c)   If the false fire alarm is an intentional false
alarm, a fine of $500 will be charged regardless of the number of false alarm
occurrences in the preceding 12-month period.



(Ord. 2018-04-06900, passed 4-24-2018)



DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS



§ 32.115  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is established in and for the city a Department of
Public Works.



   (B)   The Department shall consist of a Director of Public Works and
other officers and personnel as determined from time to time by Council.



   (C)   The Directory of Public Works is also referred to as the
Superintendent of Public Works in these codified ordinances.



(Ord. 2006-02-0008O, passed 2-28-2006)



§ 32.116  ASSISTANT DIRECTOR AND STREET SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   There is established the office of Assistant Director of
Public Works and Street Superintendent. These positions shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of Council. The term of the appointment shall
begin at the start of the fiscal year, May 1, and expire on April 30 the
final date of the fiscal year.



   (B)   (1)   The Director, Assistant Director or Street
Superintendent may be removed during the term of the appointment by the
Mayor, with the approval of Council.



      (2)   The grounds for removal may include job performance,
alternate administrative procedures, departmental efficiency or otherwise.
The Assistant Superintendent so removed shall have the right to a hearing
before Council regarding the basis for removal.



   (C)   Subject to the direction of the Director of Public Works, the
Assistant Director and Street Superintendent shall be responsible for the
supervision of the Department of Public Works, as specified within their
respective job descriptions.



(Ord. 2006-02-0008O, passed 2-28-2006)



§ 32.117  DISQUALIFICATION OF APPLICANTS FOR CERTAIN OFFENSES.



   (A)   All applicants for positions in the Department of Public Works
of the City of Oak Forest are required to possess or obtain an Illinois
commercial driver’s license and shall be eligible and qualified to operate
city motor vehicles. Therefore, to protect public health, safety and welfare,
no person



shall be eligible to apply and test for, accept, or be employed in any
position within the Department of Public Works, that is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission, if:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of more than two
“serious traffic violation” within three years of the date of application
for employment. For purposes of this section, “a serious traffic
violation” is defined as:



         (a)   A violation of section 11-402(a) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to leaving the scene of an accident involving damage
to a vehicle. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402(a);



         (b)   A violation of section 11-403 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to failure to stop and exchange information after a
motor vehicle collision involving property damage only. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-403;



         (c)   A violation of section 11-502(a) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating illegal transportation, possession, or carrying of
alcoholic liquor within the passenger area of any vehicle. ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-502(a);



         (d)   A violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to operating a motor vehicle without a valid license
or permit. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101;



         (e)   A violation of Section 11-403 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to failure to stop and exchange information or give
aid after a motor vehicle collision involving personal injury or death. ILCS
Ch. 625 Act 5, § 11-403;



         (f)   A violation related to excessive speeding,
involving speeding over 15 miles per hour over the speed limit;



         (g)   A violation relating to reckless driving;



         (h)   A violation of section 11-707(d) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to passing in a no passing zone. ILCS Ch. 625 Act 5,
§ 11-707(d);



         (i)   A violation of section 11-1402(b) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to limitations on backing upon a controlled access
highway. ILCS  Ch. 625,  Act 5, § 11-1402(b);



         (j)   A violation of section 11-707(b) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to driving on the left side of a roadway in a
non-passing zone. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707(b);



         (k)   A violation of section 11-1002(e) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to failure to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
at an intersection. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002(e);



         (l)   A violation of section 11-1008 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to failure to yield to a pedestrian on a sidewalk.
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008;



         (m)   A violation for failure to reduce speed to avoid
an accident;



         (n)   A violation for driving too fast for conditions;



         (o)   A violation of Section 11-605 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, relating to exceeding the speed in a school zone. ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-605;



         (p)   A violation for improper or erratic traffic lane
changes, lane usage and/or center lane usage;



         (q)   A violation for improper passing on the roadway,
including, without limitation, a violation for passing on the wrong side of
the road or a violation for passing on the shoulder, left or right side;



         (r)   A violation for passing a school bus receiving or
discharging passengers or displaying a warning not to pass;



         (s)   A violation of ILCS Ch. 635, Act 5, § 11-710, for
following another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having
due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the
condition of the highway;



         (t)   A violation of section 11-1201, relating to
failure to stop for an approaching railroad train or railroad equipment or
signals. ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201; or



         (u)   Any other similar violation of a law or local
ordinance of any state relating to motor vehicle traffic control.



      (2)   The applicant’s driver’s license is suspended or
revoked at the time of application for employment.



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of driving under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, under any state law or local ordinance in the
three year period prior to application for employment.



      (4)   The applicant is unable to obtain an Illinois Commercial
Driver’s License within 90 days of the date of hire.



   (B)   The bases for disqualification provided under this section
shall be in addition to all other bases for disqualification for employment
with the city, under any state or federal law, rules or regulations, or local
ordinance, or Civil Service Commission Rule. Nothing contained in this
Section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Civil Service
Commission to disqualify an applicant from consideration for employment, or
discipline an employee up to and including termination.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall apply to automatically
disqualify only new applicants for positions of employment within the
Department of Public Works and shall not result in any automatic
disqualification of any current employees in the Department of Public Works.



(Ord. 2015-04-059O, passed 4-12-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



COMMUNITY/COMMERCIAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT



§ 32.130  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   There is established the Community/Commercial Economic
Development Department.



   (B)   The Community/Commercial Economic Development Department shall
consist of the position of Director of Community/Commercial Economic
Development Department and other personnel as determined by need.



   (C)   All employment and positions in the department are subject to
budgetary considerations.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 32.131  POSITION OF DIRECTOR.



   The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Council. The Director shall be an employee of the city and be
responsible for the general supervision of the Department.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 32.132  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Community/Commercial Economic Development Department shall be
responsible for activities relating to planning, zoning, economic
development, and other activities which may be assigned.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 32.133  ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Community/Commercial Economic Development Director shall be subject
to the supervision of, and shall report to the City Administrator, and to the
Mayor.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.145  ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   There is established in and for the city a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners consisting of three members who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of Council and who shall serve respectively for the
following terms: one to serve until the end of the current municipal year,
one to serve until the end of the municipal year next ensuing and the third
to serve until the end of the municipal year second next ensuing. The
successor to each member so appointed shall serve for three years and until
his or her respective successor is appointed and qualified.



(2000 Code, § 2.44.010)



§ 32.146  OATH AND BOND; REQUIREMENTS OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall be considered officers of the municipality and shall file an oath and a
fidelity bond in such manner as may be required by Council.



   (B)   No person holding a lucrative office under the United States,
this state or any political subdivision thereof or a municipality shall be a
member of the Board or the Secretary thereof. The acceptance of any lucrative
office by a member of the Board shall be treated as a resignation of his or
her office as a member of the Board or the Secretary thereof. No person shall
be appointed a member of the Board who is related, either by blood or
marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official or the
municipality. Not more than two members of the Board shall belong to the same
political party existing in the municipality at the time of appointments and
as defined in ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 10-2, the Election Code.  If only one
or no political party exists in the municipality at the time of the
appointments, then state or national political party affiliations shall be
considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be determined
by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the Board.



(2000 Code, § 2.44.020)



§ 32.147  APPOINTMENTS TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all
officers and members of the Fire Department and the Police Department, except
the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, which appointments may be made by the
Mayor with the consent of Council.



   (B)   All appointments made by the Board shall be made from the rank
next below that to which the appointment is made, other than that of the
lowest rank.



(2000 Code, § 2.44.030)



§ 32.148  RULES; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall make the rules and
appointments and removals as set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1
et seq.



(2000 Code, § 2.44.040)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.149  SECRETARY.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may employ a Secretary or
designate one of its own members to act as Secretary. The Secretary shall
keep the minutes of the Board’s proceedings, shall be custodian of all
papers pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held and shall perform other duties as the Board prescribes.



(2000 Code, § 2.44.050)



BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF POLICE PENSION FUND



§ 32.160  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established in and for the city a Board of Trustees of the
Police Pension Fund.



(2000 Code, § 2.46.010)



§ 32.161  COMPOSITION.



   The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of five
members, two of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, two of whom shall be
elected from the regular Police Department and one of whom shall be a
beneficiary under the Police Pension Fund Act, as established by statute.



(2000 Code, § 2.46.020)



§ 32.162  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Of the two members of the Board of Trustees of the police
pension fund appointed by the Mayor, one shall serve for one year beginning
May 14, 1963, and the other shall serve for two years beginning May 14, 1963.
The successors to the trustees shall serve for two years each or until such
time as their successors are appointed and qualified.



   (B)   (1)   The third and fourth members of the Board shall be
elected from the regular Police Department by the active members thereof as
provided by statute.



      (2)   The fifth member shall be elected from the beneficiaries
under the Police Pension Fund Act.



   (C)   Of these three members, all shall serve for two years
beginning on May 14, 1963, and all shall be elected as provided by statute.



(2000 Code, § 2.46.030)



§ 32.163  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Trustees of the police pension fund shall exercise and
have all the powers and duties delegated to it by statute.



(2000 Code, § 2.46.040)



BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



§ 32.175  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is established in and for the city a Board of Local
Improvements, which shall consist of the Mayor and seven members of Council.



   (B)   Those members shall be appointed by the Mayor.



(2000 Code, § 2.50.010)



§ 32.176  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it by statute or ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 2.50.020)



§ 32.177  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Board of Local Improvements shall meet upon the call of
the Mayor or any two members, provided that at least 24 hours’ notice of
the call is given each member.



   (B)   However, a meeting may be held when all members are present
without notice.



(2000 Code, § 2.50.030)



§ 32.178  SECRETARY.



   The Secretary of the Board of Local Improvements shall be appointed
from one of the members of the Board.



(2000 Code, § 2.50.040)



§ 32.179  EXPENDITURES.



   The Board of Local Improvements, without Council approval, may expend
budgeted sums not to exceed $2,500 per line item, or $2,500 for any
particular project proposed before the Board.



(2000 Code, § 2.50.050)



EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD



§ 32.190  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The city establishes an Emergency Telephone System Board.



(2000 Code, § 2.52.010)



§ 32.191  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Emergency Telephone System Board shall be to
coordinate and supervise the planning and implement action and upgrading of
the enhanced 9-1-1 system.



(2000 Code, § 2.52.020)



§ 32.192  COMPOSITION.



   The Emergency Telephone System Board shall consist of the Police Chief,
Fire Chief, Public Works Director, Emergency Management Director, Network
Administrator and the Radio Room Supervisor.



(2000 Code, § 2.52.030) (Am. Ord. 2017-01- 0630O, passed 1-10-2017)



§ 32.193  (RESERVED).



§ 32.194  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Emergency Telephone System Board shall have the following powers
and duties:



   (A)   Planning a 9-1-1 system;



   (B)   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading and
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems;



   (C)   Receiving moneys from the surcharge imposed under ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 15.3, and from any other source, for deposit into the emergency
telephone system fund;



   (D)   Authorizing all disbursements from the fund; and



   (E)   Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the
implementation or upgrade of the system.



(2000 Code, § 2.52.050)



§ 32.195  EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM FUND.



   (A)   All moneys received by the Emergency Telephone System Board,
pursuant to a surcharge imposed under Ordinances 1600, passed January 10,
1989; 1631, passed May 9, 1989; and 2192, passed July 16, 1996, shall be
deposited into an emergency telephone system fund.



   (B)   The Oak Forest City Treasurer shall be custodian of the fund.
All interest accruing on the fund shall remain in the fund.



   (C)   No expenditures may be made from the fund except upon the
direction of the Board by resolution passed by a majority of all members of
the Board.



   (D)   Expenditures may be made only to pay for the costs associated
with the following:



      (1)   The design of the emergency telephone system;



      (2)   The coding of an initial master street address guide
data base, and update and maintenance thereof;



      (3)   The repayment of any moneys advanced for the
implementation of the system;



      (4)   The charges for automatic number identification and
automatic location identification equipment, and maintenance, replacement and
update thereof;



      (5)   The nonrecurring charges related to installation of the
emergency telephone system and the ongoing network charges; and



      (6)   Other products and services necessary for the
implementation, upgrade and maintenance of the system. However, the costs
shall not include personnel or facilities, nor shall the costs include
equipment which is not directly associated with the 9-1-1 emergency telephone
system.



(2000 Code, § 2.52.060)



EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM ADVISORY BOARD



§ 32.210  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The city establishes an Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board.



(2000 Code, § 2.54.010)



§ 32.211  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board shall be
to provide input, advice and information to the Emergency Telephone System
Board as to the implementation and upgrading of the 9-1-1 system.



(2000 Code, § 2.54.020)



§ 32.212  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board shall consist of
five members who are residents of the city.



   (B)   They shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council on the basis of their particular fitness for duty on the Board
as well as prior experience.



(2000 Code, § 2.54.030)



§ 32.213  TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The members of the Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board
shall be appointed on an annual basis.



   (B)   All members of the Advisory Board shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for their actual or necessary expenses.



(2000 Code, § 2.54.040)



§ 32.214  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Emergency Telephone System Advisory Board shall have the following
powers and duties:



   (A)   To render advice to the 9-1-1 Board as to the planning of a
9-1-1 system;



   (B)   To render advice to the 9-1-1 Board regarding coordinating and
supervising the implementation, upgrading and maintenance of the system,
including the establishment of equipment specifications and coding systems;



   (C)   To render advice regarding receiving moneys from the surcharge
imposed under ILCS, Ch. 65, Act 5, § 15.3 and from any other source, for
deposit into the emergency telephone system fund; and



   (D)   To render other duties as may be delegated by the 9-1-1
Emergency Telephone System Board, with the approval of the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.54.050)



FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD



§ 32.225  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The city does create and establish a Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The
Board shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities provided for in this
subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.010)



§ 32.226  COMPOSITION.



   The Foreign Fire Insurance Board, hereinafter referred to as the
F.F.I.B., shall consist of the Fire Chief and four elected members of the Oak
Forest Fire Department and shall include the following officers:



   (A)   President;



   (B)   Vice-president;



   (C)   Secretary; and



   (D)   Treasurer.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.020)



§ 32.227  ELECTION OF OFFICERS; TERMS.



   (A)   The election of officers of the F.F.I.B. shall take place
annually during the final quarter of each calendar year.



   (B)   Any officer elected after the passage of this subchapter shall
serve up to and including December 31, 1991.



   (C)   The terms of each officer thereafter shall be from January 1
through December 31 of the same calendar year.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.030)



§ 32.228  FIREFIGHTER EMPLOYMENT STATUS REQUIRED.



   The President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer of the Board
shall be firefighters in the Oak Forest Fire Department at the time of their
election and during the entire time each may serve as an officer.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.040)



§ 32.229  DUTIES AND POWERS OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   President. The President shall preside at all meetings of the
officers. The President shall have other powers as he or she may be given
from time to time by action of the Oak Forest City Council, consistent with
the Illinois Municipal Code.



   (B)   Vice President. The Vice President shall carry out the duties
of the president during the absence or inability of the president to perform
such duties and shall carry out other functions as are assigned from time to
time by the F.F.I.B. President or the Oak Forest City Council.



   (C)   Secretary. The Secretary shall take minutes of any and all
meetings of the officers. The Secretary shall keep these minutes in a manner
identical to the manner in which City Council minutes are kept. The Secretary
shall also perform any other duties and functions as are assigned from time
to time by the Mayor or the Oak Forest City Council.



   (D)   Treasurer. The Treasurer shall:



      (1)   Have charge and custody of and be responsible for all
funds collected by the city from the foreign fire insurance company fees as
described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-10-1;



      (2)   Deposit all moneys in the name of the City of Oak Forest
Fire Department in banks, savings and loan associations or other depositories
as shall be designated by the Oak Forest City Council;



      (3)   Invest said funds as are not immediately required in
such securities as the Oak Forest City Council shall specifically or
generally select from time to time;



      (4)   Maintain the financial books and records of the F.F.I.B.;



      (5)   In general, perform all duties incident to the office of
Treasurer and other duties as from time to time may be assigned to him or her
by the F.F.I.B. or the Oak Forest City Council;



      (6)   Give a sufficient bond to the city. This bond shall be
approved by the Mayor, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the
Treasurer of his or her duties under this subchapter and the rules and
regulations provided for herein. The bond shall be paid for from the funds
collected from the foreign fire insurance company fees; and



      (7)   Receive the foreign fire insurance company fees so paid
and pay out the money upon the order of the F.F.I.B. for the maintenance, use
and benefit of the Department.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.050)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.230  TERMS OF OFFICE OF OFFICERS.



   The President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer shall serve for
one-year terms and shall be elected to office by the members of the Oak
Forest Fire Department. The first election for those officers shall take
place within 30 days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this
subchapter. No officer shall serve in the same office for more than two
consecutive full year terms.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.060)



§ 32.231  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The officers of the F.F.I.B. shall make all needful rules and
regulations with respect to the management of the foreign fire insurance
company fees to be paid to the Treasurer. All rules and regulations
promulgated by the F.F.I.B. must be passed by the affirmative vote of at
least three of the four presiding officers. All rules and regulations
promulgated by the F.F.I.B. must be approved by the Oak Forest City Council
in the same manner as a city ordinance must be passed.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.070)



§ 32.232  PAYMENT OF FUNDS.



   The City Treasurer shall pay the sums received from the insurance
company specified in ILCS Ch.65, Act 5, § 11-10-1 to the Treasurer of the
F.F.I.B. of the city.



(Ord. 2418 (part), 1999; Ord. 2417 (part), 1999)



§ 32.233  BUDGET.



   (A)   Preliminary budget. The F.F.I.B. officers shall approve a
preliminary budget for the expenditure of the foreign fire insurance company
fees collected by March of each year.



   (B)   Final budget.



      (1)   The F.F.I.B. officers shall, by December of each year
prior to the start of each fiscal year, adopt a final budget for the
collection and payment of the foreign fire insurance company fees.



      (2)   The final budget shall be approved by the City Council
in the same fashion as any other regular city ordinance.



   (C)   Budget amendments. The Oak Forest F.F.I.B. budget referred to
in division (A) above may be amended at any time by a majority vote of the
F.F.I.B. and a majority vote of the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.090)



§ 32.234  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   (A)   The F.F.I.B. shall provide to the Oak Forest City Council an
annual audit of the financial affairs of the Fire Department to be made by a
certified public accountant at the end of each fiscal year in accordance with
generally accepted auditing principals.



   (B)   The annual report shall be delivered to the Mayor, City
Treasurer and City Administrator. The audit shall be paid for from funds
collected from the foreign fire insurance company fees.



(2000 Code, § 2.56.100)



CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 32.245  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established a Citizens Advisory Commission, which shall be
known as the Oak Forest Citizens Advisory Commission.



(Ord. 2006-11-0067O, passed 11-14-2006)



§ 32.246  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Oak Forest Citizens Advisory Commission shall be composed
of nine commissioners and one ex-officio alderman to serve as liaison between
the commissioners and Council. All commissioners shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The ex-officio alderman
shall be appointed by the Mayor. Commissioners shall serve until retirement
or replacement.



   (B)   The commissioners shall have the right to select their own
chairperson from the members already appointed by the Mayor.



   (C)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner
in which the original appointments are required to be made.



(Ord. 2012-07-0390O, passed 7-24-2012)



§ 32.247  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Oak Forest Citizens Advisory Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:



      (1)   To coordinate projects and assignments given to it by
the Mayor and Council and perform duties at the direction of the Mayor and
Council;



      (2)   To provide recommendations to the Mayor and Council
pertaining to the effectiveness and format of city-sponsored community events;



      (3)   To provide input and recommendations regarding programs
or efforts to increase citizen involvement in the community;



      (4)   To recommend strategies to establish and maintain
effective communications; and



      (5)   To establish meeting dates and times as well as rules of
order for the operation of the Commission.



   (B)   Nothing in these powers and duties shall in any way be
construed to usurp the duties of the Mayor or Council, which are nondelegable.



(Ord. 2006-11-0067O, passed 11-14-2006)



CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



§ 32.260  COMPOSITION.



   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-1, the Mayor shall forthwith
appoint three Civil Service Commissioners, who shall be known as the Civil
Service Commission of the city.



(2000 Code, § 2.66.010)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.261  CLASSIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.



   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-3, the Civil Service Commission
shall classify all of the offices and places of employment in the city,
except those offices and places excluded by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-17
and except for police officers and firefighters, who are subject to the
jurisdiction of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.



(2000 Code, § 2.66.020)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.262  RULES.



   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-5 and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
10-1-6, the Civil Service Commission shall make and publish rules to carry
out the purposes of the Commission.



(2000 Code, § 2.66.030)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.263  ORGANIZATION.



   The Civil Service Commission shall be organized and shall function in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-1-1 through 10-1-48, as amended.



(2000 Code, § 2.66.040)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.264  EXPIRATION OF CANDIDATE LISTS.



   All entry level candidate lists shall expire one year following the
final approval and posting of any list by the Civil Service Commission.



(2000 Code, § 2.66.050)  (Ord. 2758, § 2, passed --2003)



CONSUMER PROTECTION COMMISSION



§ 32.275  ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   There is established in and for the city a Commission of
Consumer Protection, the chairperson of which shall be entitled the
Commissioner of Consumer Protection.



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of ten members. All Commissioners
will be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Oak Forest with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The Oak Forest Consumer Protection Commission
shall have the right to select its own chairman from the members already
appointed by the Mayor.



   (C)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner
in which the original appointments are required to be made.



   (D)   The members of the Commission shall represent a cross-section
of consumer interests and shall not include local businessmen and business
women who own and/or manage a city business that might be the subject of a
Commission investigation or regulation.



(2000 Code, § 2.68.010)  (Ord. 2012-09-0400O, passed 9-25-2012)



§ 32.276  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission and consumer protection shall:



   (A)   Enforce all laws in relation to weights and measures and all
laws in relation to consumer protection;



   (B)   Receive and investigate complaints from all persons affected
by potential or actual violations of any of the provisions of this
subchapter, or initiate its own investigation of frauds and unfair dealings
against such persons;



   (C)   Issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of documents, papers, books, records and other evidence in any
matter over which this subchapter applies; administer oaths or affirmations
to any person whose testimony is required; interrogate witnesses; inspect
premises; require written answers to questionnaires; and require periodic
written reports and the filing of statements;



   (D)   Issue cease and desist orders with respect to consumer
practices declared to be unlawful by the Commission;



   (E)   Report to the appropriate law enforcement officer any
information concerning a violation of any consumer protection law, which
reports shall be at the discretion of the Commission;



   (F)   Represent the interest of consumers before administrative and
regulatory agencies and legislative groups;



   (G)   Assist, advise and cooperate with local, state and federal
agencies and officials to protect and promote the interest of the consumers
of the city;



   (H)   Assist, develop and conduct programs of consumer education and
information through publications and other materials prepared for
distribution to the consumers of the city;



   (I)   Undertake activities to encourage local business and industry
to maintain high standards of honesty, fair business practices and public
responsibility in the production, promotion and sale of consumer merchandise
and services and in the extension of credit; and



   (J)   Exercise and perform such other functions, powers and duties
as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to protect and promote the welfare
of the consumers of the city.



(2000 Code, § 2.68.020)



§ 32.277  EXISTING RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.



   No existing right or remedy shall be lost, impaired or affected by
reason of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 2.68.030)



CRIME PREVENTION COMMISSION



§ 32.290  RECITALS.



   The City Council finds that all the recitals contained in the preamble
to the ordinance codified in this subchapter are full, true and correct, and
incorporates them into this subchapter by this reference.



(2000 Code, § 2.70.010)  (Ord. 2220, § 1, passed --1997)



§ 32.291  CREATION OF THE CRIME PREVENTION COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is created the Crime Prevention Commission of Oak Forest.



   (B)   The Commission volunteers will be comprised of 13 members,
with one serving as Commission Chair, who shall be elected by a majority of
the members.



   (C)   Eligible persons for appointment shall be submitted to the
Mayor and their appointment shall be by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council.



   (D)   The term of appointment shall begin at the start of the fiscal
year and end with the final date of that year.



   (E)   The Mayor, Chief of Police, and the Executive Director of the
Chamber of Commerce shall be named as ex-officio members of this Commission.



(2000 Code, § 2.70.020)  (Ord. 2220, § 2, passed --1997; Ord. 2745, § 1,
passed --2003; Am. Ord. 2009-09-0257O, passed 9-8-2009)



§ 32.292  OBJECTIVE.



   (A)   The objective of the Crime Prevention Commission shall be to
help develop and promote crime prevention planning and programming activities
that benefit citizens and businesses within Oak Forest.



   (B)   The Oak Forest Police Department’s crime prevention officer
will serve as liaison to the commission and will assist the Commission in the
development of its plans and programs.



   (C)   The Crime Prevention Commission will be utilized to help the
city achieve its stated goals for crime prevention and disseminate
information of the public to keep it better informed about crime prevention.



   (D)   Through the establishment of plans and programs initiated in a
coordinated effort with the Police Department, the Crime Prevention
Commission will help effectuate more proactive measures to prevent crime and
protect the public and its property.



(2000 Code, § 2.70.030)  (Ord. 2220, § 3, passed --1997)



§ 32.293  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The qualifications for appointment as a member to the Oak Forest Crime
Prevention Commission shall include the following.



   (A)   All Commission members must be at least 21 years of age.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall screen all persons and review their
qualifications.



   (C)   All appointees must profess an interest in and a basic
understanding of the philosophy and practice of crime prevention, and be
willing to participate in training opportunities that may be available.



(2000 Code, § 2.70.040)  (Ord. 2220, § 4, passed --1997)



§ 32.294  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Crime Prevention Commission, working in cooperation with the Oak
Forest Police Department, shall have the following duties and
responsibilities to effectuate crime prevention in our community:



   (A)   Act as a liaison to the community, as well as to other
entities relative to law enforcement;



   (B)   Develop and improve crime prevention plans and programs;



   (C)   Promote public awareness of crime prevention activities;



   (D)   Obtain and organize relevant law enforcement information;



   (E)   Assist in the dissemination of materials and hand-outs; and



   (F)   Maintain media relations on crime prevention and law
enforcement activities in Oak Forest.



(2000 Code, § 2.70.050)  (Ord. 2220, § 5, passed --1997)



FINANCE COMMISSION



§ 32.320  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   There is established in and for the city a Finance Commission, to be
composed of the Mayor and aldermen, the City Treasurer and a Budget Officer.



(Ord. 2006-04-0024O, § 2, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 32.321  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Finance Commission shall:



   (A)   Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions and boards;



   (B)   Compile an annual budget;



   (C)   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions and boards which relate to moneys received by the municipality
and municipal departments, commissions and boards, and paid out by the
municipality and municipal departments, commissions and boards, debts and
accounts receivable and amounts owed by or to the municipality and municipal
departments, commissions and boards;



   (D)   Obtain such additional information from the municipality and
municipal departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the Budget
Officer for purposes of compiling a municipal budget, the information to be
furnished by the municipality and municipal departments, commissions and
boards in the form required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission
or board which refuses to make such information as requested of it available
to the Budget Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any
subsequent budget for the municipality until the municipal department,
commission or board complies in full with the request of the Budget Officer;



   (E)   Establish and maintain such procedures as will ensure that no
expenditures are made by the municipality or municipal departments,
commissions or boards except as authorized by the budget;



   (F)   Compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenue
available to the municipality for the fiscal year for which the budget is
drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the municipality and all
other municipal departments, commissions and boards. Revenue estimates and
expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in
conformity with good fiscal management procedures. The budget shall be
itemized in a manner consistent with a chart of accounts as may now or in the
future be approved by the City Treasurer. The budget shall contain actual or
estimated revenue and expenditures for the two years immediately preceding
the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the
fiscal date for the two preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner
which is in conformity with the chart of accounts. Each budget shall show the
specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made; and



   (G)   Authorize, as necessary, without Council approval, budget
adjustments not to exceed, either positively or negatively, $2,500 per line
item.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.020)



§ 32.322  ANNUAL BUDGET IN LIEU OF APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE.



   Passage of the annual budget by Council shall be in lieu of passage of
the appropriation ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.030)



§ 32.323  ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.



   The annual budget shall be adopted by Council before the beginning of
the fiscal year to which it applies.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.040)



§ 32.324  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND.



   In the preparation by the Finance Commission of the annual budget,
one-half of one percent of equalized assessed value of property subject to
taxation by the city may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purposes
or specific capital improvements, repairs and/or replacements of specific
types of municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and
personal, which fund shall be designated as the capital improvement, repair
or replacement fund. Expenditures from the fund shall be budgeted in the
fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair or replacement will
occur. Upon the completion or abandonment of any object for which the fund
was used, or if surplus moneys remain after the completion or abandonment of
any object for which the fund was inaugurated, then the funds no longer
necessary for capital improvement, repair or replacement shall be transferred
into the general corporate fund of the municipality on the first day of the
fiscal year following the abandonment, completion or discovery of surplus
funds.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.050)



§ 32.325  REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.



   (A)   Council may delegate authority to heads of municipal
departments, boards or commissions to delete, add to, change or create
subclasses within object classes budgeted previously to the department, board
or commission, subject to the limitation or requirement for prior approval by
the Budget Officer or the Mayor as Council, upon a two-thirds vote, may
establish.



   (B)   By a vote, the annual budget for the municipality may be
revised by deleting, adding to, changing or creating subclasses within object
classes and object classes themselves. No revision of the budget shall be
made increasing the budget if funds are not available to effectuate the
purpose of the revision.



(2000 Code, § 3.80.060)



§ 32.326  MONEYS FOR CONTINGENCIES.



   The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes,
not to exceed 10% of the total budget (excluding the amount set aside for
contingency purposes), which money may be expended for contingencies upon a
majority vote of Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.070)



§ 32.327  PUBLIC INSPECTION OF BUDGET.



   Council shall make the tentative budget conveniently available to
public inspection for at least ten days prior to the passage of the annual
budget.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.080)



§ 32.328  APPLICATION OF STATE STATUTES.



   ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 shall apply to all
procedures under this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.090)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed --1999)



§ 32.329  MEETINGS.



   The Finance Commission shall meet once every month or at the call of
the Budget Officer with two days’ notice.



(2000 Code, § 2.80.100)



PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



§ 32.340  CREATED.



   There is created a Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall consist
of the nine members of the present Planning Commission. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be deemed to be the “Board of Appeals,” as
described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 et seq., and the "Plan
Commission," as described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-1 et seq.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.010)  (Ord. 2272, § 1, passed --1997)



§ 32.341  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose and intent of this subchapter to place all
of the responsibilities and powers of the former Zoning Board of Appeals and
the former Planning Commission under the jurisdiction of one commission, to
consist of nine members as provided for in this subchapter, and to be called
the Planning and Zoning Commission of the city.



   (B)   Matters coming before that Commission shall be interpreted and
ruled upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission and in doing so, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall utilize the standards and procedural
requirements contained in the ordinances of the city as the case may be.



   (C)   It is understood that there may be multiple issues to be
decided and ruled upon at the same hearing and that different voting
requirements and/or standards may be necessary to approve certain actions.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.020)  (Ord. 2272, § 11 (part), passed --1997)



§ 32.342  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of the
present members of the Planning Commission and any additional appointees
necessary to bring the full membership to nine members.



   (B)   New members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.030)  (Ord. 2272, § 2, passed --1997)



§ 32.343  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of each Commission member of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be for three years. The Mayor shall fill any vacancies on
the Commission, with confirmation by the City Council, in the same manner
those regular appointments shall be made to the Commission in the future.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.040)  (Ord. 2272, § 3, passed --1997)



§ 32.344  CHAIRPERSON.



   The Mayor shall appoint one of the members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission as chairperson and shall hold office until a successor is
appointed. The chairperson or the Mayor may ask another member of the
Commission to serve as acting chairperson in his or her absence.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.050)  (Ord. 2272, § 6, passed --1997)



§ 32.345  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be held
at the call of the chairperson and at regular times as the Commission shall
determine.



   (B)   All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
open to the public and be in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.060)  (Ord. 2272, § 12 (part), passed --1997)



§ 32.346  DUTY OF CHAIRPERSON; APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the chairperson to evaluate the
application(s) before the Planning and Zoning Commission and to outline to
the applicant or his or her representative and to the members of the
Commission the standards and requirements which must be met in each
application.



   (B)   When necessary and appropriate, motions shall be voted on
separately. The applicant and city shall have the same rights and obligations
as if said action(s) were taken by two separate boards or commissions.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.070)  (Ord. 2272, § 11 (part), passed --1997)



§ 32.347  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and may require submissions to each record, plats and other
information necessary to make its determinations.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.080)  (Ord. 2272, § 13, passed --1997)



§ 32.348  MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member present.



   (B)   Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case
when required and the reasons for granting or denying the application(s)
shall be specified.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.090)  (Ord. 2272, § 12 (part), passed --1997)



§ 32.349  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   Members of the Commission may be removed by the City Council for cause
after written charges have been filed and after a public hearing has been
held if demanded by the member so charged.



(2000 Code, § 2.86.100)  (Ord. 2272, § 5, passed --1997)



SENIOR CITIZEN COMMISSION



§ 32.360  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established a Senior Citizen Commission which shall be known
as the Oak Forest Senior Citizen Commission.



(2000 Code, § 2.88.010)



§ 32.361  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   Membership in the Commission shall, as nearly as possible, be
representative of interested groups of the community such as church groups,
senior citizen groups, the United Way, park districts, civic clubs, fraternal
organizations, veterans organizations, homeowners, health care organizations,
commerce and educational organizations, the Social Security Administration,
housing, food and recreation organizations, as well as other organizations.



   (B)   The membership of the Commission shall consist of 13
commissioners and one ex-officio alderman who shall serve as liaison between
the commissioners and Council.



   (C)   All commissioners, as well as the ex-officio alderman, shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. The
commissioners shall have the right to select their own chairperson from the
members already appointed by the Mayor.



   (D)   Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner
in which the original appointments are required to be made.



(2000 Code, § 2.88.020)  (Am. Ord. 2012-08-0391O, passed 8-28-2012)



§ 32.362  RESERVED.



§ 32.363  POWERS.



   The Senior Citizen Commission shall have the power to:



   (A)   Review and evaluate community senior citizen services and
facilities;



   (B)   Maximize the use of present facilities by senior citizens;



   (C)   Recommend rules and regulations concerning the rendering or
operation of services and facilities under its direction or supervision;



   (D)   Coordinate with other organizations as to the social,
recreational, educational, cultural, art and health services, special events,
needs and opportunities for senior citizens;



   (E)   Coordinate the rendering of services and the operation of
facilities with other agencies;



   (F)   Review and evaluate the use of the senior bus and recommend
rules and regulations concerning its operation and services. The Commission
shall also be responsible for recommending a budget, to the City Council, for
the senior bus for each fiscal year; and



   (G)   Perform other acts as may be necessary or proper to carry out
the purposes of this subchapter, consistent with the direction of the Mayor
and Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.88.040)  (Ord. 2006-04-0015O, passed 4-25-2006)



YOUTH COMMISSION



§ 32.375  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   There is established in the city a Youth Commission, to be composed of
13 members, one of whom shall serve as chairperson.



(2000 Code, § 2.94.010)  (Ord. 2410, § 1, passed --1999)



§ 32.376  APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The members and the chairperson of the Youth Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
Five youth, ages 13 to 19 years, shall serve for two years, and five youths,
ages 13 to 19 years, shall serve for one year. Four adults shall be appointed
and shall serve for two years, and all appointments and appointments to fill
vacancies shall be made in like manner as in the case of the initial
commissioners. A commissioner having been duly appointed shall continue to
serve after the expiration of his or her term until his or her successor has
been appointed. All terms shall expire on April 30 in the final year of the
member’s term.



   (B)   If a vacancy occurs in the Youth Commission, it shall be
filled by appointment by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, upon recommendation of the chairperson of the Youth Commission, for
the unexpired term of the Youth Commission seat vacated.



(2000 Code, § 2.94.020)  (Ord. 2410, § 2, passed --1999)



§ 32.377  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.



   Each member of the Youth Commission shall reside in the City of Oak
Forest. A nonresident may serve as an advisor to the Youth Commission, at the
request of the Youth Commission, and shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.94.030)



§ 32.378  DUTIES.



   (A)   The purpose of the Youth Commission shall be to study the
concerns of the youth of the community, to make recommendations regarding
areas of youth activities to the Mayor and the City Council and to assist in
the implementation of solutions as directed by the Mayor and the City
Council. The Youth Commission shall have the primary responsibility of
identifying the goals and progress needed by the city to provide a positive
and meaningful environment for the healthy growth of its youth. It shall
recommend and implement programs that recognize the age differences of
teenage youth, as well as the need to restrict such programs to certain age
groups.



   (B)   The Youth Commission shall recommend to the Mayor and the City
Council such policies, and it shall implement the services and programs, as
are established by the Mayor and City Council.



   (C)   The Youth Commission will mobilize community resources and
actively encourage ongoing programs, or assist in initiating new services or
programs, with several private and public agencies of the city engaged in
youth areas, which support the goals of the Youth Commission as they are
defined. The Youth Commission shall help to educate the citizenry as to
present youth services available and shall assume additional responsibilities
in youth-related areas as the Mayor and City Council from time to time may
direct.



   (D)   Initially, and from time to time, as necessary, the Youth
Commission shall plan a forum in order to bring city youth together to
express their ideas and concerns.



(2000 Code, § 2.94.040)



§ 32.379  ELECTION OF SECRETARY; MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Youth Commission shall meet and elect a Secretary from its
members as soon as possible after its establishment.



   (B)   The Youth Commission shall hold meetings as may be necessary,
and the meetings shall be held in City Hall or in some other suitable place.



   (C)   Meetings will be held on a regular basis at the discretion of
the Commission.



(2000 Code, § 2.94.050)



§ 32.380  REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES; ESTABLISHMENT OF LINE ITEM IN CITY’S
BUDGET.



   (A)   Members of the Youth Commission, under the direction of the
chairperson, shall be financially reimbursed for any expenses incurred in the
normal function of their duties.



   (B)   A budget line item shall be established for the Youth
Commission, in each fiscal year budget, and shall be approved by the City
Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.94.060)



COMMUNITY POOL COMMISSION



§ 32.382  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is an establishment in the city, the Community Pool Commission to
be composed of four members, one of whom shall serve as Chairperson appointed
by the Mayor and another who will be a representative of the Park District.



(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)



§ 32.383  DUTIES.



   (A)   The purpose of the Community Pool Commission shall be the
oversight of the Oak Forest Community Pool. The Commission will identify
goals and progress needed to provide a safe and enjoyable environment of
current facilities and explore the possibilities of future facilities for the
residents of the community.



   (B)   The Commission shall have the responsibility of tracking and
reporting of the expenses and revenues of the pool, and to work with the City
Administrator to create a budget each year.



   (C)   The Commission shall mobilize community resources, and assist
in the planning of events to support the economic sustainability of the pool.



(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)



§ 32.384  ELECTION OF POSITIONS; MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Community Pool Commission shall meet and elect a Secretary
and a Treasurer from its members as soon as possible after its establishment.



   (B)   Meetings will be held on a regular basis at the discretion of
the Commission.



(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)



§ 32.385  REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES; ESTABLISHMENT OF LINE ITEM IN CITY'S
BUDGET.



   (A)   Members of the Community Pool Commission, under the direction
of the Chairperson, shall be financially reimbursed for any expenses incurred
in the normal function of their duties.



   (B)   A budget line item for revenues and expenses shall be
established for the Community Pool Commission, in each fiscal year budget,
and shall be approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 2017-11-0667, passed 11-14-2017)



EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY



§ 32.395  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is established in and for the city the Oak Forest
Emergency Management Agency (“EMA”), to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in
accordance with the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975.



   (B)   The agency shall consist of the Director and additional
members as may be appointed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.396  DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director of the Emergency Management Agency of the city
shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of Council
on an annual basis.



   (B)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training, operation and supervision of the
agency, subject to policy direction of the Mayor and Council, as provided by
statute.



   (C)   The Director shall represent the city on all matters
pertaining to the Emergency Management Agency. During periods of emergency,
as defined by law for agency purposes, the Director shall coordinate the
actions of all the Emergency Management Agency.



   (D)   The Director is authorized to require the assistance of any
and all able-bodied residents for protection to the public welfare during
periods emergency.



   (E)   The Director is authorized to delegate his or her authority as
he or she deems it.



   (F)   In the event of the absence, resignation or death of the
Director or his or her inability to serve, the Mayor, or any person
designated by him or her, shall be and act as Director until a new
appointment is made as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.397  INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to be a
modification of the executive authority of the Mayor under the various
provisions of state law giving the Mayor certain emergency powers.



   (B)   Rather it is the express intent of this subchapter to assign
the emergency authority that is  now existent or subsequently granted or
extended by law to the Emergency Management Agency of the city.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.398  FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Emergency Management Agency of the city shall perform
functions within the city as are prescribed in and by the State Emergency
Management Agency plan and program prepared by the Governor and in and by
such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor and,
in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be
required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by
the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act of 1975.



   (B)   These emergency management and coordinative function include,
but are not limited to, coordination of, but not limited to the following;
mutual aid, ground search and rescue, weather situations (flooding, ice
storms, tornado spotting), maintain the operation of outdoor warning system,
radiological and hazardous material, resource management (preparing and
maintaining the emergency operational plan), communication support,
evacuation and relocation, assist in accident re-construction (rail, air, and
vehicle), incident command center for MABAS divisions, and other situations
that require an incident command center.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed.  Emergency
management provisions are currently set forth as the Emergency Management
Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



§ 32.399  MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.



   (A)   Any member of the City Emergency Management Agency may be
designated as a member of a mobile support team created by the Director of
the State Emergency-Management Agency as provided by law.



   (B)   The leader or mobile support team shall be designated by the
Director of the city “EMA”.



   (C)  Any member or a mobile support team who is a city employee or
officer shall, while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the state
director, receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to the employment or office. Any member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the city shall, while so serving, receive from the
state reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.400  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The Director of the Emergency Management Agency of the city may
negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions
of the state, but no agreement shall be effective until it has been approved
by the Mayor and Council and by the State Director of the Emergency
Management Agency.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.401  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists due to
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
a human made or natural disaster, the City Emergency Management Agency shall
cooperate fully with the State Emergency Management Agency and with the
Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.402  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Emergency Management Agency of the city who are paid
employees or officers of the city, if called for training by the state
director of the Emergency Management Agency, shall receive, for the time
spent in that training, the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held. Members who are not city employees or officers shall receive for that
training time the compensation as may be established by the Mayor.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.403  REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.



   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund
any reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the Emergency Management Agency of the city as prescribed by the
State Director of the Emergency Management Agency, compensation for services
and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the
city in response to a call by the Governor or the state director of the
agency, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state
incident to agency activities as provided by law.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.404  VOLUNTEERS.



   (A)   All persons other than mayoral appointments and employees of
the city, volunteering for service pursuant to this subchapter, shall serve
without compensation.



   (B)   While engaged in the service, they shall have the same
immunities as persons and employees of the city performing similar duties.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.405  INTEGRATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Appointed officers and employees of the city shall be integrated under
the division of the Emergency Management Agency of the city as the Mayor and
the Director deem necessary and expedient, and such officers and employees
are directed and authorized to comply with directives issued under this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.406  PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   The Mayor and Council may, on recommendation of the Director
or on their own motion, authorize the Director to engage in the purchase of
contracts necessary to place the city in a position to effectively combat any
disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile
and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide
emergency assistance to victims in the case of a disaster or in the case of a
human made or natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of an enemy-caused or other disaster, the
Director is authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in
view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or
obligations, as authorized by the State ESDA Act of 1975, provided that if
Council meets at such time, the Director shall act subject to the directions
and restrictions imposed by Council.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed.  Emergency
management provisions are currently set forth as the Emergency Management
Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



§ 32.407  OATH.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Emergency
Management Agency of the city shall, before entering upon his or her duties,
subscribe to the following oath, in writing, which shall be filed with the
Director:



   "I, _____________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will
well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And
I do further swear (or affirm) that do not advocate, nor am I now, nor have I
ever been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Oak Forest
Emergency Management Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.408  OFFICE SPACE.



   The Mayor and Council are authorized to designate space in a city
building or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Mayor, for the office of
the Emergency Management Agency of the city.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.409  APPROPRIATIONS; LEVY OF TAXES.



   (A)   The Mayor and Council may make an appropriation for Emergency
Management Agency purposes in the manner provided by law and may levy, in
addition, for agency purposes only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the
assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by the State ESDA Act of 1975.



   (B)   However, that amount collectible under the levy shall in no
event exceed $0.25 per capita.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed.  Emergency
management provisions are currently set forth as the Emergency Management
Agency Act, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.



§ 32.410  CREDENTIALS OF AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Credentials of authority in a manner and form to be determined
by the Director may be issued to Emergency Management Agency officers and
personnel.



   (B)   The Mayor and the City Clerk are authorized to affix the seal
of the city on such credentials.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)



§ 32.411  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the
Emergency Management Agency of the city in any enforcement of any lawful rule
or regulation issued pursuant to this subchapter or in the performance of any
duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this subchapter;



   (B)   Do any act prohibited by any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this subchapter if such act is of a kind that will give
assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of
the city or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; or



   (C)   Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or
identification specified by the agency.



(Ord. 2006-02-0006O, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-12-0268O, passed
12-8-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



BUREAU OF FIRE INVESTIGATION



§ 32.425  PREAMBLES.



   The preambles recited in the ordinance codified in this subchapter
shall be incorporated as part of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 2.58.010)  (Ord. 2413, § 1, passed --1999)



§ 32.426  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established within the city a Fire Investigation Bureau.



(2000 Code, § 2.58.020)  (Ord. 2413, § 2, passed --1999)



§ 32.427  CONTROL AND AUTHORITY; LIAISON.



   (A)   The Fire Investigation Bureau shall be under joint control of
the Chief of each of the Oak Forest Police and Fire Departments.



   (B)   In the event of a conflict between the joint heads, the Fire
Chief shall have ultimate authority.



   (C)   The Fire and Police Chief may appoint a liaison to act as head
of the Fire Investigation Bureau.



(2000 Code, § 2.58.030)  (Ord. 2413, § 3, passed --1999)



§ 32.428  PURPOSES AND DUTIES.



   (A)   This Bureau shall investigate fires to determine whether the
fire was caused as a result of carelessness or design.



   (B)   The Bureau shall develop operating procedures to aid in its
work. The Bureau shall, as needed, seek outside expertise to aid in the
investigation of the cause and origins of a fire.



(2000 Code, § 2.58.040)  (Ord. 2413, § 4, passed --1999)



§ 32.429  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The fire/arson investigator shall have the overall authority
of the remains of all areas, structures and materials involved in the fire
from the time the fire is put out until which time he or she deems it
necessary to release them.



   (B)   Upon the completion of the investigation, the arson
investigator, if appropriate, shall deliver the results of the investigation
to the Police Department.



   (C)   The Fire and Police Departments will work in full cooperation
during fire/arson investigations.



(2000 Code, § 2.58.050)  (Ord. 2413, § 5, passed --1999)



§ 32.430  FIRE INVESTIGATOR QUALIFICATIONS.



   The qualifications of a fire/arson investigator shall be, at a minimum,
the following:



   (A)   A fire/arson investigation certification outlined by the
Illinois State Fire Marshal's office (120 hours);



   (B)   Firefighter III certification as outlined by the Illinois
State Fire Marshal’s Office; and



   (C)   Additional requirements as deemed necessary by the Fire and
Police Chiefs.



(2000 Code, § 2.58.060)  (Ord. 2413, § 6, passed --1999)



ECONOMIC ADVISORY COUNCIL



§ 32.445  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.



   The Citizens’ Commission previously known as the Oak Forest Economic
Development Commission (EDC) shall be dissolved effective with the passage of
the ordinance codified in this subchapter, and replaced with an Economic
Advisory Council (EAC), compact in size, but specifically charged with the
following mission, agenda and/or duties:



   (A)   Promote and recommend programs and policies to improve the
economic vitality of our community, while helping to mitigate any adverse
physical and economic conditions affecting the social and economic growth of
the City of Oak Forest, now and in the future;



   (B)   Working in conjunction with the Oak Forest Chamber of
Commerce, to devise and implement an ongoing business outreach program,
designed to assess the needs and identify those issues related to government
policies and/or services which affect existing businesses in Oak Forest;



   (C)   Working in conjunction with the city’s community development
staff, research and compile an overall economic development strategy and/or
marketing plan, serving as a blueprint for the recruitment of new investment
in Oak Forest’s commercial, industrial and service sectors;



   (D)   Recommend guidelines and structure objective criteria to
better evaluate the use of development incentives as a means of business
attraction and retention;



   (E)   Compile and conduct those surveys or other research
instruments necessary to ascertain the status of the economic climate and
circumstances affecting businesses operating within the corporate limits;



   (F)   Subject to the powers and limitations granted by the City
Council to the EDC, the EAC shall be charged with the design, implementation
and review of various economic development programs, including, but not
limited to, the creation of economic development corporations, facade
improvement, property tax incentives and specific incentives directed at
certain redevelopment efforts, including the economic impact of the projects;



   (G)   Working in conjunction with the staff of various city
departments, and upon approval of the program by the City Council, review
applications and recommend to the City Council, worthy candidates for
inclusion in the city’s various economic development programs; and



   (H)   Serve as economic development ambassadors for the city
conducting various marketing and public relations activities related to the
attraction of new business investment and the retention of existing business.



(2000 Code, § 2.72.010)  (Ord. 2842, § 1, passed --2004)



§ 32.446  COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The membership of the EAC shall consist of seven persons,
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.



   (B)   EAC membership shall be limited to residents of Oak Forest or
owners/operators of businesses within Oak Forest, appointed at-large, but
remain representative of a cross-section of the city’s civic, business and
professional leadership, having demonstrated the skills and expertise
necessary to the implementation of a successful economic development program.



   (C)   The EAC’s membership shall serve rotating terms of three
years, with initial membership limited to the following terms of office:



      (1)   Four members shall serve for an initial term of two
years; and



      (2)   Three members shall serve for an initial term of three
years.



   (D)   In addition to the appointed membership from the community
at-large, one ex-officio member, an alderman, serving as the representative
of, and direct liaison to, the City Council, and the executive director of
the Oak Forest Chamber of Commerce, serving as the representative of, and
direct liaison to, the Chamber of Commerce, shall be considered full voting
members of the EAC with all rights, privileges and responsibilities, thereto
assigned. Given the unique nature of the position and the need to maintain an
effective relationship with the Chamber of Commerce, as the primary group
representing business interests which may extend outside the corporate limits
of Oak Forest, the residency requirement shall be waived for the Chamber’s
executive director.



   (E)   At a minimum, meetings shall be held quarterly; however, the
chair of the EAC shall reserve the right to convene additional meetings, at
the request of the Mayor, City Council and/or community development
coordinator, as circumstances dictate.



   (F)   The EAC shall be empowered to elect a member of its body to
serve as chair, acting theretofore, as the EAC’s public spokesman, where
applicable. The city’s Community Development Coordinator and the Community
Development Department shall provide staff support to the EAC, as time,
budget and staff resources permit.



(2000 Code, § 2.72.020)  (Ord. 2842, §2, passed --2004; Am. Ord.
2011-06-0345O, passed 6-14-2011)



§ 32.447  VOLUNTEERS.



   In the conduct of its duties and responsibilities, the EAC shall be
authorized to enlist the services of those other members of the community
whose expertise and commitment to volunteer service will further expedite the
fulfillment of the EAC’s mission, agenda and duties.



(2000 Code, § 2.72.030)  (Ord. 2842, § 3, passed --2004)



§ 32.448  EXPENDITURES.



   The EAC shall be authorized to obligate and/or expend funds, for
purposes stated and to the amount appropriated in the EAC’s annual budget,
subject to approval by the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.72.040)  (Ord. 2842, § 4, passed --2004)



§ 32.449  FACADE IMPROVEMENT GRANT PROGRAM.



   (A)   The economic advisory council is authorized to implement and
oversee a facade improvement grant program to promote the continued use and
maintenance of commercial buildings in the city and to recommend the payment
of grants to business property owners for improvements to their building
facades. The facade improvement grant program shall be administered as
follows:



      (1)   Grant eligibility. To be eligible for a facade
improvement grant, a building must be used in commercial or industrial
purposes. Business property owners must propose to make at least $20,000 in
eligible improvements, as defined in division (A)(3) of this section, to be
eligible for a facade improvement grant.



      (2)   Limit and nature of grant award.  Facade improvement
grants will be issued to qualifying applicants in a maximum amount not
greater than 33% of the actual cost of the eligible improvements except for
qualifying sign amortization projects where the maximum amount will be not
greater than 50% of the actual cost.



      (3)   Eligible costs. The following improvement costs are
eligible for reimbursement from the facade improvement grant:



         (a)   Installation, repair and replacement of exterior
exit doors to provide public access, meet current building and fire codes,
and/or improve the overall appearance of the building;



         (b)   Painting of the exterior of the building;



         (c)   Repair, replacement or addition of exterior
shutters and awnings, except for backlit and/or plastic awnings;



         (d)   Repair and replacement of signs;



         (e)   Repair, replacement and installation of exterior
stairs, porches, railings and exit facilities;



         (f)   Repair and rebuilding of exterior walls, including
cleaning, sealing, tuck-pointing, painting and the like;



         (g)   Tuck-pointing, other repair and cleaning of
exterior bricks;



         (h)   Repair of windows, frames, sills, glazing,
replacement of glass, and installation of new windows;



         (i)   Repair or construction of cornices in order to
replicate the building’s original facade;



         (j)   Repair, installation, replacement or addition of
any other improvement the City Administrator deems appropriate; and



         (k)   Landscaping and streetscape improvements
including, but not limited to brickpavers, lighting and furnishings.



      (4)   Ineligible costs. The following improvement costs are
not eligible for reimbursement from the facade improvement grant:



         (a)   Building permit fees and related costs;



         (b)   Extermination of insects, rodents, vermin and
other pests;



         (c)   Title reports and legal fees;



         (d)   Acquisition of land or buildings; and



         (e)   Air conditioning and heating facilities.



   (B)   Application; submittals. Applicants under this section shall
submit the following application materials to the Community Development
Director, or his or her designee:



      (1)   Once completed and original application form, on a form
approved by and provided by the Community Development Director, which form
shall include:



         (a)   Applicant’s name, address and contact
information;



         (b)   Subject property common address and property
identification number;



         (c)   Legal description of subject property;



         (d)   Current use of the property;



         (e)   Improvement information, including, without
limitation:



            1.   Contractor information;



            2.   Cost estimate;



            3.   Facade area;



            4.   Requested amount of grant;



            5.   Proposed improvements;



            6.   Copies of the drawings of the proposed work,
to scale and preferably in color; and



            7.   Brief narrative description of the project;



         (f)   Pictures of facade and particular areas to be
enhanced; and



         (g)   Assessed value of the property.



   (C)   Economic Development Commission; review and recommendations;
City Council action.



      (1)   Upon the Community Development Director’s receipt of
application materials, he or she shall review the application to determine
its completeness with the above requirements. If an application is deemed
complete by the Economic Development Director, he or she shall submit a
report to the City Council outlining the facts, proposed improvements, and
requested assistance.



      (2)   In the event that the Community Development Director
finds that an application is incomplete or that the proposed scope of
improvements are ineligible or partially ineligible for reimbursement under
the facade improvement grant program, the Community Development Director
shall inform the applicant in writing of any deficiency in his or her
application or ineligible improvements.



      (3)   Not later than 45 days after receipt of the report from
the Community Development Director, as established in division (C)(1) of this
section, the City Council shall convene to consider the application and draft
facade improvement grant agreement, which shall be approved by resolution
duly adopted with the condition that the Economic Advisory Council holds a
public meeting to approve final cost estimates.



      (4)   The Economic Advisory Council shall convene to review
and approve final cost estimates, and grantee award amount.  If the
applicant fails to submit three adequate cost estimates, the Economic
Advisory Council may deny approval and/or return application back to City
Council for consideration.



   (D)   Conditions. The applicant shall be subject to the following
conditions.



      (1)   Upon approval of the application, the applicant shall
enter into a facade improvement grant agreement with the City of Oak Forest
the form and substance of which to be provided by the Community Development
Director, which shall govern the use of the grant. The agreement shall be
recorded with the office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. The applicant
shall be responsible for all fees and costs incurred in recording the facade
improvement grant agreement.



      (2)   The applicant shall execute a restrictive covenant for
the maintenance of facade improvements. The restrictive covenant shall be
recorded with the office of the Cook County Recorder. The applicant shall be
responsible for all fees and costs incurred in recording the restrictive
covenant.



      (3)   Should the applicant fail to complete the eligible cost
items or otherwise abandon the property before completion of the eligible
cost items, the city shall have a lien against the property in its favor in
the amount of the facade improvement grant released to the applicant.



      (4)   The applicant must maintain in good condition, and not
change in any manner whatsoever, without first obtaining the express prior
written consent of the City Administrator, the eligible cost items for which
funds from the facade improvement grant were used for a period of at least
ten years from the completion of those items, pursuant to the restrictive
covenant for the maintenance of facade improvements.



      (5)   In the event that the owner of the building sells,
transfers or conveys the property within five years after the date upon which
any funds have been released from the facade improvement grant, the owner, or
his or her successor, shall reimburse the city for the funds then released,
to the date of sale, transfer or conveyance, from the facade improvement
grant in accordance with the following sliding scale.



 


Year of Sale

 

Percentage of City Grant Then Release to Reimburse



Up to one year
 

100%



Up to two years
 

80%



Up to three years
 

60%



Up to four years
 

40%



Up to five years
 

20%




 



(Ord. 2006-07-0047O, passed 7-25-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-06-0346O, passed
6-14-2011; Am. Ord. 2014-08-0513O, passed 8-26-2014)




SAFETY COMMITTEE




§ 32.460  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   The Executive and Departmental Safety Committees are an
integral part of the city’s overall risk management plan.



   (B)   This is one place where management and employees can truly
come together as one to create results. To be effective, the Committees must
interact in an environment of open communication and have a desire to make a
difference.



   (C)   By defining their goals and objectives, the Committees can
create a shared vision that will enable action and promote a safe work
environment for all employees.



(2000 Code, § 2.96.010)  (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)



§ 32.461  MISSION STATEMENT.



   The mission of the City of Oak Forest Safety Committee is to develop
and promote a safe environment for all employees and visitors to the
facilities through the involvement of all individuals with regard to
education, communication and safe work practices.



(2000 Code, § 2.96.020)  (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)



§ 32.462  EXECUTIVE SAFETY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Role and function. The Executive Safety Committee develops,
implements and oversees the administration of the organizations risk
management program. In that role, the Committee’s functions include, but
are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Developing and recommending risk management programs
intended to enhance the personal safety and well-being of employees,
residents and the general public, and to control the severity and frequency
of accidents in order to reduce damage to property and equipment;



      (2)   Coordinating, establishing and implementing annual risk
management goals and objectives designed to meet the needs of the City of Oak
Forest based on review of loss history;



      (3)   Reviewing all motor vehicle accidents, equipment or
other property damage accidents, and work-related injuries and illnesses;



      (4)   Reviewing safety-related statistical data, records and
reports provided by the intergovernmental risk management agency (IRMA), the
risk management agency, and other sources for the purpose of making informed
decisions with regard to risk management policies and practices;



      (5)   Determining the size and make-up of the Departmental
Safety Committee and monitoring the Committee’s activities and progress by
reviewing the minutes submitted by the Departmental Safety Committee;



      (6)   Reviewing and acting on recommendations submitted by the
Employee Safety Committee and giving them direction;



      (7)   Serve as an advisory body to management on health and
safety issues;



      (8)   Providing suggestions and recommendations for resolution
of health and safety concerns.



   (B)   Activities.



      (1)   Review accident/incident reports. Types of accidents,
causes and trends shall be identified and appropriate corrective action
suggested;



      (2)   Obtain and analyze available data on part injuries and
illnesses and identify trends and suggest appropriate corrective actions;



      (3)   Provide support and serve as a resource in the
development, implementation, and maintenance of a comprehensive risk
management, safety and loss prevention program; and



      (4)   Develop written programs to ensure compliance with OSHA
health and safety regulations.



   (C)   Members. The executive safety committee shall be comprised of
(three elected officials), the City Administrator, department heads, and the
safety coordinator at minimum. Others may be added at the discretion of the
committee chair.



   (D)   Meetings. Meetings will be held on a monthly basis. (Second
Tuesday of each month at 1:30 p.m.).



      (1)   Special meetings of the committee may be called by the
chairperson upon his or her initiative, or upon the request of a majority of
the members.



      (2)   Union/management bargaining issues will be referred to
the appropriate bargaining unit.



(2000 Code, § 2.96.030)  (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)



§ 32.463  DEPARTMENTAL SAFETY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Role and function. The Departmental Safety Committee serves as
liaison between the departmental employees of the City of Oak Forest and the
Executive Safety Committee. In that role, the Committee’s functions shall
include but not be limited to:



      (1)   Identifying annual specific goals and objectives based
on loss history;



      (2)   Creating and maintaining among employees an active
interest in practicing safety awareness on the job;



      (3)   Addressing issues that will promote the health and
wellness of all employees;



      (4)   Recommending to the Executive Safety Committee methods
of improving the city’s risk management program;



      (5)   Carrying out the Executive Safety Committee’s
directives and supporting actively its decisions and recommendations; and



      (6)   Conducting monthly facility inspections based on
criteria located within the safety manual and reporting these findings to the
executive safety committee.



   (B)   Activities.



      (1)   Identify unsafe work practices and conditions and
suggest appropriate remedies;



      (2)   Conduct safety inspections of both operations and
facilities, identify safety hazards and recommend corrective measures;



      (3)   Review accident/incident reports. Types of accidents,
causes and trends shall be identified and appropriate corrective action
suggested;



      (4)   Obtain and analyze available data on part injuries and
illnesses and identify trends and suggest appropriate corrective actions;



      (5)   Assist in the development and implementation of
effective health and safety awareness programs; and



      (6)   Encourage feedback from all individuals with regard to
health and safety-related ideas, problems and solutions.



   (C)   Members.



      (1)   The Departmental Safety Committee shall be comprised of
a diverse group of employees from both union represented and nonunion
represented from all major operating departments.



      (2)   At a minimum, department heads will appoint one employee
from each department (and/or division).



   (D)   Meetings.



      (1)   Meetings will be held monthly. (Meetings may be
cancelled due to lack of business, but only after approval of safety
coordinator and Executive Safety Committee chair).



      (2)   Special meetings of the Committee may be called by
chairperson upon his or her initiative, or upon the request of majority of
the members.



   (E)   Safety suggestions.



      (1)   Solicitation from employees. Members shall solicit
safety suggestions from their coworkers and bring those suggestions to the
attention of the Departmental Safety Committee. The Committee shall review
the suggestions and determine whether to implement them, refer them to the
Executive Safety Committee, or reject them. The Committee shall notify the
contributing employee(s) of its decision.



      (2)   Safety Suggestion Program. Members shall follow the
safety suggestion program procedures described within the city’s safety
manual regarding the processing of written safety suggestions submitted by
employees.



(2000 Code, § 2.96.040)  (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)



§ 32.464  RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Management’s responsibilities.



      (1)   Enforce all safety rules and procedures;



      (2)   Actively promote safety;



      (3)   Allow the time for Committee representative
participation in meetings and assigned responsibilities;



      (4)   Allocate the fund/resources necessary to implement
Safety Committee activities;



      (5)   Lead by example in following all safety rules;



      (6)   Support Committee decisions;



      (7)   Provide timely feedback to the Committee;



      (8)   Perform the initial investigation of all injuries,
incidents and near misses;



      (9)   Actively promote safety and risk management;



      (10)   Act as communication liaison between management and the
Committee;



      (11)   Facilitate the Safety Committee meetings;



      (12)   Coordinate the assignment of activities to Committee
members;



      (13)   Establish necessary deadlines based on member input;



      (14)   Follow up on assigned responsibilities;



      (15)   Schedule and develop an agenda for meetings based on
member input;



      (16)   Prepare an annual report of the Committee’s
accomplishments;



      (17)   Prepare a report of the Committee’s goals and
objectives for next calendar year;



      (18)   Orientation of new members; and



      (19)   Ensure the effectiveness of the meeting by directing
discussions to meet the Committee’s mission and objectives.



   (B)   Safety Coordinator responsibilities.



      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;



      (2)   Serve in the capacity as a resource to the Committee on
risk management issues;



      (3)   Review all accident investigation reports;



      (4)   Conduct health and safety inspections and prepare
reports;



      (5)   Assist with the development of the agenda; and



      (6)   Serve as liaison between the Executive and Departmental
Safety Committees.



   (C)   City Administrator’s responsibilities.



      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;



      (2)   Ensure the meeting minutes are recorded, completed and
distributed in a timely fashion;



      (3)   Distribute the agenda with minutes to Committee members,
one week prior to each scheduled meeting;



      (4)   Take and record attendance;



      (5)   Make arrangements for the meeting room;



      (6)   Distribute any correspondence and/or directives
developed by the Committee; and



      (7)   Develop and maintain files of meetings and
correspondence.



   (D)   Committee members responsibilities.



      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;



      (2)   Attend all health and safety meetings on time or arrange
for an alternate to attend;



      (3)   Communicate Committee activities to his or her
department;



      (4)   Serve on appointed project teams or subcommittees;



      (5)   Bring safety or health concerns to committee meetings
and/or to the attention of the affected employee’s supervisor;



      (6)   Assist with the development of the agenda upon request;
and



      (7)   Serve as an example by following all safety rules and
work practices.



   (E)   Employee responsibilities.



      (1)   Actively promote safety and risk management;



      (2)   Bring safety concerns to his or her supervisor or
Committee representative immediately;



      (3)   Learn and follow health and safety rules and procedures;
and



      (4)   Attend all safety training courses relevant to his or
her job classification.



(2000 Code, § 2.96.050)  (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)



§ 32.465  SAMPLE SAFETY COMMITTEE AGENDA.



   (A)   Call to order.



   (B)   Roll call.



   (C)   Approval of minutes.



   (D)   Old business; accident review board findings
reviewed/discussed.



   (E)   New business.



      (1)   New accident report review.



      (2)   Quarterly loss history review.



      (3)   Upcoming safety training.



      (4)   Training materials.



      (5)   Facility inspection report(s) review.



   (F)   Confirmation of next meeting.



   (G)   Adjournment.



(2000 Code, § 2.96.060)  (Ord. 2882, Art. 2 (part), passed - -2005)




STREETSCAPE ADVISORY COUNCIL




§ 32.480  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.



   With the passage of the ordinance codified in this subchapter, a
Citizens’ Commission, known and referred to as the Oak Forest Streetscape
Advisory Council (SAC) shall be formed, specifically charged with the
following mission, agenda and/or duties:



   (A)   Promote and recommend programs and policies to improve the
design and aesthetics of our streetscape, particularly in the commercial
corridors, contributing to the vitality of our community, while helping to
mitigate any adverse physical and economic conditions affecting the social
and economic growth of the City of Oak Forest, now and in the future;



   (B)   Working in conjunction with Oak Forest staff, to devise and
implement an ongoing outreach program, designed to assess the needs and
identify those issues related to government policies and/or services which
affect the beautification and/or rejuvenation of the streetscape in Oak
Forest;



   (C)   Working in conjunction with the city’s community development
staff, research and compile an overall strategy and/or capital improvement
plan, serving as a blueprint for the recruitment and development of working
partnerships among Oak Forest’s commercial, industrial and service sectors;



   (D)   Recommend guidelines and structure objective criteria to
better evaluate the use of streetscape materials—furniture, landscape,
signage and plantings—as a means of business attraction and retention, as
well as overall beautification;



   (E)   Compile and conduct those surveys or other research
instruments necessary to ascertain the status of the streetscape and the
physical environment, including those unique circumstances affecting certain
locations within the corporate limits;



   (F)   Coordinate the city’s annual beautification awards program;
and



   (G)   Serve as ambassadors for the city— conducting various
outreach and public relations activities related to the successful
integration and overall preservation of Oak Forest’s two major
environments—the built environment and the natural environment.



(2000 Code, § 2.97.010)  (Ord. 2850, § 1, passed - -2004; Ord.
2006-06-0034O, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 32.481  COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The membership of the SAC shall consist of not less than five
and not more than 11 persons, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice
and consent of the City Council. SAC membership shall be limited to residents
of Oak Forest or owners/operators of businesses within Oak Forest, appointed
at-large, but remain representative of a cross-section of the city’s civic,
business and professional leadership, having demonstrated the skills and
expertise necessary to the implementation of a successful community outreach
program.



   (B)   Vacancies on the SAC shall be filled in the same manner in
which the original appointments are required to be made.



   (C)   In addition to the appointed membership from the community
at-large, one ex-officio member, an alderman, serving as the representative
of, and direct liaison to, the City Council, and the Community Development
Coordinator, or designee, serving as the representative of, and direct
liaison to, municipal departments, shall be considered full voting members of
the SAC with all rights, privileges and responsibilities, thereto assigned.



   (D)   At a minimum, meetings shall be held quarterly; however, the
chair of the SAC shall reserve the right to convene additional meetings, at
the request of the Mayor, City Council and/or Community Development
Coordinator, as circumstances dictate, providing adequate public notice as
required by law.



   (E)   (1)   The SAC shall be empowered to elect a member of its
body to serve as chair, acting theretofore, as the SAC’s public
spokesperson, where applicable.



      (2)   The city’s Community Development Coordinator and the
Community Development Department shall provide staff support to the SAC, as
time, budget and staff resources permit.



(2000 Code, § 2.97.020)  (Ord. 2850, § 2, passed - -2004; Am. Ord.
2012-09-0393O, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 32.482  VOLUNTEERS.



   In the conduct of its duties and responsibilities, the SAC shall be
authorized to enlist the services of those other members of the community
whose expertise and commitment to volunteer service will further expedite the
fulfillment of the SAC’s mission, agenda and duties.



(2000 Code, § 2.97.030)  (Ord. 2850, § 3, passed - -2004)



§ 32.483  EXPENDITURES.



   The SAC shall be authorized to obligate and/or expend funds, for
purposes stated and to the amount appropriated in the SAC’s annual budget,
subject to approval by the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.97.040)  (Ord. 2850, § 4, passed - -2004)




GAZEBO COMMITTEE




§ 32.495  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a city standing advisory Committee which
shall be known as the Oak Forest “Gazebo Committee.”



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.496  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Gazebo Committee shall have no more than five people
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.



   (B)   The initial appointments for Gazebo Committee members shall be
made upon the passage of this section, and will expire on April 30, 2008.



   (C)   Gazebo Committee members shall not be compensated for their
services.



   (D)   Three members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.



   (E)   A majority decision of all members present at a
duly-constituted meeting shall be required for all Committee actions.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.497  OFFICERS OF THE GAZEBO COMMITTEE.



   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall designate from
the Committee’s members a chairperson of the Gazebo Committee, who shall
serve for a term of one year and until a successor is appointed. The
Committee shall elect from its members, a Secretary and other officers as it
may deem advisable.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.498  DUTIES OF THE CHAIR.



   (A)   The chair shall have the duty to call all meetings of the
Gazebo Committee and to preside at all Gazebo Committee meetings.



   (B)   In the absence of the chair, a majority of a quorum of the
members, by majority vote, may select from one of their number a temporary
chair to preside at the meeting.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.499  GAZEBO COMMITTEE MEETINGS.



   (A)   All Committee meetings shall be conducted in accordance of the
requirements of the Open Meetings Act.



   (B)   The Secretary shall keep minutes of Committee meetings which
shall be turned over to the City Clerk following approval.



   (C)   At the first initial meeting of the Committee and at the first
meeting in each January thereafter, the Committee shall establish a regular
meeting schedule for the remainder of the year, which will be posted in
accordance with the Open Meetings Act meetings, which will be turned over to
the City Clerk following approval.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.500  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Gazebo Committee shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To plan events at the city’s gazebo;



   (B)   To recommend events and a budget for events to the Mayor and
City Council;



   (C)   To form subcommittees as the Committee deems necessary or
desirable for the efficient conduct of special events within the city;



   (D)   To evaluate any community event over which the Committee is
given responsibility, and to provide the Mayor and City Council with a
written report of the evaluation and recommendations within 60 days after the
event;



   (E)   To establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the
functions of the Gazebo Committee, consistent with the powers and duties set
forth herein;



   (F)   To establish, review and approve yearly calendar dates for
monthly meetings and various special events at the gazebo subject to the
approval of the Mayor and City Council;



   (G)   The Gazebo Committee shall not conduct any special events
without the approval of the Mayor and City Council;



   (H)   The Gazebo Committee shall not have the power to approve the
expenditure of any city funds unless specifically approved within the city
budget. The expenditures shall only be committed to and made when approved by
the Mayor and City Council; and



   (I)   To perform other functions or responsibilities as may be
assigned from time to time by the Mayor or City Council.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)




COMPREHENSIVE PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE




§ 32.515  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established an ad hoc City Advisory Committee which
shall be known as the Oak Forest “Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee.”
This Committee shall become effective upon the appointment of its initial
members and shall cease to exist 30 days after the City Council’s final
approval of the city’s Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.516  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall have no more
than seven people appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
City Council.



   (B)   The initial appointments for Comprehensive Plan Steering
Committee members shall be made upon the passage of this subchapter, and will
expire when the Committee dissolves as specified in § 32.515 above.



   (C)   Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee members shall not be
compensated for their services.



   (D)   Four members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.



   (E)   A majority decision of all members present at a
duly-constituted meeting shall be required for all Committee actions.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.517  OFFICERS OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall
designate from the Committee’s members a chairperson of the Comprehensive
Plan Steering Committee, who shall serve until the Committee dissolves in
accordance with this subchapter.



   (B)   The Committee shall elect from its members, a Secretary and
other officers as it may deem advisable.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.518  DUTIES OF THE CHAIR.



   (A)   The chair shall have the duty to call all meetings of the
Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee and to preside at all Comprehensive
Plan Steering Committee meetings.



   (B)   In the absence of the chair, a majority of a quorum of the
members, by majority vote, may select from one of their number a temporary
chair to preside at the meeting.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.519  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE MEETINGS.



   (A)   All Committee meetings shall be conducted in accordance of the
requirements of the Open Meetings Act.



   (B)   The Secretary shall keep minutes of Committee meetings which
shall be turned over to the City Clerk following approval.



   (C)   At the first initial meeting of the Committee and at the first
meeting in each January thereafter, the Committee shall establish a regular
meeting schedule for the remainder of the year, which will be posted in
accordance with the Open Meetings Act meetings, which will be turned over to
the City Clerk following approval.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)



§ 32.520  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall have the following
powers and duties:



   (A)   To review and evaluate alternatives for the city’s
comprehensive plan, and to make recommendations to the City Planning and
Zoning Commission regarding the adoption of the city’s Comprehensive Plan;



   (B)   To form subcommittees as the Committee deems necessary or
desirable to perform the Committee’s functions;



   (C)   To perform other functions or tasks as assigned by the Mayor
and City Council;



   (D)   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall not perform
any other functions without the approval of the Mayor and City Council; and



   (E)   The Comprehensive Plan Steering Committee shall not have the
power to approve the expenditure of any city funds. The expenditures shall
only be committed to and made when approved by the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 2006-10-0061O, passed 10-24-2006)




YOUTHFUL FIRE DANGER AWARENESS PROGRAM




§ 32.535  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established in the city a youthful fire danger awareness
program.



(2000 Code, § 2.98.010)  (Ord. 2375, § 1, passed - -1999)



§ 32.536  PURPOSES.



   This program, which will act at the direction of the City Fire Chief,
will identify and counsel juveniles who intentionally or unintentionally use
fire in circumstances other than its proper intended use and, as appropriate,
the families of the individuals.



(2000 Code, § 2.98.020)  (Ord. 2375, § 2, passed - -1999)



§ 32.537  PERSONNEL.



   (A)   (1)   Youthful damage counselors will be trained in
youthful fire damage awareness programs approved by the office of the State
Fire Marshal.



      (2)   The counselor will direct the avenues in which
assistance is indicated, cooperate with the juvenile court system and refer
target individuals to appropriate health professionals and/or local agencies.



   (B)   The counselors shall suggest the need for individuals to
secure professional help.



   (C)   The program shall be staffed by volunteer fire awareness
counselors.



(2000 Code, § 2.98.030)  (Ord. 2375, § 3, passed - -1999)




MEDICARE-ONLY COVERAGE




§ 32.560  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.



   It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the governing body of
the City of Oak Forest to extend to the eligible employees thereof, effective
as of January 1, 2004, the benefits of the Hospital Insurance provisions of
the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, in pursuance to the
policy, and to that purpose, the City Council and Mayor of the City of Oak
Forest take action with the Social Security Division of the State
Employees’ Retirement System of Illinois as may be required by applicable
state and federal laws or regulations.



(2000 Code, § 2.99.010)  (Ord. 2799, § 2, passed - -2004)



§ 32.561  COVERAGE OF ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES; AUTHORIZATION.



   The Mayor of the City of Oak Forest is authorized and directed to
execute coverage of eligible employees as provided in § 32.560 above.



(2000 Code, § 2.99.020)  (Ord. 2799, § 3, passed - -2004)



§ 32.562  WITHHOLDINGS FROM SALARIES AND WAGES.



   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purposes
provided in § 32.560 above, are authorized to be made in the amounts and at
times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the Internal Revenue Service for wages paid after
December 31, 1986.



(2000 Code, § 2.99.030)  (Ord. 2799, § 4, passed - -2004)



§ 32.563  EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS.



   Employer contributions on wages paid after December 31, 1986 shall be
paid to the Internal Revenue Service in accordance with federal laws and
regulations.



(2000 Code, § 2.99.040)  (Ord. 2799, § 5, passed - -2004)



§ 32.564  RECORDS AND REPORTS; REQUIRED.



   The City of Oak Forest Finance Director shall maintain records and
submit reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.



(2000 Code, § 2.99.050)  (Ord. 2799, § 6, passed - -2004)



VETERANS COMMISSION



§ 32.575  CREATION.



   There is hereby created a Veterans Commission in the City of Oak Forest.



(Ord. 2008-10-0203O, passed 10-28-2008)



§ 32.576  COMPOSITION.



   The Commission shall consist of 13 members. All commissioners will be
appointed by the Mayor of the city with the advice and consent of the City
Council. The Oak Forest Veterans Commission shall have the right to select
its own Chairman from the members already appointed by the Mayor.
Additionally, honorary members to the Veteran’s Commission may be appointed
by the Veterans Commission but honorary members will not have voting
privileges reserved for regularly appointed members. The Commission shall
meet on a monthly basis, more often as may be necessary. They shall keep a
record of their meetings and supply the same to the City Clerk.



(Ord. 2009-07-0251O, passed 7-28-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0335O, passed
4-12-2011; Am. Ord. 2015-10-0565O, passed 10-27-2015)



§ 32.577  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The members shall be appointed for a term of three years. If a member
resigns or is otherwise unable to continue their duties as a commissioner,
another member may be appointed to fulfill the remaining time in that term
with the approval of the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council. Members shall be selected on the basis of experience and/or
knowledge of veteran’s affairs and concerns with a strong desire to work
with and for and to otherwise assist local veterans and their families.
Members shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 2009-07-0251O, passed 7-28-2009; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0335O, passed
4-12-2011)



§ 32.578  GOALS AND CHARGES.



   The goals and charge of the Commission shall be:



   (A)    Recommend to the Mayor and City Council activities relating
to veterans affairs;



   (B)   Promote veterans awareness and welfare in the city;



   (C)   Represent the city at veteran's functions throughout the
community;



   (D)   Coordinate joint sponsorship of programs with city veterans
groups; and



   (E)   Be a repository of educational information about veteran's
issues for the city, recognize accomplishments of local veterans, assist
veterans who may need help in securing benefits and, in general, be the
knowledge base of veteran matters in the city.



(Ord. 2008-10-0203O, passed 10-28-2008)



BUILDING DEPARTMENT



§ 32.590  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   There is established the Building Department.



   (B)   The Building Department shall consist of the position of
Building Commissioner, and other personnel as determined by need.



   (C)   All employment and positions in the department are subject to
budgetary considerations.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 32.591  POSITION OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   The Building Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council. The Building Commissioner shall be an
employee of the city and be responsible for the general supervision of the
Department.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 32.592  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Building Department shall be responsible for activities relating to
the review and inspection of construction related activities, as well as
performing inspections of construction related activities. Additionally, the
department is also responsible for performing inspections, code compliance
activities related to apartments, as well as residential and commercial
properties, and other activities which may be assigned.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



§ 32.593  ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Building Commissioner shall be subject to the supervision of, and
shall report to the City Administrator, and to the Mayor.



(Ord. 2010-04-0287O, passed 4-27-2010)



GREEN STEPS COMMISSION



§ 32.605  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   Findings.



      (1)   Oak Forest is an environmentally conscious community
surrounded by forest preserves, located within a major urbanized area, and
has a long history of volunteerism interested in resolving public issues; and



      (2)   Residents and businesses of Oak Forest have been
enthusiastic in helping to promote conservation, efficiency, sustainability
and education to help preserve our natural resources and protect our natural
environment; and



      (3)   The City of Oak Forest wishes to formalize a process
within government that will help identify "green issues" and seek ways toward
which we, as a community, might better understand such issues and seek their
resolution.



   (B)   A commission is hereby created and established, which shall be
known as the Oak Forest Green Steps Commission.



(Ord. 2010-06-0295O, passed 6-8-2010)



§ 32.606  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Oak Forest Green Steps Commission shall be composed of
seven Commissioners and one Aldermanic Ex-Officio Member to serve as liaison
between the Commission and the Oak Forest City Council.



   (B)   All Commissioners will be appointed by the Mayor of the City
of Oak Forest with the advice and consent of the City Council. The ex-officio
member shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Oak Forest Green Steps Commission
shall have the right to select its own Chairman from the members already
appointed by the Mayor.



   (C)   Vacancies on the Green Steps Commission shall be filled in the
same manner in which the original appointments are required to be made.



(Ord. 2010-06-0295O, passed 6-8-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-09-0394O, passed
9-11-2012)



§ 32.607  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Oak Forest Green Steps
Commission are meant to be broad in scope so as not to limit the
commissioners in their efforts to develop ideas that will make Oak Forest
second to none in terms of its "environmental footprint". The purpose of the
Green Steps Commission will be to encourage residents, schools, businesses
and government within Oak Forest to be more eco-conscious and make more
eco-friendly choices. The duties and responsibilities include, but are not
limited to, the following:



   (A)   Identify both general and specific issues that need to be
addressed that will enable Oak Forest to preserve natural resources and
protect the natural environment.



   (B)   Create an atmosphere of concern about the natural resources we
use and what we must do about it to preserve our standard of living.



   (C)   Develop ideas that will help resolve existing problems in Oak
Forest such as more environmental friendly building codes and more efficient
recycling methodologies.



   (D)   Encourage businesses and other organizations to pursue
innovative "green" initiatives that will help them to achieve Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (L.E.E.D.) certification.



   (E)   Promote the goal of sustainability: the effort to conserve an
ecological balance to avoid the depletion of natural resources.



   (F)   Disseminate information that will educate others -
particularly the young - so that all will be aware of being more
eco-conscious.



   (G)   Educate the public that protecting our environment and
ecological systems is a positive way to economically grow and prosper in the
long run.



   (H)   Communicate ideas to the Mayor and City Council that will make
them consider eco-friendly choices in programs and project they propose for
the city of Oak Forest.



   (I)   Initiate efforts within the community that lead to programs
and projects that reduce our consumption of natural resources and promote
conservation.



   (J)   Strive to become an "All Green Community” whether by
official designation or simply through the efforts put forth by Oak Foresters
themselves.



(Ord. 2010-06-0295O, passed 6-8-2010)



CHAPTER 33:  REVENUE AND FINANCE



Section




Locally Imposed and Administered Tax and
Employment Rights and Responsibilities




   33.001   Title



   33.002   Scope



   33.003   Definitions



   33.004   Notices



   33.005   Late payment



   33.006   Payment



   33.007   Certain credits and refunds



   33.008   Audit procedure



   33.009   Appeal



   33.010   Hearing



   33.011   Interest and penalties



   33.012   Abatement



   33.013   Installment contracts



   33.014   Statute of limitation



   33.015   Voluntary disclosure



   33.016   Publication of tax ordinances



   33.017   Review of liens by Tax Administrator



   33.018   Application




Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax




   33.030   Imposition; rate



   33.031   Reports



   33.032   Payment of tax




Police Protection Tax




   33.045   Imposition; rate




Municipal Motor Fuel Tax




   33.060   Definitions



   33.061   Tax imposed



   33.062   Collection of tax



   33.063   Registration and maintenance of records



   33.064   Allocation of funds collected



   33.065   Failure to report and pay tax



   33.066   Suspension/revocation of business license




Municipal Utility Taxes




   33.080   Definitions



   33.081   Taxes imposed



   33.082   Exceptions; exemptions



   33.083   Additional taxes



   33.084   Collection



   33.085   Reports to city



   33.086   Credit for over-payment



   33.087   Limitation of liability



   33.088   Simplified municipal telecommunication tax rate change




Purchasing System




   33.100   Office of purchasing



   33.101   Operating procedures



   33.102   Joint purchasing agreements



   33.103   Documentation of expenses



   33.104   Recycled product procurement policy




Economic Development Projects




   33.115   Definitions



   33.116   Purposes



   33.117   Powers of city



   33.118   Exercise of powers; terms of bonds set by ordinance



   33.119   Covenants in bonds



   33.120   Signatures on bonds; validity



   33.121   Liens on bond revenues and receipts



   33.122   Liability for bonds



   33.123   Investment of city funds



   33.124   Exemption from construction and bidding requirements for
public buildings



   33.125   Conflict of laws




Mortgage Credit Certificate Program




   33.140   Home rule authority



   33.141   Declaration of public purpose



   33.142   Definitions



   33.143   Establishment of program



   33.144   Aggregate limit of certificates



   33.145   Administration agreement



   33.146   Appointment of Program Administrator; Local Administrator



   33.147   Certificates



   33.148   Mortgage credit certificate election



   33.149   Public notice



   33.150   Volume cap



   33.151   Ratification



   33.152   Approval of further actions




Industrial Revenue Bonds




   33.165   Guidelines and criteria for issuance



   33.166   Checklist




Miscellaneous Fiscal Provisions




   33.180   Prevailing wage rate



   33.181   Returned checks fee



   33.182   Charge for dwelling units; fire protection fund



   33.183   Ambulance service charges



   33.184   Emergency service charges



   33.185   Paid sick leave; minimum wage - employers



 



   33.999   Penalty




LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX AND
EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES




§ 33.001  TITLE.



   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as, and may be
cited as, the locally imposed and administered tax and employment rights and
responsibility ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.010)  (Ord. 2493, § 1, passed - -2000; Am. Ord.
2016-12-0628O, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 33.002  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the city’s
procedures in connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes and employment relations.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.020)  (Ord. 2493, § 2, passed - -2000; Am. Ord.
2016-12-0628O, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 33.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act.



   CITY.  The City of Oak Forest, Illinois.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The city’s Mayor and City Council.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX.  Each tax imposed by the
city that is collected or administered by the city, not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The city’s controller is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
Local Tax Administrator to act in the Local Tax Administrator’s stead. The
Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of
this subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter. The exercise of the
authority by the Local Tax Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
subchapter and the Act.



   NOTICE.  Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE.  Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of the tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.030)  (Ord. 2493, § 3, passed - -2000)



§ 33.004  NOTICES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar
days, prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the Local Tax Administrator.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax Administrator as
follows:



      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the person’s last known address; or



      (2)   Personal service or delivery.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.040)  (Ord. 2493, § 4, passed - -2000)



§ 33.005  LATE PAYMENT.



   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the city, pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:



   (A)   Physically received by the city, on or before the due date; or



   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the city, with adequate postage prepaid.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.050)  (Ord. 2493, § 5, passed - -2000)



§ 33.006  PAYMENT.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order:



   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;



   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and



   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.060)  (Ord. 2493, § 6, passed - -2000)



§ 33.007  CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, however, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations or a claim for credit or refund
shall be two years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not
paid the amounts directly to the city.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any moneys to the city.



      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the Local Tax
Administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax
Administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



      (3)   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in
whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for
refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 5% per annum, based on a
year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.070)  (Ord. 2493, § 7, passed - -2000)



§ 33.008  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.



   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and
if the date and time selected by Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within
30 days, after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.



   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days, nor more
than 30 days, from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
Local Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing,
that is convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.



   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. A books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the city.



   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate of the
taxpayer’s tax liability.



   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days,
of the city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing the tax.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.080)  (Ord. 2493, § 8, passed - -2000)



§ 33.009  APPEAL.



   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the Local Tax Administrator’s issuance of a protestable
notice of tax due, bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal,
refund and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax
Administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within 14 days, of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days, after the expiration of the 45-day period.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.090)  (Ord. 2493, § 9, passed - -2000)



§ 33.010  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 33.009 above, the Local Tax
Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of a taxpayer. Lack
of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing the Local Tax Administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.100)  (Ord. 2493, § 10, passed - -2000)



§ 33.011  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.



   (A)   Interest. The city provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax, to be per
annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.



   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties.



      (1)   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of 5% of
the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed;
and a late payment penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as
due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax
due shall be imposed.



      (2)   If no return is filed within the time or manner provided
by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of
tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty
shall be assessed equal to 10% of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed.



      (3)   A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.110)  (Ord. 2493, § 11, passed - -2000)



§ 33.012  ABATEMENT.



   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if
the Local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.120)  (Ord. 2493, § 12, passed - -2000)



§ 33.013  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   (A)   The city may enter into an installment contract with the
taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance.



   (B)   The Local Tax Administrator may not cancel any installment
contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing.



   (C)   Upon written notice by the Local Tax Administrator that the
payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 working days to
cure any delinquency.



   (D)   If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the
14-day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the
installment contract with the Local Administrator, the installment contract
shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.130)  (Ord. 2493, § 13, passed - -2000)



§ 33.014  STATUTE OF LIMITATION.



   (A)   The city, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review
all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing.



   (B)   The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.



      (1)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more
than two years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for
the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return
for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



      (2)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any
four-year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be
issued by the city, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.



      (3)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a
fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.140)  (Ord. 2493, § 14, passed - -2000)



§ 33.015  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a
taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation or
assessment from the Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file
an application with the Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of
the tax due.



   (B)   A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must
agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for
all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four
years before the date of filing the application.



   (C)   A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may
not be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest of the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void.



   (D)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than
90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void.



   (E)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than
90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.150)  (Ord. 2493, § 15, passed - -2000)



§ 33.016  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.160)  (Ord. 2493, § 16, passed - -2000)



§ 33.017  REVIEW OF LIENS BY TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.



   (B)   Upon a determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect.



   (C)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the Local Tax
Administrator shall:



      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;



      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and



      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed
lien.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.170)  (Ord. 2493, § 17, passed - -2000)



§ 33.018  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the city’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this
subchapter shall be controlling.



(2000 Code, § 3.28.180)  (Ord. 2493, § 18, passed - -2000)




MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX




§ 33.030  IMPOSITION; RATE.



   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from sales made in the course of the business while this
subchapter is in effect, in accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.



(2000 Code, § 3.04.010)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed - -1999)



§ 33.031  REPORTS.



   Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in the city shall file a report as required by ILCS Ch.
35, Act 120, § 3.



(2000 Code, § 3.04.020)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed - -1999)



§ 33.032  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   At the time the report required by § 33.031 above is filed, there
shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed by
§ 33.031 above on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal
property during the preceding month.



(2000 Code, § 3.04.030)




POLICE PROTECTION TAX




§ 33.045  IMPOSITION; RATE.



   A tax is imposed for the purpose of police protection in the city at
the rate of 0.05% of the value, as equalized or assessed by the State
Department of Revenue, of all taxable property in the city for the first year
in which this tax is levied, and at the rate of 0.075% of the value, as
equalized or assessed by the Department, of all taxable property in the city
in all succeeding years, in accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3.



(2000 Code, § 3.08.010)




MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX




§ 33.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR FUEL.  All volatile liquids compounded or used for fueling motor
vehicles, including gasoline, gasohol, compressed natural gas and diesel
fuels.



   MOTOR FUEL RETAILER.  Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of selling motor fuel at retail, not for resale.



(2000 Code, § 3.36.010)  (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)



§ 33.061  TAX IMPOSED.



   There is imposed and levied upon the retail purchase within the city of
motor fuel at the rate of $0.03 per gallon or any fraction thereof.



   (A)   This tax shall be in addition to any and all other federal,
state and local taxes.



   (B)   The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such taxes
shall be upon the motor fuel retailer. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling motor fuel.



(2000 Code, § 3.36.020)  (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)



§ 33.062  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   Each motor fuel retailer in the city shall have the duty to
collect the motor fuel tax from each purchaser and to pay it over to the
city, along with an accounting thereof, on return forms provided by the city.



   (B)   The return and tax payment shall be due on the same filing
dates as are established for filing with the Illinois Department of Revenue
of the Retailer’s Occupation Tax Return Form ST-1, Sales and Tax Use Return.



(2000 Code, § 3.36.030)  (Ord. 2696, § 2, passed - -2003; Ord. 2684, § 2
(part), passed - -2002)



§ 33.063  REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   (A)   Each motor fuel retailer shall maintain complete and accurate
books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of motor
fuel and the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof.



   (B)   These documents shall be available in the city for examination
and for audit by the city upon reasonable notice during customary business
hours.



(2000 Code, § 3.36.040)  (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)



§ 33.064  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS COLLECTED.



   The proceeds received from the collection of the municipal gas tax
shall be allocated in the amount of $0.02 per gallon to the motor fuel tax
fund and $0.01 per gallon to the general fund.



(2000 Code, § 3.36.050)  (Ord. 2684, §2 (part), passed - -2002; Ord.
2010-04-0289O, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0341O, passed 4-26-2011)



§ 33.065  FAILURE TO REPORT AND PAY TAX.



   (A)   If any motor fuel retailer fails to timely file any report or
if any amount due shall remain unpaid after the due date there shall be a
late payment penalty of 1% of the unpaid tax for each month, or any portion
thereof, that full payment is not received.



   (B)   The city may also bring a civil action to collect any unpaid
tax or penalty.



(2000 Code, § 3.36.060)  (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)



§ 33.066  SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A)   If the City Clerk as license commissioner, or his or her
designee, after an administrative hearing finds that any motor fuel retailer
has wilfully evaded the responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter, he or she may suspend or remove any city licenses issued to the
establishment.



   (B)   The owner, operator or licensee shall have an opportunity to
be heard at the hearing. Any license suspension or revocation resulting from
the hearing shall not relieve or discharge the civil liability for nonpayment
of the tax due.



(2000 Code, § 3.36.070)  (Ord. 2684, § 2 (part), passed - -2002)




MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAXES




§ 33.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The consideration received for distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for
resale, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services
rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever;
provided, however that GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include: any amounts
specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 8-11-2(d),  the Illinois Municipal Code; and that portion of the
consideration received for the distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
gas to any local governmental body or school district whose territory
includes the municipality.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE.  Any person
having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of
whether the place of business or agent or other representative is located in
this state permanently or temporarily, or whether the person, subsidiary or
other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Has the meaning ascribed to it in ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act but shall include alternative retail
electric suppliers as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102.



   PURCHASER.  Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate
limits of the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, excluding
any local governmental body or school district whose territory includes the
municipality.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL.  Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.081  TAXES IMPOSED.



   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges.



   (A)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
city at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:



      (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.00558 per kilowatt-hour;



      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.00366 per kilowatt-hour;



      (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: $0.00330 per kilowatt-hour;



      (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in
a month: $0.00320 per kilowatt-hour;



      (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in
a month: $0.00311 per kilowatt-hour;



      (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.00293 per kilowatt-hour;



      (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.00288 per kilowatt-hour;



      (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.00284 per kilowatt-hour;



      (9)   For the next 10, 000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: $0.00279 per kilowatt-hour;



      (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in month; $0.00275 per kilowatt-hour; and



      (11)   The tax rates set forth in the preceding table will be
used at least through December 31, 2008, are proportional to the rates
enumerated in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act
90-561), and do not exceed the revenue that could have been collected during
1997 using the rates enumerated in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2 (as modified
by Public Act 90-561).



   (B)   The privilege of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas for use or consumption, and not for resale, at a rate not to
exceed 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.082  EXCEPTIONS; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed
with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the
extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state
or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling or transmitting
gas or electricity, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase
at retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for
those transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of the “Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act” authorized by
§ 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code; nor shall any tax authorized by
this subchapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any
privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon
all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the city, whether
privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege
within the city.



   (B)   Any local governmental body or school district whose territory
includes the municipality shall be exempted from the taxes imposed by this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.083  ADDITIONAL TAXES.



   (A)   These taxes shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon
the taxpayer or its business.



   (B)   All of the taxes enumerated in this subchapter are in addition
to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the
city by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or
other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or
thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of
the taxpayer’s business.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.084  COLLECTION.



   The tax authorized by § 33.081(A) above shall be collected from the
purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt
of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser
and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any tax collected by the person maintaining a
place of business in this state delivering the electricity shall constitute a
debt owed to the city by the person maintaining a place of business in this
state. Persons delivering the electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding the tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering the electricity shall also be authorized to
add to the gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the
person delivering the electricity for the expense incurred in keeping
records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax
and supplying data to the city upon request. If the person delivering the
electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser
shall be required to pay the tax directly to the city in the manner
prescribed by the city. Persons delivering the electricity who file returns
pursuant to this division shall, at the time of filing the return, pay the
city the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.085  REPORTS TO CITY.



   On or before the last day of each month, each person maintaining a
place of business in this state who delivers the electricity to the
purchaser, in the case of the tax imposed by § 33.081(A) above, and each
taxpayer, in the case of the tax imposed by § 33.081(B) above, shall make a
return to the city for the preceding month stating:



   (A)   Its name;



   (B)   Its principal place of business;



   (C)   Its gross receipts or kilowatt-hour usage, as applicable,
during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;



   (D)   Amount of tax;



   (E)   Other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require; and



   (F)   Each person making the return herein provided for shall, at
the time of making the return, pay to the city, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the person may, if he
or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between the
billings, and the taxable gross receipts or kilowatt-hour usage, as
applicable.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.086  CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.



   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be credited against
any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who
made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more
than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date
of the amount.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.087  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   If the provisions of this subchapter with respect to the
exemption of school districts and units of local government from the taxes
imposed by this subchapter or the application thereof are held
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the amount of tax due as a consequence
of the holding shall be limited to the amount that the taxpayer is authorized
to charge and collect from the school districts and units of local government
pursuant the provisions of § 9-221 of the Public Utilities Act or any
successor thereto.



   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk is hereby directed to send a certified
copy of this subchapter to all taxpayers and to provide to all taxpayers the
names and addresses of each school district and unit of local government
which own facilities within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect,
following its passage, approval and publications as required by law and shall
be effective with respect to: the use or consumption of electricity; and
gross receipts actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after
the first day of January, 2007.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 33.088  SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATION TAX RATE CHANGE.



   (A)   The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax
imposed under the authority of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications
Tax Act (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.) upon the act or privilege of
originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate
or interstate telecommunications by a person is hereby changed to 6% of the
gross charges for the telecommunications purchased at retail.



   (B)   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of
Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (C)   (1)   This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval and publication in pamphlet form as
required by law, provided, however, that division (A) above shall take effect
for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after the
first day of January, 2007.



      (2)   The Municipal Clerk is hereby directed to file a
certified copy of this subchapter with the Illinois Department of Revenue on
or before September 20, 2006.



(Ord. 2006-07-0046O, passed 7-11-2006)




PURCHASING SYSTEM




§ 33.100  OFFICE OF PURCHASING.



   (A)   There is established in and for the city an office of
purchasing under the direction of the City Administrator, or if a vacancy
exists in that position, under the direction of the City Clerk or Deputy City
Clerk, who shall be referred to as the purchasing agent. This office will be
responsible to the Mayor and Council for the entire purchasing program.



   (B)   The office or designee shall have the following
responsibilities, in addition to any others designated by the Mayor and
Council:



      (1)   Act to procure all necessary supplies, materials and
services, subject to the approval of Council, for the efficient operation of
the government at the lowest possible cost;



      (2)   Report to the Mayor and Council any collusive or
restrictive bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as
possible on all purchases;



      (3)   Establish and amend, with the approval of Council, all
rules and regulations authorized by this subchapter;



      (4)   Keep informed of current developments in the field of
purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and keep abreast of
the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other
governmental jurisdictions, national technical associations, trade
associations having national recognition and private businesses and
organizations;



      (5)   Prescribe and maintain forms necessary to the operation
of this subchapter;



      (6)   Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors’ catalog file,
which catalog shall be filed according to materials and shall contain
descriptions of vendors’ commodities and prices;



      (7)   Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk to take full
advantage of discounts;



      (8)   Act to procure all federal and state exemptions to which
the government is entitled;



      (9)   Cooperate with other personnel to secure the maximum
efficiency in budgeting and accounting; and



      (10)   Declare as irresponsible those bidders or vendors who
default on their quotations, and disqualify them from receiving any business
from the government for a stated period of time, as determined by the Mayor
and Council.



(2000 Code, § 2.28.010)



§ 33.101  OPERATING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Introduction/statement of policy.



      (1)   The purpose of this purchasing manual is to provide the
City of Oak Forest staff with guidelines and directions for the acquisition
of goods and services. When used with good judgment and common sense, the
policies and procedures conveyed within will allow the city to obtain
required supplies and services efficiently and economically.



      (2)   This manual is designed to be a fluid document and will
be modified from time to time to conform to changes in legislation,
technology and actual practice. Although it may not answer every question
related to purchasing practices, it does provide general guidelines for
purchasing activities. Employees who need help dealing with specific
situations not covered by the manual should contact the controller for
assistance.



      (3)   The provisions of this manual shall be approved by the
City Council. Administration of the manual shall be the responsibility of the
City Administrator.



      (4)   Failure to follow the procedures outlined in this manual
may lead to disciplinary action in accordance with the provisions of the City
of Oak Forest personnel policy manual.



   (B)   Purchasing policies.



      (1)   Code of ethics. All city personnel engaged in purchasing
and related activities shall conduct business dealings in a manner above
reproach in every respect. Transactions relating to expenditure of public
funds require the highest degree of public trust to protect the interests of
the city and the residents of Oak Forest. City employees shall strive to:



         (a)   Ensure that public money is spent efficiently and
effectively and in accordance with statutes, regulations and city policies;



         (b)   Maintain confidentiality at all times;



         (c)   Not accept gifts or favors from current or
potential suppliers, which might compromise the integrity of their purchasing
function;



         (d)   Purchase without favor of prejudice;



         (e)   Ensure that all potential suppliers are provided
with adequate and identical information upon which to base their offer or
quotation and that any subsequent information is made available to all
bidders;



         (f)   Establish and maintain procedures to ensure that
fair and equal consideration is given to each offer or quotation received and
selection is based upon the lowest responsible bid;



         (g)   Offer a prompt and courteous response to all
inquires from potential or existing suppliers;



         (h)   Responsibly plan purchases to insure that the need
for “emergency” approvals reflects true emergencies; and



         (i)   It shall be the responsibility of the City
Administrator to determine if a violation of this code of ethics has occurred
and if disciplinary action is necessary in accordance with the city’s
personnel manual.



      (2)   Approval of city purchases. No employee shall purchase
goods or services on behalf of the city without first seeking approval as
required by this policy. All purchases shall require advance approval of the
appropriate department head, purchasing agent or the City Council in
accordance with the guidelines described in this division:



 


Dollars Limits

 

Required Approval



Up to $1,000
 
Department head


$1,001.00 to $10,000
 
City Administrator


$10,001 and above
 
City Council



 



      (3)   Regular purchase orders. All purchases exceeding $1,000
shall require the issuance of a regular purchase order to the vendor before
an order for goods or services is filled. Employees shall be responsible for
planning for purchases exceeding $1,000 in advance, and should allow
sufficient time to have a requisition processed and purchase order issued and
mailed to the vendor. Vendors must indicate the correct purchase order number
on an invoice and forward it to the Finance Clerk to process it for payment.



      (4)   Change orders to regular purchase orders. After a
regular purchase order is issued to the vendor, it may become necessary to
change it to include additional quantities, shipping costs and the like. If
the actual purchase exceeds the requisition by more than 10%, the department
head should forward a request to edit the purchase order to the controller
indicating the reason for the increase. If the change is less than or equal
to 10%, no action is necessary.



      (5)   Blanket purchase orders. Blanket purchase orders are
intended to give employees flexibility when purchasing mass quantities from
the same vendor on a recurring basis (e.g., concrete, patching material, car
washes). Blanket purchase orders will be issued to a vendor on a monthly
basis. The department head shall enter a requisition for the approximate
quantity needed for the month. The controller will approve the monthly
expenditure and issue a purchase order. The purchase order will be closed at
the end of the month. In instances where a blanket purchase order has been
issued, it is not necessary to process a requisition and have a regular
purchase order issued in advance of obtaining the goods. Employees may obtain
items from vendors in the field upon approval of the department head. Vendors
must reference the correct blanket purchase order number on an invoice and
forward it to the Finance Clerk to process it for payment.



      (6)   Contract purchase order. Contract purchase orders shall
be issued if the city has an annual contract with a vendor or supplier (e.g.,
insurance policy, maintenance contract). Contract purchase orders will be
created by the Finance Clerk at the beginning of each fiscal year. Department
heads should forward the terms of any contract to the controller so that a
purchase order can be created and mailed to the vendor. The purchase order
will be closed at the end of the fiscal year. Vendors must indicated the
correct contract purchase order number on an invoice and forward it to the
Finance Clerk to process it for payment.



      (7)   Union and contractual benefits. A request for payment
for union and contractual benefits paid to city employees should be forwarded
to the Finance Clerk to be included on the list of bills presented to the
City Council. Examples of union and contractual benefits include optical and
dental reimbursement, tuition reimbursement and uniform reimbursement. The
check request approved by the department head will supersede the requirement
for a purchase order.



      (8)   Grant purchases. Purchases made with grant proceeds
require a regular purchase order, if it is greater than $1,000. The
department head should request the controller to propose a budget adjustment
to the City Council if the income and expenditure was not previously budgeted.



   (C)   Competitive quotes and exceptions to the policy.



      (1)   General policy for soliciting quotes.



         (a)   Employees are responsible for obtaining quotes for
purchases in the instances outlined in this section. When requesting a
purchase, quotes should be forwarded to the purchasing agent. Requisitions
submitted without the required quotes or a satisfactory explanation of why
quotes were not obtained (e.g., sole source, emergency, standardized vendor
and the like) would be returned to the originator without approval.



 

Up to $1,500
 
One verbal quote is required, however, employees are encouraged to seek
additional quotes when possible.


$1,501 to 10,000
 
Three quotes must be obtained and submitted to the purchasing agent with the
requisition. A purchase order will be issued after approval by the purchasing
agent.


$10,001 to 20,000
 
Three written quotes must be obtained and submitted to the purchasing agent
with the requisition. The purchasing agent will forward the request to the
City Council for approval. A purchase order will be issued after approval by
the City Council.


$20,001 and above
 
Must be competitively bid in accordance with state law and city ordinances.
City Council approval is required for all contracts of this dollar amount. A
purchase order will be issued after approval by the City Council.



 



         (b)   Items purchased more than once during a fiscal
year (e.g., paper, office supplies and the like) do not need quotes every
time a purchase is made. However, competitive quotes for these items shall be
sought at the beginning of each fiscal year to ensure that vendors are
competitive.



      (2)   Joint purchasing.



         (a)   City employees are authorized to obtain goods and
services using the State of Illinois joint purchasing program.



         (b)   When available through the state program, it is
not necessary for city employees to obtain quotes or to competitively bid the
goods or services, which are sought.



         (c)   Employees shall be responsible, however, for
ensuring that the goods or services are of a quality sufficient to meet the
city's needs and that pricing is competitive.



         (d)   When making purchases using the state’s assigned
vendor, employees shall submit a purchase requisition to the purchasing agent
and shall include the State of Illinois’ contract number. This information
should be indicated on the requisition by using the special instructions
field when entering the purchase requisition. The controller will then issue
a purchase order to the vendor.



         (e)   The city is also authorized to enter into
agreements for joint purchasing with authorized units of government under the
law.



         (f)   These units include, but are not limited to, the
City of Chicago, Cook County and other municipalities in the Northwest
Municipal Conference and the South Suburban Mayors’ and Managers’
Association. Furthermore, if a local vendor matches the contract amount in a
competitively bid joint purchase program, that vendor will be deemed the
lowest responsible bidder for that purchase.



      (3)   Sole source purchases.



         (a)   Contracts for parts, supplies or equipment that
are available only from a single source are referred to as sole source
purchases.



         (b)   Sole source procurements may arise from the
following circumstances:



            1.   Equipment for which there is no comparable
competitive product or is available only from one supplier;



            2.   Public utility services from natural or
regulated monopolies;



            3.   A component or replacement part for which
there is no commercially available substitute, and which can be obtained only
from the manufacturer;



            4.   An item where compatibility is the overriding
consideration, such as computer software; and



            5.   A used item, for example, a television
transmitter tower, that becomes immediately available and is subject to prior
sale.



         (c)   These items shall not be subject to requirements
for seeking competitive quotes or bids. When submitting a request for
purchase, the requisitioner must indicate that the item or service is a sole
source purchase. This should be noted on the special instructions field when
entering the requisition. The controller will then issue a purchase order to
the vendor.



         (d)   Sole sources purchases in excess of $10,000 shall
be presented to the City Council prior to acquisition with a request to waive
bids, approve the purchase and enter into a formal contract.



      (4)   Emergency purchases policy.



         (a)   EMERGENCIES are defined as events that could not
have been foreseen where immediate action is necessary to safeguard the
public’s health and safety. In the event of an emergency affecting the
public health and safety, the department head or his or her designee may
authorize a vendor to perform work necessary to resolve the emergency without
formal bid solicitation.



         (b)   A department head may authorize a vendor to
perform any and all work necessary only if the public health and safety could
be affected.



         (c)   After the emergency has been resolved, the
department shall enter a requisition in the purchase order module for the
goods or services purchased.



         (d)   Using the requisition special instructions field,
the department shall indicate that it was an emergency and forward an
explanation to the purchasing agent.



         (e)   The controller will then issue an emergency
purchase order to the vendor.



      (5)   Waiving of bids. When appropriate, the City Council may
waive the bidding procedure and authorize a purchase by a vote of two-thirds
of all aldermen.



   (D)   Competitive bidding and requests for professional services.



      (1)   When a formal bid is required.



         (a)   All purchases of goods or services exceeding
$20,000 shall be purchased by sealed bids, formal bidding procedures and from
the lowest responsive bidder after an adequate period of public notice.



         (b)   Public notice shall be published in at least one
newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least 14 days prior to bid
closing.



         (c)   The newspaper notice shall include, at a minimum,
a brief description of the item to be purchased or sold, where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured, the time and place for bid opening and a
rejection rights clause.



      (2)   Bid opening procedures. All sealed bids shall be
publicly opened by an employee as assigned by the applicable department head
at the time stated in the legal notice. The purchasing agent or his or her
designee shall be present at the bid opening as well as at least one other
employee to serve as a witness and tabulate the bid results.



      (3)   Bid lists.



         (a)   Each department shall be responsible in
maintaining their own lists of prospective bidders.



         (b)   Requests to be placed on the bid list received by
City Administrator or controller shall be forwarded to the appropriate
department head.



         (c)   Departments shall be responsible for maintaining
current lists of bidders and for determining prospective bidder’s
qualifications.



      (4)   Requests for professional services.



         (a)   Some contracts, by their nature, are not adapted
to award by competitive bidding. Examples include, but are not limited to,
contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of
professional skill where the education, experience or character of the
individual is a significant factor in determining their ability to meet the
city’s needs.



         (b)   These contracts generally result from a request
for proposal (RFP) solicited from consultants for “professional services.”



         (c)   The city is required by the Local Government
Professional Services Selection Act to follow specific procedures when hiring
an architect, engineer or land surveyor. The procedures must be followed,
unless:



            1.   The city has a satisfactory relationship for
services with one or more firms;



            2.   An emergency situation exists and an
architect, engineer or land surveyor must be selected in an expeditious
manner; or



            3.   When the cost of those services is expected
to be less than $25,000. If none of these conditions apply, the city must
solicit proposals.



   (E)   Minimum requirements for certain bidders on city contracts.



      (1)   Prior to the award of any contract for the purchase of
any work for the City of Oak Forest, any successful bidder shall produce each
of the following:



         (a)   Federal employee tax number if an entity other
than an individual or social security number if an individual;



         (b)   Proof of compliance with provisions of 
Subchapter VI of Chapter 21, Title 42 of the United States Code and Federal
Executive Order No. 11246 as amended by Executive Order No. 11375 (known as
Equal Opportunity Employer provisions);



         (c)   Certificates of insurance indicating the following
coverages: general liability workers’ compensation, complete operations,
automobile, hazardous occupation, product liability and professional
liability as may be necessary for the project and in the amounts as described
in the bid specifications;



         (d)   Proof of compliance with all provisions of the
Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, including wages, medical and hospitalization
insurance and retirement for all those trades covered in the Act.



      (2)   Failure to produce these items within five business days
of the date of written request by the city shall result in the bidder’s
disqualification. For purposes of this division (E), WORK shall mean any
repair, construction, installation or labor provided in furtherance of any
repair, construction or installation.



(2000 Code, § 2.28.020)  (Ord. 2659, passed 10-8-2002; Ord. 2931, §§ 2, 3
(Exh. A), passed - -2005; Ord. 2014-05-0495O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 33.102  JOINT PURCHASING AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The city shall share in centralized procurement through joint
purchasing with the state, as revised on July 1, 1972.



   (B)   The city is authorized to enter into agreements for joint
purchasing authorized units of government under the law, including the city
of Chicago, Cook County and other municipalities in the Northwest Municipal
Conference and the South Suburban Mayors’ and Managers’ Association.



(2000 Code, § 2.28.030)



§ 33.103  DOCUMENTATION OF EXPENSES.



   (A)   No expenditure of city funds shall be submitted to Council or
approved by Council, particularly for the purpose of reimbursement of
expenses of elected officials of the city, unless evidence is presented to
Council as to the following:



      (1)   The amount of the expenditure involved;



      (2)   To what business establishment, individual or other
person the expenditure was committed and is to be paid;



      (3)   When the expenditure was committed;



      (4)   The purpose or the interest of the city for which the
expenditure was committed; and



      (5)   In the case of expenditures to be assigned against
expense accounts of elected or appointed officials, those involved in the
expenditure and for whom the expenditure was committed.



   (B)   Should an item of expenditure be placed before Council for
approval without the evidence required in division (A) above available to
members of Council for inspection prior to the vote of approval, any vote of
approval on an overall list that includes such an item shall be presumed not
to include approval of an item. Without the above substantiation, items will
not be considered to be approved.



   (C)   Where evidence of an expenditure is a receipt from the use of
a credit card such as American Express, Master Card, Visa or the like, only
the original receipt of an expenditure will be acceptable evidence to the
city of the expenditure; an electrostatic (i.e., Xerox and the like) copy of
the receipt will not be acceptable evidence of the expenditure. An
expenditure that is not supported by original evidence, as set forth herein,
will not be approved regardless of a general vote of Council on an overall
list that might include an inadequately supported claim for expenditure
remuneration.



   (D)   The intention of this subchapter is to seek the greatest
possible confirmation of the most efficient use of city funds. Wherever there
is a doubt, the doubt is to be resolved in favor of the proposition that the
most efficient use of city funds has not been achieved. In that case, the
expenditure will be presumed not to be most efficient and approval of Council
will be presumed not to have been given.



(2000 Code, § 2.28.040)



§ 33.104  RECYCLED PRODUCT PROCUREMENT POLICY.



   It shall be the policy of the city to encourage the procurement of
recycled products by showing a preference for recycled products which
demonstrate the same fitness and quality at a price less than, equal to or up
to 10% more than nonrecycled products, and to adhere to the following
guidelines.



   (A)   All departments involved in procurement shall conduct a review
of existing product and service specifications to determine whether existing
specifications either require the use of products manufactured from virgin
materials or exclude the use of recycled products, reusable products or
products designed to be recycled.



   (B)   In the event that  specifications exclude the use of recycled
products or require the use of virgin materials, then those exclusions or
requirements shall be eliminated unless demonstrated, to the satisfaction of
the department head, that recycled products would not achieve a necessary
performance standard. A copy of the findings shall be submitted to the City
Administrator.



   (C)   All city departments shall recommend changes to the City
Administrator to ensure that performance standards for particular products
can be met, that specifications are not overlay stringent and that
specifications will incorporate requirements for the use of recycled
materials, reusable products and products designed to be recycled, to the
maximum extent possible.



   (D)   Outside contractors bidding to provide products or services to
the city, including printing services, must demonstrate that they will comply
with the specifications described herein to the greatest extent feasible.



   (E)   When recycled products are used, reasonable efforts shall be
undertaken to label the products to indicate that they contain recycled
materials. Other recycled products used by the city shall, to the extent
practical, also indicate that they contain recycled materials.



   (F)   The city shall cooperate to the greatest extent feasible with
the South Suburban Mayors and Managers Association and neighboring city and
county governments in an effort to develop a comprehensive, consistent and
effective procurement effort intended to stimulate the market for recycled
products, reusable products and products designed to be recycled.



   (G)   All related city departments and commissions shall work
cooperatively to further the purposes of this policy. The city’s economic
development process shall incorporate the goal of stimulating the market for
recycled materials.



(2000 Code, § 2.28.050)  (Ord. 2007-04-0097O, passed 5-8-2007)




ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS




§ 33.115  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.  Any land, interest in land, building,
structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance,
machinery or equipment, or any combination thereof, and all real and personal
property deemed necessary in connection therewith, for use by any person,
provided that the existence of the economic development project will create
or retain employment opportunities in the municipality.



   POLLUTION.  Any form of environmental pollution, including, but not
limited to, water pollution, air pollution, land pollution, solid waste
pollution, thermal pollution, radiation contamination or noise pollution, as
determined by the various standards prescribed by the state, the federal
government or other governmental entities, and including, but not limited to,
anything which is considered as pollution or environmental damage in the
Environmental Protection Act, compiled as ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 through
51, and any amendment thereto and substitution therefor.



   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY.  Any land, interest in land, building,
structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, appurtenance, addition,
machinery or equipment, or any combination thereon and all real and personal
property deemed necessary in connection therewith, having to do with or the
end purpose of which is reducing, controlling or preventing pollution.



   PROJECT.  Any economic development project or pollution control
facility or any combination thereof.



   PROJECT COSTS.  Includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary
costs incidental to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction repair,
alteration, improvement and extension of a project, including, without
limitation, the cost of studies and surveys; plans, specifications and
architectural and engineering services; legal, marketing or other special
services; financing, acquisition, demolition construction, equipment and site
development of new and rehabilitated buildings; rehabilitation,
reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing buildings; and all other
necessary and incidental expenses, including an initial bond and interest
reserve, together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to a
date six months subsequent to the estimated date of completion.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.010)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed - -1999)



§ 33.116  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this subchapter are to provide a financing device which
will aid in financing projects in order to relieve conditions of
unemployment; to encourage the increase of industry within the municipality,
thereby reducing the evils attendant upon unemployment; to provide for the
increased welfare and prosperity of the residents of the municipality; and to
provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of pollution
control facilities in order to eliminate, abate or reduce serious dangers to
the public health and welfare caused by environmental pollution. Those
purposes are declared and determined to be public purposes and functions
pertaining to the government and affairs of the municipality.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.020)



§ 33.117  POWERS OF CITY.



   (A)   In addition to powers which it may now have, the municipality
shall have the power, under this subchapter, to:



      (1)   Construct, acquire by gift, purchase or lease,
reconstruct, improve, better or extend and finance one or more projects,
whether or not now or hereafter in existence, within or without the
municipality or partially within or partially without the municipality, but
in no event further than ten miles from the territorial boundaries of the
municipality, and, if desirable, acquire by gift, purchase or lease lands or
rights in land in connection with any project;



      (2)   Issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part
the project costs of any project and designate an appropriate name for the
bonds;



      (3)   Rent, lease or sell any project to any person in a
manner that payments to be received with respect to the project shall produce
revenues and receipts sufficient to provide for the prompt payment at
maturity of principal, interest and redemption premiums, if any, upon all
bonds issued to finance the cost of the project;



      (4)   Pledge to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under
this subchapter, the interest thereon, and the redemption premiums, if any,
the revenues and receipts to be received from the project;



      (5)   Mortgage the project in favor of holders of bonds issued
therefor;



      (6)   Sell and convey the project, including, without
limitation, the sale and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage, if any, as
provided in this subchapter, for a price as Council may determine. However,
no sale or conveyance of the project shall ever be made in a manner as to
impair the rights or interests of the holders of bonds issued to finance the
project costs of the project;



      (7)   Issue its bonds to refund, in whole or in part, bonds
theretofore issued by the municipality under authority of this subchapter; and



      (8)   Enter into a loan agreement in lieu of any lease
agreement with any person and accept a note and/or a mortgage as evidence of
any security for the person’s obligation to repay the proceeds of revenue
bonds, and pledge the note and/or mortgage for the benefit of the holders of
bonds.



   (B)   Property acquired by the municipality pursuant to this
subchapter shall be exempt from the imposition and collection of taxes
thereon while owned by the municipality, but the use of the property is
subject to taxation to be paid by the lessee or occupant as provided in § 26
of the Revenue Act of 1939, filed May 17, 1939, as amended.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.030)



§ 33.118  EXERCISE OF POWERS; TERMS OF BONDS SET BY ORDINANCE.



   (A)   The exercise of all powers granted by this subchapter may be
authorized, and bonds may be authorized to be issued under this subchapter
for the purposes set forth in this subchapter, by an ordinance of Council,
which may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced and which
shall take effect immediately upon adoption.



   (B)   The bonds shall bear interest at a rate, shall be payable at a
time, may be in one or more series, may bear a date, may mature at a time not
exceeding 40 years from their respective dates, may be payable in a medium of
payment at a place, may carry registration privileges, may be subject to
terms of redemption at such premiums, may be executed in such a manner, may
contain terms, covenants and conditions, and may be in such a form, either
coupon or registered, as the ordinance may provide, or as may be subsequently
determined by Council before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at a
public or private sale in a manner and upon terms as may be deemed advisable
by Council. Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts
or certificates in a form and with provisions as Council may determine may be
issued to the purchaser of bonds sold pursuant to this subchapter. The bonds
and interim receipts or certificates shall be deemed to be securities and
negotiable instruments within the meaning and for all purposes of the Uniform
Commercial Code.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.040)



§ 33.119  COVENANTS IN BONDS.



   (A)   Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this
subchapter may contain covenants from the project for which the bonds are to
be issued, including:



      (1)   The creation and maintenance of reserves;



      (2)   The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to
the project or any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations, enlargements or
additions thereto;



      (3)   The maintenance and repair of the project;



      (4)   The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and
disposition of insurance moneys;



      (5)   The appointment of any bank or trust company within or
outside the state, having the necessary trust powers as trustee for the
benefit of the bondholders, paying agent and bond registrar;



      (6)   The investment of funds held by the trustee; and



      (7)   The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the
bonds or any portion thereof or any trustees therefor are entitled to the
appointment of a receiver.



   (B)   Any ordinance may provide that the principal of and interest
on the bonds shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust covering
the project for which the bonds are issued, and may include any improvement
or extension thereafter made. The mortgage or indenture of trust may contain
the covenants and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds and shall
continue in effect until the principal of, the interest on and the redemption
premiums, if any, on the bonds so issued have been fully paid. The duties of
the municipality and its corporate authorities and officers under this
subchapter and any ordinance, mortgage or indenture of trust shall be
enforceable by any bondholder by mandamus, foreclosure of any mortgage or
indenture of trust or other appropriate suit, action or proceeding in any
court of competent jurisdiction, provided that the ordinance, mortgage or
indenture of trust may provide that all remedies and rights to enforcement
may be vested in a trustee for the benefit of all the bondholders, which
trustee shall be subject to the control of a majority of the holders or
owners of any outstanding bonds.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.050)



§ 33.120  SIGNATURES ON BONDS; VALIDITY.



   The bonds shall bear the signatures of the officers of the municipality
as may be designated in the ordinance authorizing the bonds, and the
signatures shall be the valid and binding signatures of the officers,
notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payments therefor, any
or all of the persons whose signatures may appear thereon have ceased to be
officers of the municipality issuing the bonds. The validity of the bonds is
not dependent on nor affected by the validity or regularity of any proceeding
relating to the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction,
improvement, equipping, betterment or extension of the project for which the
bonds are issued. The ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide that the
bonds shall contain a recital which shall be conclusive evidence of their
validity and of the regularity of their issuance.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.060)



§ 33.121  LIENS ON BOND REVENUES AND RECEIPTS.



   All bonds issued under this subchapter have a lien upon the revenues
and receipts derived from the project for which the bonds have been issued,
and Council may provide in the ordinance authorizing the bonds for the
issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon
the revenues and receipts or may provide that the lien upon the revenues and
receipts is subordinate.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.070)



§ 33.122  LIABILITY FOR BONDS.



   (A)   All bonds issued under this subchapter shall be limited
obligations of the municipality payable solely out of the revenues and
receipts derived from the project with respect to which the bonds are issued.



   (B)   No holder of the bonds has the right to compel any exercise of
taxing power of the municipality to pay the bonds or the interest or premium,
if any, thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an indebtedness of the
municipality or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutory provision.



   (C)   It shall be plainly stated on the face of each bond that it
has been issued under the provisions of this subchapter and that it does not
constitute an indebtedness of the municipality or a loan of credit thereof
within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.080)



§ 33.123  INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS.



   The municipality or any trustee on behalf of the municipality may
invest any funds held by it pursuant to this subchapter in bonds, notes,
certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or other securities constituting
direct obligations of the United States of America; in certificates of
deposit or time deposits constituting direct obligations of any bank as
defined by the Illinois Banking Act, as amended, provided that investments
may be made only in those certificates of deposit or time deposits in banks
which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or its
successor; or in short-term discount obligations of the Federal National
Mortgage Association. Any securities may be purchased at the offering or
market price thereof at the time of such purpose.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.090)



§ 33.124  EXEMPTION FROM CONSTRUCTION AND BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC
BUILDINGS.



   The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to
any requirement relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or
improvements proposed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes or any other similar
requirement which may be lawfully waived by this section. Any requirement of
competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for awarding
contracts for such purpose or for the lease or other disposition of property
of the municipality is not applicable to any action taken under this
subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.100)



§ 33.125  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   (A)   The powers conferred by this subchapter are in addition to and
supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this subchapter shall not
affect, the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance.



   (B)   Projects may be acquired, purchased, constructed,
reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped, extended and financed, and bonds
may be issued under this subchapter for such purposes, notwithstanding that
any other law or ordinance may provide for the acquisition, purchase,
construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, extension
and financing for a like project, or for the issuance of bonds for like
purposes, and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations
or other provisions contained in any other law or ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 3.12.110)




MORTGAGE CREDIT CERTIFICATE PROGRAM




§ 33.140  HOME RULE AUTHORITY.



   The municipality is a home rule unit under the provisions of the 1970
Constitution of Illinois, and as a home rule unit may, under the powers
granted by § 6(a) of Article VII thereof, “exercise any power and perform
any function pertaining to its government and affairs,” and this subchapter
is adopted pursuant to the municipality’s home rule powers, any provisions
contained in any other municipal ordinance or resolution or in Illinois law
to the contrary notwithstanding.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.010)



§ 33.141  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is found, determined and declared that the purpose of this
subchapter is to take steps designed to reduce the cost of financing for both
the acquisition of principal residence housing located in the municipality
and the rehabilitation and improvement of principal residence housing located
in the municipality in order to provide decent, safe and sanitary housing for
qualifying persons of moderate income.



   (B)   It is further found, determined and declared that the
principal residence ownership, rehabilitation and improvement will provide
for and promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare, maintain and
foster the increase of industrial and commercial activity and economic
development, and preserve and increase the ad valorem tax base of the
municipality and its environs. The foregoing are declared and determined to
be public purposes and functions pertaining to the government and affairs of
the municipality.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.020)



§ 33.142  DEFINITIONS.



   All words and phrases not otherwise defined in this subchapter shall
have the respective meanings set forth in the administration agreement
approved in this subchapter (as executed and as amended from time to time),
unless a different meaning clearly appears in the context.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.030)



§ 33.143  ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM.



   (A)   There is established and implemented a qualified mortgage
credit certificate program under § 25 of the Internal Revenue Code, as
amended (the “program”), for the purpose of issuing certificates. The
certificates shall be issued to borrowers in connection with the acquisition,
rehabilitation or improvement of the borrower’s principal residence within
the incorporated area of the municipality (the “program area”).



   (B)   The certificates shall carry a credit rate as shall be
provided in the administration agreement (as executed and as amended from
time to time), which credit rate shall be not less than 10% nor more than
50%, and an indebtedness amount specified in each certificate.



   (C)   The municipality elects not to issue the principal amount of
qualified mortgage bonds specified in the election referred to in § 33.148
below that are otherwise authorized to be issued by the municipality during
calendar year 1992 pursuant to §§ 103, 143(a) and 146 of the Internal
Revenue Code, as amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, in no
event, however, to exceed the principal amount of $1,323,032.



   (D)   The Program Administrator is authorized and directed, on
behalf of the municipality, to timely file all reports, annual and otherwise,
as are or may be required by § 25 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended,
and the regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (E)   The certificates authorized herein shall be provided in the
manner, in the amounts and in the time frames required by IRS Regulations §
125-4T(g) in connection with owner-financed target area residences, if any,
within the program area.



   (F)   The imposition of fees to fund the costs of the program is
authorized and directed as provided in the administration agreement. Those
fees shall be charged to each borrower and shall not exceed 2% of the
borrower’s indebtedness amount. The amount and type of the fees shall not
be unreasonable and shall include only those which are permissible under IRS
Regulations § 1.25-4T(h)(2).



(2000 Code, § 3.16.040)



§ 33.144  AGGREGATE LIMIT OF CERTIFICATES.



   The total proceeds of the certificates shall not exceed 25% of the
amount of nonissued qualified mortgage bonds as specified in § 33.143(C),
and the total proceeds shall be determined as provided in IRS Regulations §
1.25-5T(b).



(2000 Code, § 3.16.050)



§ 33.145  ADMINISTRATION AGREEMENT.



   (A)   For the purpose of administering the details of the program
and to provide for the issuance of the certificates, the form, terms and
provisions of the proposed administration agreement are in all respects
approved, and the Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized, empowered
and directed to execute and deliver the administration agreement in the name
of and on behalf of the municipality and thereupon to deliver the
administration agreement to the other parties thereto.



   (B)   The administration agreement is to be in substantially the
form before this meeting and approved, or with such changes therein as shall
be approved by the officials of the municipality executing the same, their
execution thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of their approval of any
and all changes or revisions therein from the form of administration
agreement before this meeting. From and after the execution and delivery of
the administration agreement, the officials, agents and employees of the
municipality are authorized, empowered and directed to do all acts and things
and to execute all documents as may be necessary to carry out and comply with
the provisions of the administration agreement as executed and as amended
from time to time.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.060)



§ 33.146  APPOINTMENT OF PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR; LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   George K. Baum and Company, a Missouri corporation, is
designated to serve in the capacity of the Program Administrator under and
pursuant to the terms of the administration agreement. The Program
Administrator shall evidence its acceptance of the rights, duties,
responsibilities and obligations as Program Administrator by its execution of
the administration agreement. Prior to the time that the administration
agreement has been executed by the parties thereto, the Program Administrator
designated is authorized and directed to take actions as it deems necessary
not inconsistent with this subchapter to establish the program.



   (B)   The Local Administrator shall be such entity which enters into
the administration agreement with the municipality and the Program
Administrator, as shall be approved by the officers of the municipality
executing the administration agreement. The execution of the administration
agreement by the officers of the municipality shall constitute conclusive
evidence of their approval of the Local Administrator.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.070)



§ 33.147  CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   For the purpose of lowering borrowing costs for borrowers
pursuant to the program, there is authorized to be issued and delivered,
pursuant to this subchapter and the administration agreement, certificates,
the total proceeds of which do not exceed 25% of the principal amount of
qualified mortgage bonds elected not to be issued pursuant to the election
described in § 33.148 below.



   (B)   The certificates shall be designated “City of Oak Forest,
Cook County, Illinois Single Family Mortgage Credit Certificates, Series
1992.”



   (C)   The certificates shall be issued and delivered by the Local
Administrator under the supervision of the Program Administrator as set forth
in the administration agreement.



   (D)   The certificates shall be executed by the manual or facsimile
signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk of the municipality, and the seal
of the municipality or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed thereto or
printed thereon.



   (E)   At the time each certificate is issued, it shall be
countersigned by the manual signature of the Local Administrator or as
otherwise provided in the administration agreement.



   (F)   The form of the certificates shall be that prescribed by the
Internal Revenue Service.



   (G)   If no form is prescribed or if the form is not readily
available, the certificates shall be issued in the form prepared by the
Program Administrator in accordance with the provisions of the administration
agreement.



   (H)   The certificates shall contain the information required by IRS
Regulations § 1.256T(b) and other information as the Program Administrator
in its discretion may deem necessary.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.080)



§ 33.148  MORTGAGE CREDIT CERTIFICATE ELECTION.



   (A)   The mortgage credit certificate election (the “election”),
whereby the municipality elects not to issue qualified mortgage bonds in the
amount set forth therein in order to establish the mortgage credit
certificate program, the total proceeds of which shall not exceed 25% of the
nonissued amount set forth in the election, is approved in all respects.



   (B)   The amount of qualified mortgage bonds elected not to be
issued shall be $1,323,032, or such lesser amount as is set forth in the
election as executed by the Mayor of the municipality, his or her execution
thereof to constitute conclusive evidence of his or her and the City
Council’s approval of the lesser amount.



   (C)   The Mayor of the municipality is authorized to execute,
deliver and file the election on behalf of, and as the act and deed of, the
municipality, the election to be in substantially the form before this
meeting and approved, or with such changes therein as shall be approved by
the Mayor of the municipality, his or her execution thereof to constitute
conclusive evidence of his or her approval of any and all changes therein
from the form of the election before this meeting.



   (D)   The municipality reserves its right to revoke the election, in
whole or in part, during 1992, but the revocation shall be limited to that
portion of its allocation not theretofore used to issue certificates.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.090)



§ 33.149  PUBLIC NOTICE.



   Public notice of the eligibility requirements for the certificates and
the method of certificate issuance shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.100)



§ 33.150  VOLUME CAP.



   There is allocated to the qualified mortgage bonds, which the
municipality is electing not to issue pursuant to § 33.148 above, the entire
amount of the municipality’s “volume cap” as defined in § 146 of the
Internal Revenue Code, as amended, for calendar year 1992, the amount being
$1,323,032, or the lesser amount, if any, determined by the Mayor of the
municipality and specified in the election and the certificate of the Mayor
attached thereto.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.110)



§ 33.151  RATIFICATION.



   The actions of the officials of the municipality heretofore taken in
connection with the certificates and the program are ratified and confirmed.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.120)



§ 33.152  APPROVAL OF FURTHER ACTIONS.



   (A)   From and after the execution and delivery of the documents
approved, the proper officials, agents and employees of the municipality are
authorized, empowered and directed to do all acts and things and to execute
all documents as may be necessary to carry out and comply with the provisions
of the documents, as executed, and to further the purposes and intent of this
subchapter.



   (B)   All acts and doings of the officials of the municipality which
are in conformity with the purposes and intent of this subchapter, and in
furtherance of the issuance of the certificates and the establishment of the
program, are in all respects, approved and confirmed.



(2000 Code, § 3.16.130)




INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS




§ 33.165  GUIDELINES AND CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE.



   Council, as a general policy, will consider issuing industrial revenue
bonds to qualified businesses and industries upon the assurance that the
taxpayers are fully protected and the affirmation that the business and
industry will benefit the city. To ensure the carrying out of these general
policies, the following guidelines and criteria are established.



   (A)   Applications for industrial revenue bonds shall be made to the
Mayor. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee of $500 and supporting financial documents and information as are
necessary to make a complete and thorough analysis of the applicant.



      (1)   Information so supplied shall include, but not be
limited to:



         (a)   The amount of the proposed bond issue;



         (b)   The name of the purchaser of the bonds, if
available;



         (c)   The last five annual reports of the applicant,
duly certified;



         (d)   The latest preliminary financial status report of
the applicant’s current fiscal year;



         (e)   All items listed on the checklist set forth in §
33.166 below;



         (f)   The proposed use of the proceeds of sale of the
bonds; and



         (g)   A statement regarding the dependency of the
success of the project on industrial revenue bond financing and the reasons
for requesting the financing.



      (2)   Council, the Mayor and the Treasurer may request
additional information from the applicant.



   (B)   All fees, including printing, legal, fiscal, review and costs
of preparation of all ordinances, resolutions, agreements and other legal and
financial documents that are necessary to authorize and deliver the
industrial revenue bonds, shall be reimbursed to the city by the applicant,
but may be included as part of the bond project costs. If the bonds are not
sold, or at any time within ten days after delivery of a written request for
such action by the city, the applicant shall pay all costs and fees incurred
by the city to the date of the request.



   (C)   The applicant shall pay to the city a fee for the issuance of
the bonds in an amount of not less than $5,000. Council may establish a
higher fee based upon the amount of the bonds authorized to be issued. The
fee provided for in this division may be included as a cost of the project.



   (D)   The applicant shall contract for the sale of the bonds at
terms agreeable to the applicant and the purchaser of the bonds.



   (E)   The city may require the applicant to deposit cash with the
Treasurer, in an amount to be determined by the Treasurer, to ensure that all
of its costs subsequent to the issuance of the bonds will be reimbursed by
the applicant.



   (F)   Before the bonds will be authorized to be issued, the
applicant shall deliver to the Mayor the following:



      (1)   A statement from the City Engineer that the proposed
project is in compliance with the city's comprehensive plan, that the
business or industry will benefit the city and that it will not have any
adverse impact upon traffic or sewer or water facilities;



      (2)   A statement from the City Attorney that he or she has
reviewed all documents pertinent to the application and bond issue and that,
based upon the review, there is no reason to withhold approval of the
proposed issue; and



      (3)   A statement from the city’s financial consultant that
he or she has reviewed all documents pertinent to the application and bond
issue and that the applicant is financially sound and can reasonably be
expected to pay all principal and interest on the bonds when due.



   (G)   Council may require the applicant to appear before it to
explain the proposed project and to answer questions concerning it.



   (H)   The applicant shall enter into a written agreement with the
city in which, among other things, the applicant agrees to:



      (1)   Use all reasonable efforts to find one or more
purchasers for the bonds;



      (2)   Enter into a loan agreement with the city in which the
applicant obligates himself or herself to pay, on behalf of the city, all of
the principal and interest on the bonds when due;



      (3)   Pay the city the fee for issuing the bonds; and



      (4)   Reimburse the city for all fees charged to it and for
all expenses incurred by it in connection with the issue.



   (I)   Upon the receipt of all information required in the
application and the execution of the agreement provided for in division
(H)(2) of this section, Council shall consider authorizing the issuance of
the bonds and, if it decides to do so, shall adopt a resolution inducing the
applicant to proceed with the project.



(2000 Code, § 3.20.010)



§ 33.166  CHECKLIST.



   Following is a checklist for application to the city to authorize the
issuance of industrial revenue bonds.



   (A)   Guidelines and criteria.



      (1)   Nonrefundable fee of $500.



      (2)   Project information:



         (a)   Description of the project;



         (b)   Amount of proposed bond issue;



         (c)   Proposed purchase of the bonds;



         (d)   Description of the legal status of the applicant;



         (e)   If not a public corporation, the names and
interest of any owner of more than 10% of the company; and



         (f)   Statement regarding:



            1.   Dependency of success upon IRB financing; and



            2.   Reasons for requesting IRB financing.



      (3)   Agreement to pay the city’s fee for issuing the bonds
and to reimburse the city for all fees charged to it and all expenses
incurred by it in connection with the authorization and issuance of the bonds.



      (4)   Contract for the sale of the bonds.



      (5)   Agreement to post cash security in an amount to be
determined by the Treasurer if, in the opinion of the Treasurer, the security
is required to ensure that all the expenses incurred by the city subsequent
to the issuance of the bonds will be paid to the city.



      (6)   Statements from:



         (a)   City Engineer;



         (b)   City Attorney; and



         (c)   City’s financial consultant.



   (B)   Nature of business.



      (1)   Economic.



         (a)   Financial stability:



            1.   Prospectus;



            2.   Reports to stockholders;



            3.   Certified audits for last five years; and



            4.   Evidence of contract with prospective tenants.



         (b)   Type of product;



         (c)   Number of employees at new plant;



         (d)   Number of employees expected to reside in city;



         (e)   Number of new jobs created;



         (f)   Types of skills required by plant’s employees;



         (g)   Average annual payroll; and



         (h)   Projected assessed valuation of the project.



      (2)   Environmental.



         (a)   Size of the plant in square feet;



         (b)   Amount of land required;



         (c)   Proximity to residential areas, schools and parks;



         (d)   Type of effluent;



         (e)   Toxic substances, odor, glare, noise;



         (f)   Physical appearance of the buildings;



         (g)   Estimated number of vehicles entering the plant
area per day; and



         (h)   Drainage and storm sewer requirements.



      (3)   Community services.



         (a)   Traffic and safety requirements; 



         (b)   Utility requirements:



            1.   Gallons of water used per day;



            2.   Fire protection requirements;



            3.   Sewerage requirements:



               a.   Amount; and



               b.   Type and BOD level.



            4.   Projected electricity and gas usage;



            5.   Need for water main and sewerage line
extensions; and



            6.   Provisions for future connections to water
and sewer lines.



         (c)   Ability of the schools to accommodate possible
enrollment increases.



      (4)   Civic awareness.



         (a)   Evidence of industry’s past civic activity; and



         (b)   Responsiveness of industry to community requests.



(2000 Code, § 3.20.020)




MISCELLANEOUS FISCAL PROVISIONS




§ 33.180  PREVAILING WAGE RATE.



   (A)   (1)   To the extent and as required by The Prevailing Wage
Act,  approved June 26, 1941, as amended, being ILCS Ch. 820, Act 130, §§
0.01 - 12, the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for
laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in construction of public works
coming under the jurisdiction of the city is ascertained to be the same as
the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in Cook County as
determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June 1,
2008, a copy of that determination being attached to original Ordinance
2008-06-0188O, passed June 10, 2008, and incorporated by reference.



      (2)   As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the
prevailing rate of wages by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois
shall supersede the department’s June determination and apply to any and
all public works undertaken by the city.



      (3)   The definition of any terms appearing in this section
which are also used in the aforesaid Act shall be the same as in the Act.



   (B)   Nothing in this section contained shall be construed to apply
to the general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment performed on behalf of the city except public works construction
to the extent required by the aforesaid Act.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for
inspection by any interested party in the main office of the city this
determination of the prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or
of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in
effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.



   (D)   By July 15th, the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of
Ordinance 2008-06-0188O with the Secretary of State of Illinois in
Springfield and with the Illinois Department of Labor.



   (E)   Within 30 days after filing a certified copy of Ordinance
2008-06-0188O with the Secretary of State, the City Clerk shall cause to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the area a notice that
this determination is effective and constitutes the determination of this
public body.



   (F)   The City Clerk shall mail a copy of Ordinance 2008-06-0188O to
any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting
copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular
class of workers whose wages will be affected by those rates.



(2000 Code, § 3.24.010) (Am. Ord. 2008-06-0188O, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 33.181  RETURNED CHECKS FEE.



   (A)   If any check is issued to the city and is later returned to
the city from a bank or other financial institution and marked
“nonsufficient funds,” “NSF” or the like, the drawer of the check
shall be charged an additional administrative fee of $25.



   (B)   If a check is returned to the city from a bank or other
financial institution, the city may, at its option, either redeposit the
check and bill the drawer thereof $10 by mail, or notify the drawer by mail
that the $10 charge and the amount of the original check are payable to the
city, in cash, within five business days.



(2000 Code, § 3.24.020)



§ 33.182  CHARGE FOR DWELLING UNITS; FIRE PROTECTION FUND.



   (A)   As used in this section, DWELLING UNIT means a single unit
providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation. DWELLING UNIT expressly includes any residential unit and a unit
of a multifamily dwelling.



   (B)   Any person constructing a dwelling unit within the city shall
be charged at the rate of $100 for each dwelling unit to be constructed. The
payment shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit.



   (C)   All moneys received shall be held in a separate fund to be
known as the fire protection fund and shall be earmarked and expended for a
fire protection program.



(2000 Code, § 3.24.030)



§ 33.183  AMBULANCE SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   All persons, corporations, partnerships, businesses or other
entities shall be charged for emergency ambulance service for basic life
support services requiring the services of an emergency medical technician
and for advanced life support services requiring the services of a paramedic.



   (B)   Charges may also be levied to reimburse the city when
extraordinary expenses for material used in rendering the emergency medical
services are incurred. In no event shall the charges exceed the reasonable
cost of services rendered.



(2000 Code, § 3.24.040)  (Ord. 2371, § 1, passed - -1999)



§ 33.184  EMERGENCY SERVICE CHARGES.



   The charges for basic life support services, services of emergency
technicians, advance life support services or other fees shall be set in
amounts and at rates set and approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 2371 § 2, 1999)



§ 33.185  PAID SICK LEAVE; MINIMUM WAGE - EMPLOYERS.



   (A)   Employers shall comply with all federal and state employment
laws and guidelines with regard to paid sick leave and the payment of minimum
wage. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and payment of minimum wage
shall be pursuant to all federal and state employment laws and guidelines.



   (B)   No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or
payment of minimum wage, including, without limitation, any additional
obligations adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply
within the city for employers and the city opts out of any such regulations
or requirements, except those required by federal and state law or the City
of Oak Forest.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      EMPLOYEE. An individual permitted to work by an employer
regardless of the number of persons the employer employs or the number or
hours worked.



      EMPLOYER. 



         (a)   Any person employing one or more employees or
seeking to employ one or more employees, if the person has its principal
place of business within the city or does business within the city.



         (b)   EMPLOYER does not mean:



            1.   The government of the United States or a
corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;



            2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned
by an Indian tribe;



            3.   The government of the state or any agency or
department thereof; or



            4.   The government of any municipality.



(Ord. 2016-12-0628O, passed 12-13-2016)



§ 33.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
33.080 through 33.087 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in a manner consistent with §§ 33.001 through
33.018.



(Ord. 2006-12-0078O, passed 12-12-2006)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter



         50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         51.   WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



         52.   SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM



         53.   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS



         54.   GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Illinois Plumbing Code; requirements for installation of
backflow prevention device



   50.02   Prohibition on maintenance of and cross-connection between
city water system and private, auxiliary, or emergency water supplies



   50.03   Periodic surveys of connections with city water supply;
inspection of cross-connections



   50.04   Violations; termination of water service



   50.05   Responsibility to report backflow; liability



   50.06   Elimination of all nonconforming or illegal cross-connections



   50.07   Wells




Rules and Regulations for Cross-Connection Control




   50.20   Purpose



   50.21   Application



   50.22   Policy



   50.23   Definitions



   50.24   Water system



   50.25   Cross-connection prohibited



   50.26   Survey and investigations



   50.27   Where protection is required



   50.28   Type of protection required



   50.29   Backflow prevention devices



   50.30   Inspection and maintenance



   50.31   Booster pumps



   50.32   Effective date



   50.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE; REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW
PREVENTION DEVICE.



   (A)   All plumbing installed within the City of Oak Forest shall be
installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890.



   (B)   In accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the
judgment of the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system, the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, will give notice to the water customer to install an approved
backflow prevention device immediately at the customers sole cost and expense
and in conformity with all applicable state and city statutes, ordinances,
rules, and regulations.



   (C)   Upon installation, the Building Commissioner, or his or her
designee, shall inspect, test, and approve a backflow protection device
installed pursuant to division (B) above. The customer shall be responsible
for the cost of any inspection and test upon written demand of the city.
Copies of every test of devices shall be filed with the Community Development
Director.



   (D)   In accordance with the authority set forth in divisions (A),
(B) and (C) above, the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, shall have the right to enter any property and building at any
reasonable time to conduct any inspection or testing. Further, on demand of
the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, the owner, lessee
or occupant of a property shall furnish to the Community Development
Director, or his or her designee, any information that he or she may request
regarding the piping system or systems or water use on the property.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.02  PROHIBITION ON MAINTENANCE OF AND CROSS-CONNECTION BETWEEN CITY
WATER SYSTEM AND PRIVATE, AUXILIARY, OR EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLIES.



   No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall establish or permit
to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection
whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply cross-connects with
the city’s water supply or distribution system, unless the private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
the supply shall have been approved by the Community Development Director, or
his or her designee, and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.03  PERIODIC SURVEYS OF CONNECTIONS WITH CITY WATER SUPPLY; INSPECTION
OF CROSS-CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee,
shall survey and investigate all industrial, institutional, commercial, and
other properties served by the city’s water supply and distribution system
to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
exist. The surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record
and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as often as the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, deem necessary. Records of the
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five years.



   (B)   In accordance with the authority set forth in division (A)
above, the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall have
the right to enter any property and building at any reasonable time to verify
the presence or absence of cross-connections with the city’s water supply
or distribution system. Further, the Community Development Director, or his
or her designee, shall have the right to enter any property at any reasonable
time served by a connection to the city’s water supply or distribution
system for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding any required cross-connection control devices or provisions. On
demand of the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, the
owner, lessee or occupant of a property shall furnish to the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, any information that he or she
may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on the
property.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.04  VIOLATIONS; TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee,
shall be and is hereby authorized and directed to terminate, after reasonable
notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any
connection in violation of the provisions of this subchapter is known to
exist, and to take other precautionary measures as he or she may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
distribution mains. Water service to the property shall not be restored until
the conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and until the applicable reconnection fees paid
to the city.



   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, in
the event that the Community Development Director, or his or her designee,
determines, in his or her sole discretion, that an imminent danger exists to
the city’s water supply or distribution system, the Community Development
Director, or his or her designee, may verbally demand immediate disconnection
of any cross-connection. This action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of the disconnection.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.05  RESPONSIBILITY TO REPORT BACKFLOW; LIABILITY.



   Any person must immediately report a backflow into the city’s water
supply or distribution system upon becoming aware of the backflow. Any person
responsible for any substance that enters the potable water system through
backpressure or backsiphonage, or contamination through backflow shall be
solely responsible for the cost of cleaning and purifying the city water
supply and distribution system.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.06  ELIMINATION OF ALL NONCONFORMING OR ILLEGAL CROSS-CONNECTIONS.



   No later than January 1, 2008, all existing cross-connections to the
city’s water supply and distribution system shall, at the property
owner’s sole cost and expense, be eliminated or controlled in accordance
with the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.07  WELLS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to directly
or indirectly amend or repeal any section of the city’s Building Code
regarding the usage of wells.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)




RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL




§ 50.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:



   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination
or pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants
or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the
public water supply system;



   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing
cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s
potable water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety;
and



   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of
the public and consumer’s potable water systems.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.21  APPLICATION.



   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the
public potable water supply system of the City of Oak Forest.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.22  POLICY.



   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of
the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or
backsiphonage of contaminants through the customer’s water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the Community Development Director, or his
or her designee or his or her authorized representative, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, shall
give notice to the consumer to install an approved backflow prevention device
at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately
install an approved device or devices at his or her own expense; failure,
refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install the device or
devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service
to the premises until the device or devices have been installed. The consumer
shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as
required in § 50.26(D)(4) below for a period of at least five years. The
Community Development Director, or his or her designee, may require the
consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report to the City of Oak
Forest to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will
be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a
Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector certified by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, and be registered with the City of Oak
Forest as a contractor.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.23  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENCY.  The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   APPROVED.  Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the
Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water
Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the
National Sanitation Foundation, or listed in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890.



   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM.  Any water source or system on or available to
the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor’s public water supply system; or water from a source such as
wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may
be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.



   BACKFLOW.  The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  Any device, method, or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All
devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of
the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER.  The owner, official custodian or person in
control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.



   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM.  Any water system located on the
customer’s premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a
CUSTOMER’S WATER SYSTEM.



   CONTAMINATION.  An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance
of any substance to a degree that could create a health hazard.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.  Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping system, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.



      (1)   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection formed
when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe
substance.



      (2)   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection through
which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise
introduced into a safe potable water system.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A DOUBLE
CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of
the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each
check valve.



   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP.  The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of
the receptacle.



   HEALTH HAZARD.  Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and
well-being of consumers. The word “severe” as used to qualify HEALTH
HAZARD means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to
result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.



   INSPECTION.  A plumbing INSPECTION to examine carefully and critically
all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.



   NON-POTABLE WATER.  Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary
use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 601 et seq.



   PLUMBING.  The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a PLUMBING system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all
purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the
source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the
street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all
piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in
water supply systems. PLUMBING includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances,
and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related
ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons
live, work or assemble from the point of connection of the building drain to
the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the
foundation walls.



   POLLUTION.  The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.



   POTABLE WATER.  Water which meets the requirements of 35 III. Adm.
Code 601 et seq., for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.



   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION.  A fixture or appurtenance with threaded
hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.



   PROCESS FLUID(S).  Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into
the public or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:



      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;



      (2)   Process waters;



      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply
system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;



      (4)   Cooling waters;



      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from
wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;



      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;



      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous
fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.  All gins, pipes and structures through which
water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for
drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service
connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days per
year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a “community water supply” or a
“non-community water supply.”



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  A device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with
an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between
the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal
flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two
checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either
check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere,
shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than
the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.



   SERVICE CONNECTION.  The opening, including all fittings and
appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.



   SURVEY.  The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s
piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water
supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection
and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located
within that customer’s piping system. The SURVEY must be in written form,
and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.



   SYSTEM HAZARD.  A condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or a consumer’s potable water system.



   USED WATER.  Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection
and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.



   WATER PURVEYOR.  The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.24  WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts:
the public water supply system and the consumer’s water system.



   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those
facilities of the potable water system under the control of the Community
Development Director/Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, up to
the point where the consumer’s water system begins.



   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities
utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the
public water supply distribution system.



   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s
water system.



   (E)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water supply distribution system to points of use.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.25  CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure
proper operation on a continuing basis.



   (B)   (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the
potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.



      (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an
unsafe substance may enter a supply.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.26  SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable
times to the approved cross-connection control device inspector for the
inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the
consumer’s premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of
cross-connection control devices and assemblies within the consumer’s
premises.



   (B)   On request by the Community Development Director, or his or
her designee, or his or her authorized representative, the consumer shall
furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or water use
within the customer’s premises. The consumer’s premises shall be open at
all reasonable times to the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, for the verification of information submitted by the consumer to
the public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection survey or
inspection results.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to
arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to
determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or
her water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into
his or her or the public potable water system. All cross-connection control
or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with the
Illinois Plumbing License Law, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1).



   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent
backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:



      (1)   All cross-connections are removed or approved
cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and
back-siphonage.



      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.



      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at
the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the
Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection
of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. The CCCDI must register as a contractor with
the City of Oak Forest prior to performing inspections in the city.



      (4)   Testing and records.



         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer. A copy of every test and/or inspection shall be given to the
Community Development Director. Failure to have each device inspected and a
copy provided to the Community Development Director shall be subject to
penalties as set forth in this chapter.



         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water
supply shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 19.



         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the
date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.



            1.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and
include:



               a.   Date of each test;



               b.   Name and approval number of person
performing the test;



               c.   Test results;



               d.   Repairs or servicing required;



               e.   Repairs and date completed; and



               f.   Service performed and date completed.



            2.   A copy of the maintenance log shall be made
available to the Building Commission, for inspection, upon request.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.27  WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.



   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In
addition, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Community Development Director, or his or her designee,
actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.



   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the
following conditions exist:



      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the
auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, and the source is approved by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This
shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or
waters originating from the public water supply system, which are no longer
under the sanitary control of the Community Development Director, or his or
her designee.



      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the
judgment of the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, and
the Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector, are not correctable or
intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine
whether or not cross-connections exist.



      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.



      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections
being established or re-established.



   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Community
Development Director, or his or her designee, determines that no actual or
potential hazard to the public water supply system exist:



      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;



      (2)   Laboratories;



      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;



      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or
storm water pumping stations;



      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;



      (6)   Chemical plants;



      (7)   Metal plating industries;



      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;



      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear
reactors;



      (10)   Car washes;



      (11)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and
trucks;



      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks; and



      (13)   Hair styling salons which use process fluids.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.28  TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The type of protection required under § 50.27(A), (B), and
(C) shall depend on the degree of hazard, which exists as follows.



      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with
substances that could cause a severe (high) health hazard.



      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a
substance that could cause a system or (high) health hazard.



      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, or a double
check valve assembly, shall be installed where the public water supply system
may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health (low health hazard).



   (B)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is
used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public
water supply when:



      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire
retardant or other chemicals;



      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;



      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or
water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or



      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be
connected to the sprinkler system.



   (C)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water
supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service
lines and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.29  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.



   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these
rules and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American
Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or
American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation
Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specification, and
listed in the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.



   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions and 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802, and only as
specified by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the
University of Southern California or applicable industry specifications.
Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be
performed. Manufacturer’s maintenance manual shall be available on-site.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.30  INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to
have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in manufacturer’s instructions.



      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to
document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge
point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the
time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to
improper or bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.



      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and
tested at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required
service performed within 15 days.



      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices
shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more
frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed
within five days.



   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved
by the Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be
in writing.



   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of
repairs.



   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:



      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;



      (2)   Name and approval number of person  performing the test
or visual inspection;



      (3)   Test results;



      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;



      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and



      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.



   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these
regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at
the expense of the consumer without delay as required by division (A) above.



   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the Community Development Director, or his or her designee.



   (G)   Copies of the inspections and maintenance logs shall be
submitted to the Community Development Director on an annual basis or upon
request.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.31  BOOSTER PUMPS.



   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to
or within any premises, the pump shall be equipped with a low pressure
cut-off device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the
service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Community Development Director, or his or her designee, at least once a year
that the device is operable.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.32  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   These rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect from and
after upon their passage and publication.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The Community Development Director, or his or her designee,
shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof,
the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device
required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and
repaired in a manner acceptable to the Community Development Director, or his
or her designee, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has
been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.



   (B)   Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated the conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Community Development
Director, or his or her designee, and the required reconnection fee is paid.



   (C)   Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated the conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Utilities/Operations.



   (D)   Neither the Community Development Director, or his or her
designee, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the
City of Oak Forest for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result
from termination of the customer’s water supply in accordance with the
terms of this chapter, whether or not the termination of the water supply was
with or without notice.



   (E)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply stem.



   (F)   Any person found to be violating any provision of these rules
and regulations shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and provided a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease all violation(s).



   (G)   Any person who has knowledge of a backflow into any potable
water system or the public water system must report that backflow to the
Water Department immediately upon becoming aware of the backflow. Any person
violating any of the provisions of these rules and regulations, in addition
to the fine provided, shall become liable to City of Oak Forest for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of the violations, whether the
same was caused before or after notice.



   (H)   Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject
to penalties and fines set forth in § 10.99 of the Codified Ordinances of
the City of Oak Forest, as amended.



(Ord. 2007-03-0086O, passed 3-13-2007)



CHAPTER 51: WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



Section



   51.01   Registration fee for new users



   51.02   Meters



   51.03   Rates and charges



   51.04   Free service



   51.05   Billing and collection; duties of City Clerk



   51.06   Billing errors



   51.07   Effective date for rates and charges



   51.08   Basis for fresh water supply system charge



   51.09   Computation of fresh water supply system charge



   51.10   Liability for payment; surcharge for delinquency



   51.11   Tap-in or connection permits and fees



   51.12   Charge for water used during construction



   51.13   Shutting off and turning on service



   51.14   Fresh water supply system improvement and replacement account



   51.15   Records; annual audit report



   51.16   Maintenance responsibilities of city and property owners



   51.17   Wells



   51.18   Connection to fire hydrants



   51.19   Water shut-offs, Buffalo boxes and manholes



   51.20   Water conservation



   51.21   Inspection



   51.22   Powers and authority of inspectors



   51.23   Liens



   51.24   Foreclosure of liens



   51.25   Appeals



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  REGISTRATION FEE FOR NEW USERS.



   Every owner of property, occupant thereof and/or user of the services
of the water and/or sewerage system of the city, who is a new resident of the
city, shall pay $30 upon registering for permission to use the water and/or
sewerage system. This registration fee shall be applicable only once and
shall be nonrefundable. This registration fee shall be used to cover city
expenses involved in the operative and administrative work connected with the
water and sewer service.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.010)



§ 51.02  METERS.



   (A)   Required. All water sold or supplied by the city shall be
furnished through meters and shall be paid for at the meter rate now
established by the city or as may hereafter from time to time be established.
The owners of all property in the city in which water is used from the city
system of water mains shall have installed, as provided in this section, upon
their respective premises, a water meter of the kind designated in this
section. The meter shall be properly attached to a service pipe so as to
correctly measure all city water used on the premises.



   (B)   Tests. All meters so installed shall first be tested by a
proper officer of the city and a permit therefor shall be granted by the
Director of Public Works or another officer of the city authorized by the
Mayor and Council.



   (C)   Installation. All meters installed by the property owner or
occupant of the premises shall be placed by an employee of the Department of
Public Works or by a proper mechanic or plumber authorized by the Director.
The owner and occupant of the premises in which the meter is installed shall
be liable for the theft thereof, any breakage by freezing or otherwise or
damage to it in any manner. The owner shall replace or repair the same or any
part thereof within five days after notice by the Director or other officer
of the city, and on failure to comply with the notice, the water shall be
shut off.



   (D)   Price schedule. The fee for all meters sold by the city to
water consumers will be determined based on the actual price from the
city’s supplier, plus 25% for labor, delivery and installation.



   (E)   Placement; protection.



      (1)   Upon premises where there are well-protected basements,
meters shall be set in the basements as near as possible to where the service
pipe enters the basement. All meters on service pipes connected with premises
in which there are no basements or which are inaccessible shall be set in
meter boxes to be approved by the Director or some duly authorized officer
thereof. In no event shall a meter be placed in a crawl space or in any area
upon the premises which is inaccessible.



      (2)   The owner must provide protection for the meter against
freezing. If the meter freezes, the city will repair or replace it once at no
cost to the owner. If it freezes again, it will be replaced by the city or
repaired only at cost to the owner. Meters frozen a second time shall not be
considered an emergency.



   (F)   Repairs. The owner or occupant of any building or premises
where any meter connected with a service pipe of the water supply system of
the city is installed shall see that the meter is kept and remains free from
obstructions on or around the same and that it is conveniently accessible at
all reasonable times for the purpose of reading, inspecting or repairing the
same. The Director or other employee or agent of the city shall be permitted,
at all reasonable hours, to inspect or examine the meter for the purpose of
reading or repairing the same. The water shall be turned off from any service
pipe where the meter connected therewith is not kept free, accessible and
repaired as required in this section, and the same shall not be turned on
again until this section has been complied with and until the cost of turning
off and turning on the water has been paid.



   (G)   Unauthorized connections and disturbances. No person, unless
properly authorized by the city, shall connect, disconnect, remove, repair or
otherwise disturb any water meter. No person shall turn on the supply of
water to the service pipe from which the supply has been turned off by the
authority of the city on account of nonpayment of water charges or
noncompliance with this section without first obtaining from the Director or
some authorized officer of the city a permit to do so.



   (H)   Faulty meters.



      (1)   If a meter, for any cause, fails to register the
quantity of water passing through the same for any period, the amount charged
for water during that period shall be estimated by the Director or another
authorized officer of the city. The estimate shall be based on the average
amount registered during the two preceding like periods. The charge for
turning on or off the water in all cases for a violation of this section
shall be the same as is now prescribed for that service in other cases.



      (2)   (a)   If any consumer desires to have his or her
water meter tested, he or she shall deposit with the Department of Public
Works a fee as follows, and the Department shall thereupon have the meter
tested:



 

Meter Size (Inches)
 

Fee



3/4
 

$30



1 to 1-1/2
 

$50




 



         (b)   The fee for any other size meter will be
determined based on the actual cost to the city, including labor and burden.



      (3)   A water meter shall be considered accurate if, when
subjected by the Department to a standard test, its register indicates not to
exceed 2% more or 2% less than the actual quantity of water passing through
it. If its register exceeds 2% more than the actual quantity of water passing
through it, it shall be considered fast to that extent. If its register
exceeds 2% less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it
shall be considered slow to that extent.



      (4)   If a meter is tested at the request of the consumer and
determined to register fast, the Department shall credit the consumer with a
sum equal to the percent by which it is fast multiplied by the amount of all
bills incurred by the consumer within the three months prior to the test. If
the meter is determined to register slow, the Department shall collect from
the consumer a sum equal to the percent by which it is slow multiplied by the
amount of all the bills incurred by the consumer for the three months prior
thereto.



      (5)   If the meters tested are found to be inaccurate as noted
above, the Department shall give credit on the next water bill or bills for
the amount deposited pursuant to division (H)(2) of this section, but if the
meters tested are found to be accurate, the fee shall be retained by the
Department to cover the expense of making the test.



   (I)   Types. The Buffalo meter of the American Meter Control Company
or any other water meter constructed upon like principles and of equal merit
is adopted and approved for exclusive use in the city, provided, however,
that every other meter which may be installed shall first be approved by the
Director before it is installed.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.020)  (Ord. 2006-06-0037O, passed 6-13-2006)



§ 51.03  RATES AND CHARGES.



   Each user of the city’s wastewater collection system shall be billed
on a quarterly basis for wastewater service in that quarter according to the
following rate schedule.



 


Rate/Effective Date

 

May 1, 2018



Per 1,000 gallons of metered water
 
$1.91



 



(2000 Code, § 13.04.030)  (Ord. 2007-04-0099O, § 3, passed 4-24-2007; Am.
Ord. 2008-04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0183O, passed
5-13-2008; Am. Ord. 2010-11-0314O, passed 11-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0474O,
§ 2, passed 12-10-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-12-0533O, passed 12-16-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-04-0640O, passed 4-25-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-04-0686O, passed 4-24-2018;
Am. Ord. 2018-04-0687O, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 51.04  FREE SERVICE.



   No free service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
city shall be furnished to any person, public or private. Every user of the
system shall have a metered water connection to the system and every water
meter shall be sealed.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.040)



§ 51.05  BILLING AND COLLECTION; DUTIES OF CITY CLERK.



   The City Clerk shall render bills for water service and all other
charges in connection therewith and shall collect all moneys due thereon.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.050)



§ 51.06  BILLING ERRORS.



   An error in water and/or sewer billing shall not constitute a waiver of
a claim for adjustment.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.060)



§ 51.07  EFFECTIVE DATE FOR RATES AND CHARGES.



   The rates and charges established in § 51.03 shall be effective May 1,
2018 and shall be reflected in each quarterly billing in a pro rata basis
until July 31, 2018 which time prorating is no longer necessary.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.070)  (Ord. 2007-04-0099O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord.
2008-04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0183O, passed 5-13-2008;
Am. Ord. 2010-11-0314O, passed 11-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0474O, § 3,
passed 12-10-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-12-0533O, passed 12-16-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-04-0640O, passed 4-25-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-04-0686O, passed 4-24-2018;
Am. Ord. 2018-04-0687O, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 51.08  BASIS FOR FRESH WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM CHARGE.



   (A)   The fresh water supply system (F.W.S.S.) charge shall consist
of a combination of a user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
and a debt service charge, and shall be determined periodically by Council.
The total of the user charge and debt service charge for the F.W.S.S. shall
be the rate set forth in § 51.03.



   (B)   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the
annual debt service of all outstanding loans, bonds and the like, by an
estimated annual water pumpage, to determine a charge per 1,000 gallons of
water.



   (C)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters. It shall consist of operation, maintenance and
replacement costs and shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to
operate and maintain the F.W.S.S., including a replacement fund for the year;
and



      (2)   Compute a user rate per 1,000 gallons of water by
dividing the amount of revenue and replacement fund required by the number of
thousands of gallons of billable flow estimated.



   (D)   The adequacy of the F.W.S.S. charge shall be reviewed annually
by certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit report.
The F.W.S.S. charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in the
debt service charge or a change in operation, maintenance and replacement
costs.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.080) (Am. Ord. 2008-04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord.
2008-05-0183O, passed 5-13-2008)



§ 51.09  COMPUTATION OF FRESH WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM CHARGE.



   The F.W.S.S. charge shall be computed by the following formula:



[CW=CB(V)+CD(V)]



where:



 

CW
 
=
 
fresh water supply system charge per billing period


CB
 
=
 
basic user charge (projected annual operation maintenance and replacement
costs/annual billable flow)


CD
 
=
 
debt service charge (annual debt service/annual billable flow)


V
 
=
 
volume of water used per billing period



 



(2000 Code, § 13.04.090)



§ 51.10  LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT; SURCHARGE FOR DELINQUENCY.



   (A)   The charge for F.W.S.S. service shall be payable quarterly.
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to the premises
and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the
condition that the owner, occupant and user are jointly and severally liable
therefor to the city.



   (B)   Bills for service shall be sent out by the city during the
quarter succeeding the period for which the service is billed. All water
bills are due and payable when sent out.



   (C)   All bills not paid within 30 days of the close of the billing
period shall have a surcharge of 5% added thereto.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.100)



§ 51.11  TAP-IN OR CONNECTION PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   Generally. No person shall tap into or otherwise make a
connection to the water mains of the city without first filing an application
therefor and obtaining a permit issued by the Director of Public Works. In
addition thereto, the written application shall be accompanied by the permit
and inspection fees provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this section.



   (B)   General permit and inspection fee.



      (1)   Each applicant for a permit provided for in division (A)
of this section shall pay a permit and inspection fee of $500 per residential
lot, residential unit in a multiple-unit structure, or commercial or
industrial unit in commercial or industrial property of less than 7,000
square feet. A fee of $1,000 per unit shall be charged for all units of 7,000
square feet or more.



      (2)   The sum of $200 from each $400 fee or $400 from each
$800 fee shall, upon receipt, be placed in a bond retirement fund account.
The funds shall be used to retire any existing water improvement bonds.
Thereafter, the funds shall be placed in an account as designated by the City
Treasurer.



   (C)   Additional permit and inspection fee.



      (1)   In addition to the tap-in fee requirement as provided in
division (B) of this section, each applicant to tap into or otherwise make
connection with the water mains of the city shall pay an additional permit
and inspection fee as herein provided: the sum of $2,000 per residential lot,
per residential unit in a multiple-unit structure, and per commercial or
industrial unit in commercial or industrial property of less than 7,000
square feet. A fee of $4,000 per unit shall be charged for all units of 7,000
square feet or more.



      (2)   Any and all planned unit developments approved by the
City Council prior to May 14, 1996, shall be allowed to pay the tap-in or
connection fees applicable on the date of their approval by the City Council.
Any and all closed business locations when reapplying for a connection or
tap-in fee will be allowed to reconnect or tap back in at the fee and charges
in effect immediately prior to May 14, 1996.



      (3)   (a)   The city shall place the funds received under
the terms of this division in a separate account entitled “170th Street
Water Development Fund.” The funds shall be used to repay the advance of
$450,000 as received by the city under agreement no. 1378. Payments shall be
made to the developer as designated under agreement no. 1378 or his or her
nominee, if written notice is received, on at least a quarterly basis. The
city shall not retain any fee for collecting and processing the payments.
Payment shall be made to the developer under the condition that there is full
compliance by the developer with the terms of agreement no. 1378.



         (b)   In the event the 16-inch water main is not
constructed, the developer shall not be entitled to any recapture.



         (c)   Upon repayment of the sum of $450,000 or as
otherwise provided in agreement no. 1378, the city shall have an exclusive
right to use the funds.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.110)



§ 51.12  CHARGE FOR WATER USED DURING CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   During construction of any building and before any water meter
is installed therein, the contractor so constructing the building may be
permitted to utilize the city water supply from whatever source is convenient
by making application therefor and paying to the city whatever fee is
prescribed by Council then in effect.



   (B)   There is established a charge of:



      (1)   Thirty dollars per single-family home;



      (2)   Thirty dollars per unit for a multi- family dwelling; and



      (3)   Fifty dollars for the first 4,000 square feet of floor
space, and $6 for each additional 1,000 square feet of floor space, up to a
maximum of $300, for nonresidential buildings, for the use of, and for the
service supplied by, the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city,
which charge shall be paid by any person at the time of application for a
building permit as compensation for water used from the municipal waterworks
system during the course of construction of any building or structure within
the city.



   (C)   There is hereby established a charge of $10.55 per 1,000
gallons, or a minimum charge of $105.50, for the use of and for the service
supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city, which
shall be paid by any person involved in the construction and paving of any
roadway within the city and requiring the use of water from the municipal
waterworks system during the course of such construction.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.120)  (Ord. 2007-04-0099O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord.
2008-04-0174O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0183O, passed 5-13-2008;
Am. Ord. 2013-12-0474O, § 4, passed 12-10-2013; Am. Ord. 2017-04-0640O,
passed 4-25-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-04-0686O, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 51.13  SHUTTING OFF AND TURNING ON SERVICE.



   (A)   Delinquency. A $60 service fee will be added to the water
account if payment is not received in the City Clerk's office by 9:00 a.m. of
the day when water service if to be shut off.



   (B)   Remodeling, expansion and the like. When an owner requests a
shut-off and/or turn-on of water service after regular working hours for a
nonemergency situation, i.e. remodeling, upgrading of plumbing, expansion and
the like, a fee of $30 will be charged for each shut-off and/or turn-on
request.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.140) (Am. Ord. 2011-04-0334O, passed 4-12-2011)



§ 51.14  FRESH WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT AND REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT.



   (A)   At least 5.9% of the revenues and moneys received for the
fresh water supply system charges shall be deposited quarterly and maintained
in a separate interest-bearing account entitled “Fresh Water Supply System
Improvement and Replacement Account.” (The percent shall be calculated as:
replacement cost divided by total operation, maintenance, replacement and
debt service cost.)



   (B)   Funds from the account shall be used only for nonroutine,
major, long-term improvement, repair, replacement or expansion of the
F.W.S.S. of the city. The use of the funds for the stated purposes shall be
considered first by the Board of Local Improvements on the basis of
information provided by the City Engineer and other sources. On the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board, a recommendation
to adopt a specific system project will be made to Council. Council will,
after holding a public hearing, vote on adopting or rejecting the project, or
referring it back to the Board.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.150)



§ 51.15  RECORDS; ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT.



   (A)   The city shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the F.W.S.S., and at regular
annual intervals it shall cause an audit of the books to be made by an
independent auditing concern to show the receipts and disbursements of the
F.W.S.S.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall reflect revenues and operating expenses of the F.W.S.S.,
including a replacement cost, to indicate that the water rates being charged
are adequate. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall also include the following:



      (1)   Total number of gallons billed;



      (2)   Debt service for the succeeding fiscal year;



      (3)   Total number of residential users; and



      (4)   Total number of nonresidential users.



   (C)   Access to records.  The Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the
city’s system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of
the special and general conditions to any state grant or state loan.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.160)  (Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009)



§ 51.16  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY AND PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   The city is responsible for the maintenance of all water
mains, hydrants, valves and meters in the public way up to and including the
B-box valve and/or meter vault.



   (B)   The owner is responsible for the maintenance of the service
line from the B-box valve or meter vault to the inside point of service. It
is the owner’s responsibility to repair any underground leak between these
two points, to keep this line from freezing and to pay for lost water.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.170)



§ 51.17  WELLS.



   (A)   No owner of residentially zoned property in the city shall
utilize a well for the purpose of acquiring water for human consumption or
for use within the owner’s residence or any other residence in the city.
However, any water well in existence on the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this section (Ordinance 745, passed December 17, 1973) may be
utilized for all normal uses including human consumption, until 24 months
after the city has constructed a water line in front of the owner’s
residence. The date of the construction shall be construed to be the date
when the City Manager advises the homeowner, in writing, that the water main
is ready for tap-on by the property owner.



   (B)   Each owner of property zoned residential with a residence
thereon shall tap-on to the water main of the city if the water main is
within 100 feet of the property. However, if the owner has an exclusion for
use purposes under division (A) of this section, the tap-on is not required
until the use is to cease under this section.



   (C)   After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section (Ordinance 745, passed December 17, 1973), no water well of any kind
shall be constructed in the city by an owner of property zoned residential. A
variation may be granted by Council for a situation in which it is not
feasible for a residential owner to wait for the construction of the water
main to his or her property. The property owner nevertheless is subject to
the other provisions of this section.



   (D)   Water wells for purposes of human consumption shall be
inspected within each six-month period beginning July 1, 1975. The owner of
each well must contact the City Health Department, in writing, for an
inspection. A test taken by the county’s Health Department supported by
that Department’s affidavit is in compliance with this section.



   (E)   An exemption from connecting to the city water main as per
division (B) of this section and from payment of a $25 inspection fee is
granted to a single-family residence owner of record who is owner as of the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (Ordinance 745,
passed December 17, 1973) if the owner is 65 years of age or older.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.180)



§ 51.18  CONNECTION TO FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   Permit required. No person shall make any connection to any
fire hydrant belonging to the city without first making written application
to the city and obtaining a permit authorizing the connection.



   (B)   Fee. A fee of $30 shall be paid by the applicant for the
connection.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.190)



§ 51.19  WATER SHUT-OFFS, BUFFALO BOXES AND MANHOLES.



   (A)   No water shut-off, Buffalo box or manhole shall be placed in
or under any driveway or sidewalk.



   (B)   If any water shut-off, Buffalo box or manhole is located or
placed under any driveway or sidewalk, the location shall be changed at the
sole expense of the person making the installation.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.200)



§ 51.20  WATER CONSERVATION.



   (A)   Declaration of water shortage by Mayor. The Mayor is
authorized to declare a water shortage emergency to exist within the city and
to immediately put into effect a water conservation plan aimed at conserving
the city’s water supply during the shortage.



   (B)   Water Conservation Plan. At such time as the Mayor declares
that a water shortage emergency exists, he or she shall promulgate rules and
regulations providing for prohibitions and restrictions on the use of water
in the city. The rules and regulations shall be effective until the water
shortage is declared by the Mayor to be at an end. The rules and regulations
shall be known as the water conservation plan for the city.



   (C)   Prohibited uses of water. The Mayor may either prohibit or
restrict the usage of water as follows:



      (1)   Residential external use of water for sprinkling, pools
and car washing;



      (2)   Commercial car wash establishments;



      (3)   Commercial laundries; and



      (4)   Industrial uses.



   (D)   Restrictions on lawn sprinkling and other water uses.



      (1)   Lawn sprinkling restrictions. The city purchases Lake
Michigan water from the Village of Oak Lawn, subject to the two tier
emergency restrictions set forth below, in order for the city to comply with
Illinois Department of Transportation’s “Rules and Regulations for the
Allocation of Water from Lake Michigan” dated January 1985, as amended
November 3, 1988. Commencing from May 15 through September 15 of each year,
it is unlawful for any person to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation
of lawns or gardens, except on an odd/even basis only (on odd calendar days
if the last digit in the street address is odd or on even calendar days if
the last digit in the street address is even) between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 11:00  a.m. or 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.



      (2)   Provider directed for emergency conditions.



         (a)   Under emergency conditions, as determined by the
Oak Lawn President or the Oak Lawn President and the board of trustees based
on the recommendation of Oak Lawn’s Director of Public Works relative to
the operational capacity of its water distribution system, the demands placed
on the system by the users and the possible risk of damage to or failure of
the system, it is unlawful for any person to use water for the sprinkling or
irrigation of lawns or gardens, except during the permitted days and hours
set forth below:



            1.   Tier I—Conservation Emergency. Sprinkling
or irrigation of lawns or gardens is permitted only on an odd/even basis
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.



            2.   Tier II—Total Ban. Sprinkling or irrigation
of lawns or gardens (manually or by an automatic lawn sprinkler or irrigation
system) is prohibited.



         (b)   The Village of Oak Lawn shall provide notice by
telephone, facsimile transmission, email, United States mail, messenger
delivery or personal service to the Mayor and the City Administrator,
whenever the Tier I or Tier II restrictions are in effect. The notice shall
specify the type of tier emergency restriction and the duration of the
restriction. Upon receipt of notice that an emergency restriction is in
effect, the city shall provide notice in accordance with this section to
limit or suspend the use of water within the city for the sprinkling or
irrigation of lawns and gardens or for any other special purpose(s) under
this code.



      (3)   Emergency lawn and outdoor use restrictions. The city
may further limit or suspend the use of water for the sprinkling or
irrigation of lawns and gardens, car washing, or for any other outdoor use
whenever it is determined that the public exigencies require such action.
Upon recommendation of the Director of Public Works and City Council, the
Mayor may order additional restrictions.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use water for the
sprinkling or irrigation of lawn and gardens, car washing, or for any other
outdoor use, other than during the times allowed for these uses(s) of water.
During the emergency use restriction, the city shall post the notice of the
water use restriction, including the type and duration of the restriction
within the customary posting place in the City Hall, on the city’s cable
access television channels, its web site and in any other medium normally
used by the city to communicate information of public concern to the
residents and public.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.210)



§ 51.21  INSPECTION.



   The city and its employees and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency shall have ready access at all reasonable times to the premises,
places or buildings where water service is supplied for the purpose of
inspecting, examining and testing the consumption, use and flow of water, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or obstruct
the city or it duly authorized agent or the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency in its duties hereunder.



(Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.22  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The city and other duly authorized employees of the proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Public
Works or his or her representative shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic,
paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in § 51.21 above, the Director of Public Works or duly
authorized employees of the city and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to
the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against
the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operating, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
conditions as required in § 51.21.



   (C)   The city and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the water
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009)



§ 51.23  LIENS.



   (A)   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for 105 days
after it has been rendered, the city shall file with the county’s Recorder
of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a
notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.



   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the city has notice of this, notice of delinquency and lien
filing shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his or her address is
known to the city, whenever a bill remains unpaid for 105 days after it has
been rendered.



   (C)   The failure of the city to record a lien or to make a notice,
or the failure of the owner to receive a notice, shall not affect the right
to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as set forth in § 51.24.



(Ord. 2013-02-0430O, § 2, passed 2-12-2013)



§ 51.24  FORECLOSURE OF LIENS.



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid water service charges shall be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of the statutory liens. The foreclosures shall be by
bill-in-equity in the name of the city. The City Attorney is authorized and
directed to institute the proceedings in the name of the city in any court
having jurisdiction over the matters against any property for which a bill
has remained unpaid for 105 days after it has been rendered.



(Ord. 2013-02-0430O, § 3, passed 2-12-2013)



§ 51.25  APPEALS.



   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within 30 days
of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method
used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the city within 30
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies.



(Ord. 2009-05-0240O, passed 5-26-2009)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.



   (B)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of § 51.20 shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.



(2000 Code, § 13.04.210)



CHAPTER 52: SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM



Section




General Provisions, Administration and Enforcement




   52.001   Purpose and intent



   52.002   Definitions



   52.003   Combined waterworks and sewerage system



   52.004   Use of public sewers required



   52.005   Private sewage disposal systems



   52.006   Sewerage fund



   52.007   Sewerage system improvement and replacement account



   52.008   Records; annual audit report



   52.009   Notice of rates and user charges



   52.010   Access to records



   52.011   Damage to sewage works prohibited



   52.012   Powers and authority of inspectors




Sewer Installation and Connection




   52.025   Permit required



   52.026   Sewer permit classes; fees



   52.027   Performance bond



   52.028   Transfer of title to city



   52.029   Liability for periodic sewer charge



   52.030   Changes in ownership of premises



   52.031   Maintenance and repair by city



   52.032   Reserve capacities of sewerage facilities



   52.033   Costs of installation; nonliability of city



   52.034   Separate sewers required



   52.035   Use of old sewers



   52.036   Sewer construction standards



   52.037   Building connection requirements generally



   52.038   Prohibited connections to sanitary sewers



   52.039   Sewer connection standards



   52.040   Inspection of connections



   52.041   Excavations



   52.042   Defective house connections



   52.043   Sewer repair/replacement reimbursement fund




User Rates and Charges




   52.055   Measurement of flow; meters



   52.056   Charges and rates



   52.057   Free service



   52.058   Billing and collection; duties of City Clerk



   52.059   Billing errors



   52.060   Effective date of rates



   52.061   Basis for wastewater service charges



   52.062   Computation of wastewater service charges



   52.063   Liability for payment; surcharge for delinquency



   52.064   Notice of delinquency; disconnection of service and fee for
reconnection



   52.065   Liens



   52.066   Foreclosure of liens



   52.067   Appeals




Discharges to Sewerage System




   52.080   Compliance with federal discharge standards



   52.081   Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewers



   52.082   Prohibited discharges to storm sewers



   52.083   Discharge of unpolluted waters



   52.084   General prohibited discharges



   52.085   Specific prohibited discharges



   52.086   Determination of acceptability of wastes



   52.087   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   52.088   Preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing facilities



   52.089   Control manholes



   52.090   Measurements, tests and analyses of industrial wastes



   52.091   Methods of testing and analysis



   52.092   Special agreements




Maintenance and Testing




   52.105   Preventive maintenance program for sewers



   52.106   Air testing of sanitary sewers



   52.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Discharging sludge into sewers prohibited, see § 110.082




GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 52.001  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the public sewer
system is maintained to properly serve the community while minimizing
pollution of air, land and watercourses.



   (B)   This chapter is intended to meet the current requirements of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency for federal grants for
construction of treatment works.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.010)



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The city.



   BASIC USER CHARGE.  The basic assessment levied on all users of the
wastewater collection system for the costs of operation, maintenance and
replacement.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters)
outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.



   COMMERCIAL USER.  A user of the wastewater collection system,
including transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places
engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior
drop. The purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access in order to
measure and/or sample discharges.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  The amount to be paid each billing period for
the payment of interest, principal and coverage of outstanding loans, bonds
and the like, which are applicable to the sanitary sewer system. This charge
shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users
connected to the wastewater collection system.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the state’s Environmental Protection
Agency.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   EFFLUENT CRITERIA.  Defined in the applicable NPDES permits.



   FEDERAL ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. §§
1251 et seq., as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. 92-500 and Pub. L. 93-243.



   FEDERAL GRANT.  U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II — Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and Implementing Regulations.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  A user of the wastewater collection system including
establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical
or chemical transformation of materials of substance into products.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to fox or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial
or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER.  A user of the wastewater collection
system including schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated
with federal, state and local governments.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY.  An industrial user of the wastewater
collection system that:



      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day;



      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the
wastewater collection system receiving the waste;



      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as
defined in standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act; or



      (4)   Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection
with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works
receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or
upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER.  A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000
milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analyses.



   MSDGC.  The Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   NPDES PERMIT.  Any permit or equivalent document or requirement issued
by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where
appropriated by the Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency,
after the enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of
1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the
Federal Act.



   PERSON.  Means any PERSON, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.



   pH.  The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.



   POPULATION EQUIVALENT.  A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream.



   PPM.  Parts per million by weight.



   PRETREATMENT.  The treatment of wastewater from a source before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
the city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries
that service one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city
sanitary sewerage system, even though the sewers may not have been
constructed with city funds.



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the wastewater collection system to maintain the capacity and performance for
which the system was designed and constructed.



   RESIDENTIAL USER.  A user of the wastewater collection system
including all dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments and
permanent multi-family dwellings.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial waste or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  May be used interchangeably with “wastewater.”



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquid, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.



   SEWERAGE FUND.  The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the wastewater collection system.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM.  The system of sewers and appurtenances for the
collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for
any period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration for flows during normal operation.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.



   STATE ACT.  The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.



   STATE GRANT.  The state participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois
Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making the grants as filed with the Secretary
of State of the state.



   STORM SEWER.  A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF.  The portion of precipitation that is drained into
sewers.



   SURCHARGE.  An assessment in addition to the basic user charge and
debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater
in strength than normal concentration values.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of or are
suspended in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the standard methods.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause a violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The period during which the wastewater collection system
will be operated.



   USER CLASS.  The type of user of the wastewater collection system;
either residential, commercial or industrial.



   WASTEWATER.  The spent water of a community. It may be a combination
of liquid- and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water and stormwater that may be present.



   WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM.  The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect and transport wastes to the interceptor sewers of the
Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.



   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.  The charge per billing period levied on
all users of the wastewater collection system. The service charge shall be
computed as outlined in § 52.062.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge.



   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS.  Defined in the water pollution regulations
of the state.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.020)



§ 52.003  COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   It is found, determined and declared necessary for the best
interest of the city that the waterworks system of the city and the sanitary
sewerage system of the city be combined into a single utility to be known and
designated as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city.



   (B)   All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising the
waterworks system and the sanitary sewerage system are found, determined and
declared to constitute the properties of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system.



   (C)   From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this section (Ordinance 171, passed March 16, 1960), the waterworks system
and the sanitary sewerage system shall be owned and operated by the city as a
combined utility, known as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
city, and all improvements and extensions to either the waterworks or
sewerage system shall be considered as improvements and extensions to the
combined utility. All properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of all
kinds of the waterworks system and of the sanitary sewerage system, existing,
outstanding and accruing or to accrue, shall be held, used, confessed and
acknowledged as properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of the
combined utility.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.030)



§ 52.004  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall place or deposit or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.



   (B)   No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other
polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with this chapter.



   (C)   Except as provided in § 52.005, no person shall construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (D)   The owner of a house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city
and abutting on any street alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city,
is required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with this chapter within 90 days after the date of official
notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the
property line.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.040)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.005  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under §
52.004(D), a building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with divisions (C) and (D) of this section.



   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall obtain a written permit signed by the city.
The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee
of $100 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.



   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
city. The Building Department representative shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within two working days of the receipt of written notice by the city.



   (D)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state’s
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and the State Environmental
Protection Agency and with the county’s Department of Health
specifications. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 40,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



   (E)   At times as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 52.004(D), a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
chapter and any septic tank, cesspool and similar private sewage disposal
facility shall be abandoned and filled with clean bank-run gravel.



   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the
city.



   (G)   No statement in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirement that may be imposed by the Health
Commissioner.



   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run
gravel or dirt.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.050)



§ 52.006  SEWERAGE FUND.



   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
wastewater collection system shall be deposited in sewerage accounts of the
Sewerage Fund. All the revenues and moneys shall be held by the city separate
and apart from private funds and from all other funds of the city. All of the
sum, without any deductions, shall be delivered to the city not more than ten
days after receipt of the same or at more frequent intervals as may, from
time to time, be directed by the Mayor and Council.



   (B)   The city shall receive all the revenues from the wastewater
collection system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of
the system as the same may be delivered to it and shall deposit the same in
the account of the fund designated as the Sewerage Fund of the city. The Fund
shall be administered in every respect in the manner provided by statute of
the Revised Cities and Villages Act, effective January, 1942, as amended.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.060)



§ 52.007  SEWERAGE SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT AND REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT.



   At least 20% of revenues and moneys received for the wastewater
collection system shall be deposited quarterly and maintained in a separate
interest-bearing sewerage account entitled the “sewerage system improvement
and replacement account” (replacement cost divided by total operation,
maintenance, replacement and debt service cost). Funds from the account shall
be used only for nonroutine, major, long-term improvement, repair,
replacement or expansion of the sanitary sewerage system of the city. The use
of the funds for a specific major improvement, repair, replacement or
expansion of the sewerage system shall be considered first by the Board of
Local Improvements on the basis of information provided by the City Engineer
and other sources. On the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of
the Board, a recommendation to adopt a specific sanitary sewerage system
project will be made to Council. Council will, after holding a public
hearing, vote on whether to adopt or deny the project or to refer the matter
back to the Board for further consideration.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.070)



§ 52.008  RECORDS; ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT.



   (A)   The city shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at
regular annual intervals it shall cause an audit of the books to be made by
an independent auditing concern to show the receipts and disbursements of the
wastewater collection system.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater collection system, including a replacement cost, to indicate that
sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system do, in fact, meet
these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in
the audit report shall also include the following:



      (1)   Billing data to show the total number of gallons billed;



      (2)   The debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;



      (3)   The number of users connected to the system; and



      (4)   The number of nonmetered users.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.080)



§ 52.009  NOTICE OF RATES AND USER CHARGES.



   (A)   Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction
with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which
are attributable to the wastewater collection system.



   (B)   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the city, shall
be filed in the office of the county Recorder of Deeds and shall also be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the wastewater
collection system of the city on their properties.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.090)



§ 52.010  ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state’s
Environmental Protection Agency, or any authorized representative shall have
access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which are
applicable to the city system of user charges for the purpose of making an
audit, examination, excerpt or transcription thereof to ensure compliance
with the special and general conditions of any state grant.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.100)



§ 52.011  DAMAGE TO SEWAGE WORKS PROHIBITED.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
section shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly
conduct.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.110)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.012  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Duly authorized employees of the city, the Metropolitan
Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, the state’s Environmental Protection
Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with this chapter. The city representatives shall have
no authority to inquire into any process, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industry beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to sewers, waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) of this section, the employees of the city, the
MSDGC, the state’s EPA and the U.S. EPA shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall
be held harmless for injury or death to city employees. The city shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required in § 52.005.



   (C)   Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.120)




SEWER INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION




§ 52.025  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or into,
or use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the city.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.140)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.026  SEWER PERMIT CLASSES; FEES.



   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for
residential wastewater service, and one for commercial,
institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service. In either case,
the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the City Engineer. As a condition of permit authorization,
nonresidential applications must provide information describing the
wastewater constituents, characteristics and types of activity at the time
the application is filed, a permit and inspection fee of $500 for each
building sewer permit shall be paid to the city.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.150)



§ 52.027  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   No permit for a sewer connection, house connection or sewer extension
shall be issued by the Mayor and Council unless the person applying therefor
or his or her contractor or plumber has filed in the office of the City Clerk
a performance bond with a corporate surety thereon in the sum of $10,000 for
a sewer connection or house connection and in a sum equal to one and one-half
times the estimated cost of the work to be done for a sewer extension. The
performance bond shall be approved by the Mayor and Council, conditioned upon
the completion of the connection or extension in a proper and workmanlike
manner and upon the applicant indemnifying and saving harmless the city for
any and all damage to underground utilities or to the water and sewerage
system of the city and from any failure to restore any road, ditch, pavement
driveway, walk or other property, or portion thereof, damaged during the
construction of the connection or extension so as to leave the road, ditch,
pavement, driveway, walk or other property or portion thereof in as good a
condition as the applicant, contractor or plumber found them.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.160)



§ 52.028  TRANSFER OF TITLE TO CITY.



   After completion and acceptance of a sewer main or lateral extension,
title to it shall be transferred and conveyed to the city by the owner free
and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances, without cost to the city,
and thereafter the city shall assume all costs of the operation and
maintenance of the main or extension.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.170)



§ 52.029  LIABILITY FOR PERIODIC SEWER CHARGE.



   Each sewer connection and house connection originating from an
extension shall impose liability for a periodic sewer charge to be initially
billed the owner not later than 90 days after service is available to the
owner’s premises, whether or not the owner makes a physical connection to
the sanitary sewerage system.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.180)



§ 52.030  CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP OF PREMISES.



   Irrespective of any change in ownership of premises, each parcel of
real estate for which an application for a sewer connection and house
connection has been filed and accepted by the city shall be liable for the
payment of the periodic sewer charge.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.190)



§ 52.031  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR BY CITY.



   A sewer connection, after the installation thereon shall be the
property of the city and the city shall assume all costs of maintenance and
repair thereof.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.200)



§ 52.032  RESERVE CAPACITIES OF SEWERAGE FACILITIES.



   A building sewer permit shall only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.210)



§ 52.033  COSTS OF INSTALLATION; NONLIABILITY OF CITY.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.220)



§ 52.034  SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Exceptions must be approved by Council.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.230)



§ 52.035  USE OF OLD SEWERS.



   An old building sewer may be used in connection with a new building
only when it is found to meet all requirements of this chapter. This
determination will be made upon examination and test by the city, all costs
to be borne by the applicant.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.240)



§ 52.036  SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the
requirements of the building code and the plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions, or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials (A.S.T.M.) Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, First
Edition, August 1, 1967, as amended, and the Illinois Society of Professional
Engineers’ Specification for Water and Sewer Main Construction, the 1978
edition, or any successor editions of the aforementioned publications, shall
apply.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.250)



§ 52.037  BUILDING CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.



   A building sewer shall be brought to the building in accordance with
city ordinances and § 52.025.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.260)



§ 52.038  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWERS.



   No person shall make connection of a roof downspout, exterior
foundation drain, areaway drain or other source of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.270)



§ 52.039  SEWER CONNECTION STANDARDS.



   The connection of a building sewer into a public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the Building Code and the Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or to the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All the
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before
installation.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.280)



§ 52.040  INSPECTION OF CONNECTIONS.



   The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a city
representative.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.290)



§ 52.041  EXCAVATIONS.



   An excavation for a building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.300)



§ 52.042  DEFECTIVE HOUSE CONNECTIONS.



   Whenever a house connection is obstructed or found to be broken or
defective so that sewage escapes therefrom into surrounding soil or adjacent
premises, repair or replacement may be ordered by the Director of Public
Works or his or her representative. The repair shall be at the expense of the
owner or person in control of the property. When a part of a house connection
is found to be broken or broken into, the break or leak shall be properly
repaired by replacing the broken part with a corresponding new part. Patching
of a break or leak is prohibited.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.310)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.043  SEWER REPAIR/REPLACEMENT  REIMBURSEMENT FUND.



   The city shall establish a Problem Sewer Repair/Replacement
Reimbursement Fund.



   (A)   Committee. The Fund shall be administered by a committee which
shall include the Public Works Superintendent, Public Works Assistant
Superintendent and the City Administrator. This Committee shall consider and
recommend eligible reimbursements for sewer work.



   (B)   Procedures. Any property owner may apply for partial
reimbursement of problem sewer replacement/repair costs. Criteria for
eligibility for reimbursement of repair/replacement cost shall include the
following:



      (1)   Proof of ownership of the property. This proof may
include a copy of the last recorded deed. Other proofs may be considered by
the Committee.



      (2)   Proof of property damage as a result of consistent and
repetitive sewer back-up damage. Submission of property insurance claims and
photographs are encouraged. The Committee shall be the sole judge of whether
sufficient proof has been submitted.



      (3)   Proof shall include evidence that the intrusions are the
result of faulty or inadequate sewers.



      (4)   Three bids from licensed and bonded plumbers shall be
submitted to the Committee.  These bids shall contain the nature of work to
be performed and a listing of all fees and costs.



      (5)   The city shall be the sole judge of whether the
submissions are sufficient.



      (6)   The submission by the residents and acceptance by the
Committee does not create any right or entitlement for reimbursement.



      (7)   The Committee shall select one of the bids as presented
or may request additional submittals if the Committee concludes insufficient
information has been supplied.



      (8)   The Committee may establish further substantive and
procedural rules.



      (9)   In the event the city receives an excess number of
complete and fully compliant applications the Committee shall select the
participants by use of a lottery or similar device.



   (C)   Limits of reimbursement. The contribution to any residence
shall be 50% of the direct out-of-pocket contractor costs to a limit of
$3,000. No other costs or charges shall be eligible for reimbursement.



   (D)   Time of reimbursement. The homeowners shall be eligible for
reimbursement upon proof of full payment of all contractor charges or final
lien waivers. The city shall be the sole judge whether the submitted
documents are sufficient proof of payment. Upon Committee approval of
reimbursement, the matter shall be referred to the City Council for their
consideration.



   (E)   Release. Each property owner shall, prior to receipt of funds,
submit and execute a document releasing the city from any claim relating to
any repair or replacement of the problem sewer.



   (F)   Guarantees. The city does not guarantee the quality of the
repair or replacement work. The city is not responsible for any claim arising
out of the work performed on the subject property or the condition thereof.
The city does not warrant that all deficiencies are listed in the
application. The city does not warrant anything as to the condition of the
property or the habitability thereof.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.315)




USER RATES AND CHARGES




§ 52.055  MEASUREMENT OF FLOW; METERS.



   (A)   The volume of flow used for computing user charges shall be
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of ten gallons.



   (B)   If a person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures
any part or all of his or her water from sources other than the public
waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public
sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water
meters of a type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the
volume of water obtained from the other sources, except for the case of a
single-family residence, the owner of which shall pay a quarterly wastewater
service charge.



   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged can be
required by the city if the volume cannot otherwise be determined from the
metered water consumption records.



   (D)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the property owner. Following approval and
installation, the meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the city.



   (E)   If the user can prove through metering devices installed at
his or her expense and approved by the city that a portion of the water he or
she uses is not entering the sanitary sewerage system, the city will
determine and make adjustments in future billing. The city may require
repeated proof at reasonable intervals.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.320)



§ 52.056  CHARGES AND RATES.



   (A)   Each user of the city’s wastewater collection system shall
be billed on a quarterly basis for wastewater service in that quarter
according to the following rate schedule.



 


Rate\Effective Date

 

May 1, 2017



Per 1,000 gallons of metered water
 

$1.88




 



   (B)   The rate established in division (A) above shall be effective
January 1, 2014 and shall be reflected in each quarterly billing on a pro
rata basis until March 31, 2014 at which time prorating is no longer
necessary.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.330)  (Ord. 2007-04-0100O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord.
2008-04-0175O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0475O, § 2, passed
12-10-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-12-0534O, passed 12-16-2014; Am. Ord.
2017-04-0641O, passed 4-25-2017)



§ 52.057  FREE SERVICE.



   No free service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
city be furnished to any person, public or private. Every user of the system
shall have a metered water connection to the system and every water meter
shall be sealed.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.340)



§ 52.058  BILLING AND COLLECTION; DUTIES OF CITY CLERK.



   It is made the duty of the City Clerk to render bills for service under
this chapter and all other charges in connection therewith and to collect all
moneys due thereon.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.350)



§ 52.059  BILLING ERRORS.



   An error in water and/or sewer billing shall not constitute a waiver of
a claim for adjustment.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.360)



§ 52.060  EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.



   The rates and charges established in § 52.056 shall be effective May
1, 2017 and shall be reflected in each quarterly billing in a pro rata basis
until July 31, 2017 which time prorating is no longer necessary.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.370)  (Ord. 2007-04-0100O, passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord.
2008-04-0175O, passed 4-22-2008; Am. Ord. 2013-12-0475O, § 3, passed
12-10-2013; Am. Ord. 2017-04-0641O, passed 4-25-2017)



§ 52.061  BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service
supplied by the wastewater collection system of the city shall consist of a
combination of a user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement and a
debt service charge, and shall be determined periodically by Council.  The
total of the user charge and debt service charge for the wastewater
collection system shall be the rate set forth in § 52.056.



   (B)   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the
annual debt service of all outstanding loans, bonds and the like, by an
estimated annual water pumpage to determine a charge per 1,000 gallons of
water.



   (C)   The user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters. It shall consist of operation, maintenance and replacement
costs and shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to
operate and maintain the wastewater collection system, including a
replacement fund for the year; and



      (2)   Compute a user rate per 1,000 gallons of water by
dividing the amount of revenue and replacement fund required by the number of
thousands of gallons of billable flow estimated.



   (D)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed annually by certified public accountants for the city in their
annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in the debt service charge or a change in
operation, maintenance and replacement costs.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.380) (Am. Ord. 2008-04-0175O, passed 4-22-2008)



§ 52.062  COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following
formula:



CW = CB(V) + CD(V)



where:



 

CW
 
=
 
wastewater service charge per billing period


CB
 
=
 
basic user rate (projected annual operation maintenance and replacement
costs/annual billable flow)


CD
 
=
 
debt service charge (annual debt service/annual billable flow)


V
 
=
 
volume of water used per billing period



 



(2000 Code, § 13.08.390)



§ 52.063  LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT; SURCHARGE FOR DELINQUENCY.



   (A)   The rate or charge for sewer service shall be payable
quarterly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of
the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to
the premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner, occupant and user are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the city.



   (B)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the city during
the quarter succeeding the period for which the service is billed. All sewer
bills are due and payable when sent out.



   (C)   All bills not paid within 30 days of the close of the billing
period shall have a surcharge of 5% added thereto.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.400)



§ 52.064  NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY; DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE AND FEE FOR
RECONNECTION.



   If the charge for sewer service is not paid within 75 days after the
close of the billing period for the service, the City Clerk is authorized and
directed to cause notification to be given in writing to the owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service that a delinquency
exists, and that service shall be discontinued without further notice unless
payment in full is received at the City Hall within five days of the mailing
of the notice. Upon the disconnecting of any service, a charge of $100 shall
be made for reconnecting the same after settlement of all charges.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.410)



§ 52.065  LIENS.



   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 105 days
after it has been rendered, the city shall file with the county’s Recorder
of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a
notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.



   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the city has notice of this, notice of delinquency and lien
filing shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his or her address is
known to the city, whenever a bill remains unpaid for 105 days after it has
been rendered.



   (C)   The failure of the city to record a lien or to make a notice,
or the failure of the owner to receive a notice, shall not affect the right
to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as set forth in § 52.066.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.420)



§ 52.066  FORECLOSURE OF LIENS.



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid sewer service charges shall be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. The foreclosures shall be by bill-in-equity
in the name of the city. The City Attorney is authorized and directed to
institute the proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over the matters against any property for which a bill has
remained unpaid for 105 days after it has been rendered.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.430)



§ 52.067  APPEALS.



   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within 30 days
of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method
used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the city within 30
days after notification of a formal, written appeal outlining the
discrepancies.



(Ord. 2009-05-0239O, passed 5-26-2009)




DISCHARGES TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM




§ 52.080  COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   All disposal by any person into the sewerage system is unlawful, except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.440)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.081  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO SANITARY SEWERS.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.450)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.082  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO STORM SEWERS.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary sewage
to any storm sewer in the city.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.460)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.083  DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS.



   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to a
storm sewer or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, on approval of the city,
to a storm sewer or natural outlet.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.470)



§ 52.084  GENERAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water or waste to any public sewer:



   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;



   (B)   Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;



   (C)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works; or



   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or of causing other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.480)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.085  SPECIFIC PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in
the opinion of the city and the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago, that the wastes can harm either the sewers, the sewage treatment
process or equipment; can have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or
can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city and MSDGC representatives will give consideration to such factors as
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:



   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F
(65°C);



   (B)   Any water or waste containers toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
and 150°F (0° and 65°C);



   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city;



   (D)   Any water or waste containing strong acids, iron pickling
wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;



   (E)   Any water or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objection-able or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to a degree that any material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
city and MSDGC for such materials;



   (F)   Any water or waste containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city or MSDGC as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;



   (G)   Any radioactive waste or isotope of a half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city and MSDGC in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



   (H)   Any water or waste having a pH in excess of 9.5;



   (I)   Any mercury or any or its compounds in excess of 0.05 mg/l as
Hg at any time, except as permitted by the city and MSDGC in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;



   (J)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time, except as
permitted by the city and MSDGC in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations;



   (K)   Materials which exert or cause:



      (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);



      (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



      (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works; or



      (4)   Unusual volumes of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting slugs.



   (L)   Any water or waste containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.490)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.086  DETERMINATION OF ACCEPTABILITY OF WASTES.



   (A)   If waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 52.085, which are in violation
of the standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and
Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 — Pretreatment
Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973,
as amended, which, in the judgment of the city and/or the Metropolitan
Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, and/or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city
and/or MSDGC may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under §
52.091.



   (B)   If the city and MSDGC permit the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the city and MSDGC and shall be
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.500)



§ 52.087  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city and/or the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients, except that the interceptors are not required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the city and MSDGC and shall be located as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.510)



§ 52.088  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT AND FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his or her expense.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.520)



§ 52.089  CONTROL MANHOLES.



   Each industrial user is required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city and/or the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with the
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. The manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the city and MSDGC. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.530)



§ 52.090  MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.



   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial waste shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and
analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and
any special condition for discharge established by the city and/or the
Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.



   (B)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city and MSDGC, but not
less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to ensure that there is compliance
with federal, state and local standards. The owner shall report the results
of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city and MSDGC at the times
and in the manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense
of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city and/or
MSDGC. At the times as deemed necessary, the city and/or MSDGC reserves the
right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory
service, with costs to be paid by the owner.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.540)



§ 52.091  METHODS OF TESTING AND ANALYSIS.



   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular
analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls
of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.550)



§ 52.092  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city, the Metropolitan Sanitary
District of Greater Chicago and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for
transmission and by MSDGC for treatment, subject to payment therefor in
accordance with § 52.061 by the industrial concern, provided that the
payment is in accordance with federal and state guidelines for the user
charge system and the industrial cost recovery system.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.560)




MAINTENANCE AND TESTING




§ 52.105  PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PROGRAM FOR SEWERS.



   (A)   A preventive maintenance program shall be instituted for the
proper maintenance and operation of the municipal sewerage system in order to
ensure a proper and satisfactory state of repair and performance level of the
system at all times. The City Engineer is authorized and directed to
formulate and institute the required program to carry out the intent of this
section.



   (B)   The preventive maintenance program should establish procedures
for the periodic inspection and cleaning of the municipal sewerage system and
necessary repairs thereof. The program shall incorporate the following items
and other items as determined by the City Engineer:



      (1)   Visual inspections of all manholes and other structures
and the like;



      (2)   Visual inspections of sewer lines as can be determined
from inside manholes or structures by the naked eye, by mirrors or by other
methods;



      (3)   Prevention of the entry of surface runoff into manholes
or other structures;



      (4)   Smoke testing to determine sources of entry of
extraneous flows through cross-connections of storm drains and other illegal
connections;



      (5)   Television inspections to determine state of repair,
performance level, illegal connections and the like;



      (6)   Flow measurements to determine wet and dry weather flow
by visual inspection, weirs, flow gauges, electronic recorders and the like;



      (7)   Periodic inspections of lift stations, the
serviceability of standby power ascertained and the keeping of flow records;



      (8)   Where it is determined that, based on the population
equivalent being served, excessive amounts of flows are received, a
determination of the source of the flows and the elimination of extraneous
flows.



   (C)   An overall map of the municipal sanitary sewerage system, on a
base map showing street and lot beyond, shall be prepared. The map shall
consist of one or more sheets and shall be updated periodically. The map
shall show the following details:



      (1)   Sanitary sewer manholes, structures and lift stations,
if any;



      (2)   The size, length and direction of flows and materials of
all sanitary sewer lines;



      (3)   Rim and invert elevations, referred to U.S.G.S. datum,
and slopes of sewer runs;



      (4)   Flood hazard areas, based on U.S.G.S. maps;



      (5)   Approximate locations of house connections;



      (6)   Street drainage patterns and general physical features;
and



      (7)   Storm sewer lines, manholes, inlets and other structures
and drainage features (streams, drainage ditches and the like).



(2000 Code, § 13.08.570)



§ 52.106  AIR TESTING OF SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to require air testing of
sanitary sewers and sanitary sewerage systems for the safety and welfare of
the residents of the city.



   (B)   This section shall apply to the construction of all sanitary
sewers, public and private, which tie into the municipal sanitary sewerage
system and which have a total length for each unit of sewer of 200 feet or
more.



   (C)   The following test shall be made prior to the time of
acceptance or approval of a sanitary sewer by the City Engineer. The City
Engineer shall not approve any sanitary sewer until it meets the following
test. This test shall be known as the official low pressure air acceptance
test.



      (1)   The contractor or owner shall furnish all equipment and
personnel to conduct an acceptance test using low pressure air. The test
shall be conducted under the supervision of the City Engineer.



      (2)   All branch fittings and ends of lateral stubs shall be
securely plugged to withstand internal test pressures. The section of line
being tested shall also be securely plugged at each manhole. All stoppers
shall be adequately braced when required.



      (3)   Air shall be slowly supplied to the plugged pipeline
until the internal air pressure reaches four pounds per square inch greater
than the average back pressure of any groundwater that may submerge the pipe.
At least two minutes shall be allowed for temperature stabilization before
proceeding further.



      (4)   The rate of air loss shall then be determined by
measuring the time interval required for the internal pressure to decrease
from three and one half to two and one half pounds per square inch.



      (5)   The pipeline shall be considered acceptable if the time
interval for the 1.0 psi pressure drop is not less than the holding time
listed in the following test table.



Table on following page



Minimum Holding Time in Seconds Required for Pressure to Drop From 3-1/2 to
2-1/2 PSIG



 





 

Pipe Diameter (Inches)




4

 

6

 

8

 

10

 

12

 

15

 

18

 

21

 

24

 

27

 

30

 

33

 

36

 

39




Length of Line in Feet

 

25

 

4

 

10

 

18

 

28

 

40

 

62

 

89

 

121

 

158

 

200

 

248

 

299

 

356

 

418




50

 

9

 

20

 

35

 

55

 

79

 

124

 

178

 

243

 

317

 

401

 

495

 

599

 

713

 

837




75

 

13

 

30

 

53

 

83

 

119

 

186

 

267

 

364

 

475

 

601

 

743

 

898

 

1020

 

1105




100

 

18

 

40

 

70

 

110

 

158

 

248

 

356

 

485

 

634

 

765

 

851

 

935

 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





125

 

22

 

50

 

88

 

138

 

198

 

909

 

446

 

595

 

680

 


 


 


 


 





150

 

26

 

59

 

106

 

165

 

238

 

371

 

510

 


 


 


 


 


 


 





175

 

31

 

69

 

123

 

193

 

277

 

425

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





200

 

35

 

79

 

141

 

220

 

317

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





225

 

40

 

89

 

158

 

248

 

340

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





250

 

44

 

99

 

176

 

275

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





275

 

48

 

109

 

194

 

283

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





300

 

53

 

119

 

211

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





350

 

61

 

139

 

227

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





400

 

70

 

158

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





450

 

79

 

170

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





500

 

88

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





550

 

97

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





600

 

106

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 





650

 

113

 

170

 

227

 

283

 

340

 

425

 

510

 

595

 

680

 

765

 

851

 

935

 

1020

 

1105





 



Note: To be used when testing one diameter only.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.580)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found to be violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, except § 52.011, shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in the notice, permanently cease the violation. The city may
revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation.



   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city by reason of that violation.



(2000 Code, § 13.08.130)



CHAPTER 53: EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS



Section



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Recitals and findings



   53.03   Submittal of emergency energy plans



   53.04   Review of plan



   53.05   Implementation of emergency energy plan



   53.06   Provisions not to preclude statutory requirements



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPANY.  Any person or entity engaged in the
business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering electricity,
regardless of its source, for use or consumption within the city. The term
shall not include any person or entity who delivers electricity to fewer than
50 persons within the city.



   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.  A planned course of action developed by an
electric utility company to be implemented when the demand for electricity
exceeds, or is at significant risk of exceeding, the supply.



(2000 Code, § 13.12.010)



§ 53.02  RECITALS AND FINDINGS.



   The recitals and findings contained in the ordinance codified in this
chapter, and each of them, are made a part of this chapter and are
incorporated by reference as if set forth verbatim in this section.



(2000 Code, § 13.12.020)



§ 53.03  SUBMITTAL OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.



   (A)   Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency
energy plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, or within 30 days after becoming an electric
utility company, whichever is later. The City Administrator, in the exercise
of reasonable discretion, may extend the 30-day period for an additional 30
days for good cause shown. Every company shall submit to the City
Administrator any emergency energy plan adopted by the company no later than
30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter,
or within 24 hours of the time the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The
company shall notify those officials within 24 hours of any significant
revisions to a plan and the rationale for the revisions. The revisions shall
be submitted as soon as it is practicable and reviewed in accordance with §
53.04.



   (B)   The plan shall include, at a minimum, information detailing:



      (1)   The circumstances that would require the implementation
of the plan;



      (2)   The levels or stages of the emergency plan;



      (3)   The potential impact of the plan on public health and
safety, and on the duties of city public health and safety agencies;



      (4)   What steps the company has taken to mitigate those
potential health or safety problems;



      (5)   The geographic limits of each outage area;



      (6)   The number of customers within each outage area;



      (7)   Identification of customers and facilities within each
outage area for which a service interruption would pose increased risk to
public health and safety including, but not limited to, nursing homes,
schools, buildings in excess of 80 feet in height, day care centers, persons
on life support systems, radio and communication facilities for police, fire
or public works personnel, sewer and storm water pumping facilities and
treatment facilities, and fresh water pumping stations and treatment
facilities; and



      (8)   The anticipated sequence and duration of service
interruptions.



(2000 Code, § 13.12.030)



§ 53.04  REVIEW OF PLAN.



   (A)   (1)   Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the
city, the city shall review the plan. In order to assure appropriate
coordination with public health and safety agencies, the city shall have the
right to accept or select the following elements of the plan:



         (a)   The potential impact of the plan on public health
and safety;



         (b)   The potential impact of the plan on the duties of
the city’s health and safety agencies; and



         (c)   What steps the company has taken to mitigate those
potential health or safety problems.



      (2)   The acceptance or rejection must be made by the city, in
writing, within 30 days after the date on which the plan was submitted.



   (B)   If a plan is selected, the reasons therefor shall be stated in
writing. In case a revised plan shall be resubmitted within 30 days after
notice of the rejection is given. The city shall accept or reject the revised
plan in writing within 30 days after the date on which it was resubmitted.



   (C)   An electric utility company is in violation of this chapter if
it fails to have in place an emergency energy plan approved by the city
within 120 days after the plan was required to be submitted.



(2000 Code, § 13.12.040)



§ 53.05  IMPLEMENTATION OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.



   (A)   Whenever an electric utility company determines that it is
necessary to implement an emergency energy plan, the company shall notify the
City Administrator, or his or her designee, pursuant to a notification
procedure approved by the City Administrator. The notification shall be made
as soon as practicable and shall be made prior to implementation of the plan.



   (B)   Notice of the implementation of each level or stage of the
emergency energy plan shall be made under this section pursuant to rules
promulgated by the City Administrator. The notification shall be made for
each of the following actions:



      (1)   The use of operating reserves - spinning;



      (2)   The curtailment of service to interruptible customers
(customers who have agreed to interruption of service under certain
circumstances pursuant to their contract with the electrical utility company);



      (3)   The declaration of a control area emergency;



      (4)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity
use (the notification shall include the specific wording of the appeal);



      (5)   The determination of the need for an intentional
interruption of service pursuant to the emergency plan (the notification
shall include the areas to be interrupted; the sequence and estimated
duration of outage for each area; and the affected feeders and number of
affected customers in each area); and



      (6)   Such other actions requiring notice pursuant to rules
promulgated.



   (C)   The notification of the intentional service interruptions
shall be made immediately upon the determination that the interruptions are
necessary. Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at least two
hours prior to the time of the interruption, and in no case shall the
notification be made less than 30 minutes prior to the interruption.



   (D)   Notification required by this section shall be in addition to
any notification requirements contained in this code.



   (E)   Whenever an electric utility company implements an emergency
energy plan, the company shall provide appropriate personnel to staff the
city’s emergency response facilities as provided in the city’s emergency
management plan.



(2000 Code, § 13.12.050)



§ 53.06  PROVISIONS NOT TO PRECLUDE STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude or interfere
with the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary
to assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally
safe service as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.).



(2000 Code, § 13.12.070)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any electric utility company that violates this chapter or any
rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$2,500 and not more than $10,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   Whenever the city incurs any expenses in providing the
services of public health and safety agencies as a result of: an electrical
utility company’s violation of this chapter or rules promulgated
thereunder; or the intentional interruption of power by an electric utility,
whether or not pursuant to an emergency energy plan; that company shall
reimburse the city for all amounts expended within 30 days of a certified
invoice from the city.



(2000 Code, § 13.12.060)



CHAPTER 54: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Section



General Provisions



   54.01   Garbage containers required



   54.02   Location of containers



   54.03   Burning



   54.04   Scavenging



   54.05   Deposits on streets and public ways



   54.06   Violations



Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings



   54.20   Specifications for garbage containers



   54.21   Specifications for landscape waste containers



   54.22   Placement and removal of containers



   54.23   Location of recycling containers



   54.24   Charges for collection



   54.25   City's right to contract



Multi-Family, Commercial and Industrial Uses



   54.40   Specifications for garbage containers (non-residential)



   54.41   Refuse containers; outdoor storage-placement and removal for
garbage pick-up



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.01  GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED.



   Every owner, agent of such owner or occupant of a house, building, flat
or apartment in the city, where people reside, board or lodge, or where meat
or vegetable matter is prepared, served or sold, shall maintain, in good
order and repair, a container for garbage.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.02  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.



   A refuse container shall be stored in a location hidden from public
view, except when it is necessary to place it in the parkway for refuse
collection.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.03  BURNING.



   No person shall burn refuse or garbage of any kind in the city, except
that controlled fires are permitted if they are specifically authorized by
the Mayor and Council.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.04  SCAVENGING.



   (A)   Unlawful pick-up of items placed for collection. It is
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to rummage through, pick up,
obtain or possess any items placed by residents of the city for collection by
the city' s contracted waste hauler, as provided in § 54.21.



   (B)   Unlawful pick-up of recyclable items. It is unlawful for any
person to rummage through, pick up, collect, obtain or possess any recyclable
items placed by residents of the city for collection as part of the city's
authorized recycling program.



   (C)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Residents who have placed their refuse for collection as
to the refuse so placed;



      (2)   Individuals acting in their capacity as volunteers or
otherwise as part of the city's authorized recycling program;



      (3)   Private scavengers contracted to remove rubbish from
non-single family residential locations.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.05  DEPOSITS ON STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS.



   No person shall deposit odorous or perishable garbage or refuse of any
kind in any street, alley, parkway or public way, except as provided in this
chapter. Refuse which is too large to be placed in a container may be placed
alongside the container, but in such a way that it cannot be blown about or
scattered by the wind. The size and type of refuse being discarded is
governed by a disposal service contract.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.06  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter the city, by its
clerk or other duly authorized agent, shall serve or cause to be served a
notice of violation upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which
garbage is overflowing or the surrounding areas are not clean and free of
garbage, and shall demand the abatement of the nuisance within 24 hours.



   (B)   In the event the nuisance is not abated within 24 hours, the
city may proceed to abate the nuisance by removal of the garbage. The owner
or occupant shall be responsible for all costs of such abatement including
all legal and administrative fees. The minimum charge for such abatement
shall be $150.



   (C)   Neither the city or any of its agents shall be liable for any
damage to property occasioned in the enforcement of this section.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS



§ 54.20  SPECIFICATIONS FOR GARBAGE CONTAINERS.



   For residential property, a container shall be a commercially
manufactured metal, rubber or plastic container which is watertight, has a
close-fitting cover and is provided with handles.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.21  SPECIFICATIONS FOR LANDSCAPE WASTE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Approved containers for landscape waste may include either a
33-gallon or equivalent re-usable container (with an affixed adhesive label
which reads "YARD WASTE") or kraft-type paper bags.



   (B)   Collection of tied bundles of brush or tree clippings shall
also be acceptable provided the weight of such bundles does not exceed 6o
pounds, the length of the material does not exceed four feet, the diameter of
the individual limbs/branches do not exceed four inches, and the bundle
itself does not exceed three  feet in diameter.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.22  PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF CONTAINERS.



   In residential areas where garbage pick-up is curbside, containers will
be replaced in the parkway no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding
collections and shall be removed from the parkway no later than 9:00 p.m. on
the day of collection.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.23  LOCATION OF RECYCLING CONTAINERS.



   A recycling toter shall be stored in a location hidden from public
view, except when it is necessary to place it in the parkway for recycling
collection. If no other reasonable alternative exists for storage of a
recycling toter, it may be stored in public view. It shall be placed in the
parkway not prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collections and shall be
removed from the parkway not later than 9:00 p.m. on the day of collection.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.24  CHARGES FOR COLLECTION.



   Charges for use of the garbage collection system of the city shall be
as established from time to time by Council.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.25  CITY'S RIGHT TO CONTRACT.



   The city maintains the sole right to contract for garbage and rubbish
collection, recycling and disposal services. All single-family and two-family
residences shall be considered users of this contracted service and shall pay
the established charges for use. No other companies may service single-family
or two-family residences other than the firm or firms that have been so
contracted by the city.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES



§ 54.40  SPECIFICATIONS FOR GARBAGE CONTAINERS (NONRESIDENTIAL).



   (A)   All garbage and refuse from multi-family dwellings (three or
more units), apartments, businesses, schools, libraries, churches, lodge
halls, institutions and commercial and industrial establishments shall be
stored in rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, watertight metal containers with
tight-fitting covers (which covers must be used at all times) with adequate
handles for collection purposes. All containers must be designed for use with
collection vehicles.



   (B)   All such containers must be a minimum size of one and one-half
cubic yards and must be contracted to be emptied a minimum of once per week
or more often if garbage overflows the containers. Also, all areas
surrounding the containers must be clear and free of garbage and refuse at
all times.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 54.41  REFUSE CONTAINERS; OUTDOOR STORAGE-PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL FOR
GARBAGE PICK-UP.



   (A)   Screening; Surface Materials.



      (1)   All refuse containers and all areas of permitted outdoor
storage shall be fully enclosed by an opaque fence constructed of masonry or
wood or such other material approved by the community development director,
masonry wall, or landscape screening of a height sufficient to completely
screen such containers or storage areas from view from adjoining properties
and public or private streets.



      (2)   All refuse containers and outdoor storage facilities
shall be placed on sealed concrete pads.



      (3)   All property owners subject to the requirements of this
division (A) shall have until November 8, 2008 to come into compliance with
these provisions.



   (B)   Exemptions. The requirements of this section  shall not apply
to:



      (1)   City owned refuse containers placed and maintained by
the city for use by the general public.



      (2)   Dumpsters which have been issued a temporary permit for
a limited duration of use.



(Ord. 2008-05-0185O, passed 5-27-2008)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter



         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         71.   ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE



         72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



         73.   PARKING



         74.   ABANDONED AND HAZARDOUS VEHICLES



         75.   BICYCLES



         76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



         77.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Administration and Enforcement



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Authority of police officers



   70.03   Obedience to police officers



   70.04   Application of Traffic Code to non-motorized traffic



   70.05   Location and posting of signs



   70.06   Restitution for emergency response



   70.07   Automated traffic law enforcement system



Vehicle Licenses



   70.20   License required



   70.21   Fees



   70.22   Conditions; transfers



   70.23   Applications; issuance



   70.24   Display of state registration plates and registration
stickers



Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment



   70.35   Vehicles subject to seizure and impoundment



   70.36   Seizure and impoundment of vehicles



   70.37   Exception to vehicle seizure and impoundment



   70.38   Posting a bond



   70.39   Preliminary hearing



   70.40   Final hearing



   70.41   Unclaimed vehicles



   70.42   Liability for penalty and costs



Traffic Regulation Agreement for Private Property



   70.55   Option to enter agreement



 



   70.99   Penalty



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Words and phrases used in this Traffic Code shall, for the purposes of
this Traffic Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted in § 71.01.



(2000 Code, § 10.08.010)



§ 70.02  AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.



   (A)   Officers of the Police Department or other personnel as are
assigned by the Chief of Police shall enforce all traffic laws of the city
and all state vehicle laws.



   (B)   Officers are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformity with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



(2000 Code, § 10.08.020)



§ 70.03  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.



   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction of a police officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.



(2000 Code, § 10.08.030)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC CODE TO NON-MOTORIZED TRAFFIC.



   Every person propelling a horse, pushcart or bicycle upon a roadway
shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the
duties, applicable to the driver of a vehicle, as the same are set forth in
this Traffic Code and in the Illinois Vehicle Code, except those provisions
which by their very nature can have no application.



(2000 Code, § 10.08.040)



§ 70.05  LOCATION AND POSTING OF SIGNS.



   (A)   Council shall determine where traffic control signs, including
stop signs, one-way signs, “no turn” signs and speed limit signs are
necessary in order to safeguard the public.



   (B)   After it has been determined that signs are necessary, the
Chief of Police shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all
intersections, one-way streets and speed limits.



   (C)   Left turn only (3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.): Southbound Oak Avenue
at 160th Street.



(2000 Code, § 10.08.050)  (Ord. 2507 § 1, passed --2001; Ord.
2007-11-0140O, passed 11-27-2007)



§ 70.06  RESTITUTION FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE.



   (A)   In addition to any other fine or penalty required by law, any
individual convicted of a violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, whose operation of a motor vehicle while in violation of § 11-501 or
ordinance proximately caused an incident resulting in an appropriate
emergency response, shall be required to make restitution to a public agency
for the costs of that emergency response. This restitution shall not exceed
$500 per public agency for each emergency response.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, EMERGENCY RESPONSE means any
incident requiring a response by: a police officer as defined in § 1-162 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162); a firefighter
carrying on the roles of a regularly constituted Fire Department; and an
ambulance as defined under § 4.05 of the Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
Systems Act (ILCS Ch. 210, Act 50, § 4.05).



(2000 Code, § 10.08.060)  (Ord. 2418 (part), passed --1999; Ord. 2417
(part), passed --1999)



§ 70.07  AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM.  A device within the
city with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red
light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an
intersection against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation
of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (“Code”), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-306, or similar violation of the City of Oak Forest Municipal Code.



      DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.  Failure to stop and
remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as
provided for in § 11-306 of the Code.



      NO TURN ON RED.  Failure to stop and remain stopped, and not
proceeding to turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign
indicating “No turn on red,” or other similar language, and a red signal
as provided for in § 11-306 of the Code.



      RECORDED IMAGES.  Images produced by the automated traffic law
enforcement system, which consist of either two or more photographs; two or
more microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or, a video recording
showing: the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the
recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor
vehicle.



      TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.  The person appointed as such
through Article 25 of the Code who shall have power to adopt, distribute and
process automated traffic law violation notices and other notices required by
this section, collect money paid as fines and penalties, operate the
automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the
Secretary of State as required by this section.



   (B)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this section for a
vehicle to disregard a traffic control device or turn on red in violation of
§ 11-306 of the Code.



   (C)   Administrative adjudication. All automated traffic law
violations described in this section will be adjudicated by a Hearing Officer
pursuant to the city’s administrative adjudication system, as set forth in
§§ 32.001 through 32.006 of this code.



   (D)   Defenses.



      (1)   The following may be considered defenses by the Hearing
Officer for a violation of division (B) above.



         (a)   That the motor vehicle or registration plates of
the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under
the control of or in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation;



         (b)   That the driver of the vehicle passed through the
intersection when the light was red either:



            1.   In order to yield the right-of-way to an
emergency vehicle; or



            2.   As part of a funeral procession.



      (2)   To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the
registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not
under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation,
the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle
or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely
manner.



   (E)   Notice of violation.



      (1)   When the automated traffic law enforcement system
records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in violation of division (B)
above, the city shall issue a written notice of violation to the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail within
30 days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the city of the
identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event
later than 90 days following the violation. The city shall only be required
to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the lessee’s name
by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within 60 days of the notice’s
issuance. If the driver information is not provided within 60 days, the
leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is
returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known
address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database of the
owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall be made by
first class mail postage prepaid.



      (2)   (a)   A notice of violation associated with an
automated traffic law violation shall require a review and approval of the
associated recorded image by a law enforcement officer or retired law
enforcement officer from the city, who shall inspect the image and determine
whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of division (B)
above, or whether one of the defenses enumerated in division (D) of this
section is visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination that the
recorded image captures a violation and that no defense applies, the notice
of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner
provided for above. The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall retain a copy
of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to
the owner of the vehicle. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence
of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding
alleging a violation of the above-noted statutory and local provisions and
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation subject to rebuttal on the basis
of the defenses established in this section.



         (b)   Where a vehicle crosses a stop line or crosswalk
but still comes to a complete stop and does not proceed to further enter the
intersection during the red light cycle, no violation shall be issued unless
one or more pedestrians or cyclists are present.



      (3)   The notice of violation shall include the following
information:



         (a)   The name and address of the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State,
or, if the information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known
address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database;



         (b)   The make (only if discernable) and registration
number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation;



         (c)   The violation charged;



         (d)   The location where the violation occurred;



         (e)   The date and time of the violation;



         (f)   A copy of the recorded images;



         (g)   The amount of the civil penalty and the date by
which the penalty should be paid (21 days from the date of issuance) and a
statement that the payment of the fine shall operate at a final disposition
of the violation;



         (h)   A statement that a failure to pay the civil
penalty by the date noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed
against the owner or lessee;



         (i)   The amount of the late fee;



         (j)   A statement that the failure to pay by the date
specified will result in a final determination of liability and may result in
the suspension of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle;



         (k)   A statement that the recorded images constitute
prima facie evidence of a violation;



         (l)   A statement that the person may elect to proceed
by paying the fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by
administrative hearing; and



         (m)   A statement of how an administrative hearing may
be requested.



   (F)   Hearing.



      (1)   The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of
this section may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of
violation (21 days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or
set forth an applicable defense.



      (2)   The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the
facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a
violation of this section.



      (3)   The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of
a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in
this section.



      (4)   The owner’s failure to appear at the hearing will
result in a finding of liability.



      (5)   In the event of a failure to appear, a “findings,
decision and order” letter will be sent to the owner.



      (6)   The owner’s failure to pay the amount by the date
specified in that letter will result in a final determination.



      (7)   The owner or violator shall have 25 days following an
administrative hearing to pay any penalty imposed.



   (G)   Non-residents.



      (1)   Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle is not a resident of the city but seeks to contest the merits of the
alleged violation, that person may contest the charges using the same
available defenses as stated above, but rather than attend the administrative
hearing, they may submit any and all documentary evidence to the Traffic
Compliance Administrator no later than the hearing date, together with a
written statement reflecting that they are non-residents of the city.



      (2)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall forward all
timely-submitted materials to the Hearing Officer for review and
determination.



   (H)   Final determination.



      (1)   A final determination of violation liability shall occur
following failure to pay the fine, a failure to request a hearing by the
respond-by date, after a Hearing Officer’s determination of violation
liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust the administrative
review procedures provided by the City Code.



      (2)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest
the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed
notice, the Hearing Officer’s determination shall become final upon a
failure to pay the amount owed on date provided in the “findings, decision
and order” letter. Appeal may be made to the Circuit Court of Cook County
on any final determination as provided for by the Administrative Review Act.



   (I)   Notice of determination of liability. If the registered owner
fails to pay or contest the notice of violation within 21 days a notice of
determination of liability will be sent to the owner indicating that a fine
in the amount of $100 is due to the city. The notice will also state that the
owner can petition the city to set aside the determination of liability
before it becomes final. If the owner does not pay the $100 as specified in
the notice or petition the city to set aside the determination, within 21
days, a notice of final determination will be sent to the owner indicating
that the owner has exhausted all challenge options and the $100 fine is a
debt due and owing to the city and must be paid within 14 days. The owner
will also be notified that the failure to pay the $100 fine within 14 days
will result in a late fee of $100 added to the original fine.



   (J)   Notice of final determination. Notice of final determination
shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law
violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice of
final determination shall include the following information:



      (1)   A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing
to the city; and



      (2)   A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing
to the City of Oak Forest within 14 days may result in a petition to the
Circuit Court of Cook County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment
or may result in the suspension of the person’s driver’s license for
failure to pay fines or penalties for five or more violation under this
section.



   (K)   Petitions to set aside determination.



      (1)   A petition to set aside determination of an automated
traffic law violation must be filed with or mailed to the Traffic Control
Administrator within 14 days of the date of mailing of the notice of
determination of liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to:



         (a)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle on the date of the violation notice was issued;



         (b)   The person having already paid the fine for the
violation in question; and



         (c)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new
date for a hearing.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the
determination of liability, the Hearing Officer shall review the petition to
determine if cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause
has been shown, the city shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on
which the petitioner must appear to present his or her case. The city shall
notify the petitioner of the Hearing Officer’s decision to grant a hearing
or deny the petition within 14 days of the city’s receipt.



   (L)   Notice of impending driver’s license suspension.



      (1)   A notice of impending driver’s license suspension
shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due
and owing on five or more violations of this section. The notice of impending
driver’s license suspension shall state the following information:



         (a)   The failure to pay the fine owing within 45 days
of the notice’s date will result in the city notifying’ the Secretary of
State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings
under § 6-306.5 of the Code; and



         (b)   A statement that the person may obtain a copy of
the original ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to the city along with a request for the copy.



      (2)   The notice of impending driver’s license suspension
shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded
with the Secretary of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as
undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post
office approved database.



   (M)   Driver’s license suspension.



      (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator, by certified
report, may request that the Secretary of State suspend the driving
privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine
or penalty due and owing as a result of five automated traffic violations.
The report shall be certified and contain the following:



         (a)   The name, last known address as recorded with the
Secretary of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of lease, or as recorded in a United States post office approved
database if any notice sent under this section is returned as undeliverable,
and driver’s license number of the person who failed to pay the fine or
penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to
the person in a state;



         (b)   A statement that the report is being made by the
City of Oak Forest pursuant to this section; and



         (c)   A statement that a notice of impending driver’s
license suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the
address recorded with the Secretary of State or at the last address known to
the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice
sent under this section is returned as undeliverable at the last known
address recorded at a United States post office approved database, the date
on which the notice was sent, and address to which the notice was sent.



      (2)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the
Secretary of State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid
the previously recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality
determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of the
notification shall also be given upon request aid at no additional charge to
the person named therein.



      (3)   (a)   Any person receiving notice from the Secretary
of State that their driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a
specified period my challenge the accuracy of the certified report prepared
by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



         (b)   The person shall, within seven days after having
the person challenging the report was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle
or that the person has already paid their fine for the five or more automated
traffic violations, the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall immediately
notify the Secretary of State of the error in a subsequent certified report.



   (N)   City requirements.



      (1)   No additional fee may be charged to an alleged violator
for exercising his or her right to an administrative hearing.



      (2)   The recorded image of the motor vehicle's violation is
accessible to the alleged violator at the website address provided by the
automated traffic law enforcement system vendor.



      (3)   The locations of the red light camera intersections
shall be posted on the city's website.



      (4)   The intersection equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system must have a yellow change interval that conforms to the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



      (5)   A statistical study shall be completed to assess the
safety impact of each automated traffic law enforcement system.  This study
shall be posted on the city's website.



      (6)   A certified report shall be made to the Secretary of
State whenever a registered owner of a vehicle has failed to pay any fine or
penalty due and owing as a result of five offenses for automated traffic law
violations.



(Ord. 2007-11-01410, passed 11-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2010-12-0316O, passed
12-14-2010)



VEHICLE LICENSES



§ 70.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No owner of a motor vehicle registered with the state to a city address
within the City of Oak Forest corporate municipal limits shall use or cause
or permit any of his or her agents or employees to use any vehicle upon the
streets of the city unless the motor vehicle is licensed as provided in this
chapter and unless the city sticker is affixed to the vehicle. The sticker
must be permanently affixed to the lower right hand (passenger) side of the
vehicle windshield.



(2000 Code § 10.20.010)  (Ord. 2454, § 1 (part), passed - -2000; Am. Ord.
2010-02-0278O, passed 2-23-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.21  FEES.



 




Passenger automobiles and recreational vehicles

 
$25


Trucks


Less than 8,000 pounds -- B Plate
 
$25


8,001 to 12,000 pounds -- D Plate
 
$50


12,001 to 16,000 pounds -- F Plate
 
$75


16,001 to 24,000 pounds -- H Plate
 
$87.50


Over 24,000 lbs.
 
$100


Trucks belonging to other taxing bodies and to churches within the corporate
limits which display M or CV state license plates
 
No charge


Buses
 
$87.50


Buses owned and operated by a not-for-profit organization
 
$12.50


Taxicabs, limousines, ambulances, hearses
 
$25


Motorcycles
 
$15


Disabled veterans and P.O.W.’s  which display state license plates free of
charge
 
No charge


Senior citizens, 65 years of age and over with proper identification and
vehicle registration (maximum two no-charge vehicle stickers per household)
 
No charge


Persons with disabilities, which display state PWD license plates
 
No charge


Appointed officials receiving no compensation or remuneration for services
 
No charge


Fee to transfer to another vehicle during year (maximum two transfers per
household)
 
$2


Active military personnel; one vehicle (subject to proof of active military
service and the removal of the vehicle to a temporary out-of-city duty
station or other site)
 
No charge for the period of active military service




 



 


Antique vehicles, those vehicles which display AV state license plates and
are defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102.1

 
$5


Stored/inoperative vehicles, those vehicles stored and/or inoperable but
licensed with the state
 
$25


Housing of Vehicles. Vehicles state-registered to Oak Forest
 
$25



 



(2000 Code, § 10.20.020)  (Ord. 2454, § 1 (part), passed - -2000; Ord.
2006-04-0017O, passed 4-25-2006; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0182O, passed 5-13-2008;
Am. Ord. 2010-02-0278O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-04-0438O, § 2,
passed 4-23-2013)



§ 70.22  CONDITIONS; TRANSFERS.



   (A)   All persons or businesses that own a motor vehicle that is
registered to an address in the city must purchase and display on his or her
vehicle a city vehicle license.



   (B)   All vehicle licenses issued by the city shall be valid only
for the motor vehicle for which they are issued.



   (C)   Licenses will be valid for the period beginning July 1 and
ending on June 30 of the following year.



   (D)   If any motor vehicle has been purchased or lawfully acquired
by the applicant on or after December 15 of the current year, the license fee
for the motor vehicle for the balance of that year shall be a sum equal to
one-half of the annual license fee specified in § 70.21 above for a vehicle
of that class.



   (E)   In any case where an application is made on or after July 1 of
the then current year, the license fee shall be twice the regular fee.



   (F)   If the owner of any motor vehicle licensed under this chapter
sells the same before the expiration of the license, the license may be
transferred to another motor vehicle acquired by the owner, or it may be
transferred to the new owner, upon surrender of the license and the payment
of a transfer fee of $2. Unless the license for any motor vehicle so sold is
transferred within ten days from the sale, the license shall be void. There
shall be a maximum of two transfers per household during the licensing period.



   (G)   (1)   Any person, defined as a natural person, firm,
corporation, copartnership or association shall within 30 days of
establishing residency within Oak Forest purchase a city vehicle sticker.



      (2)   Residency for a natural person shall include an
individual who uses the city as his or her principal place of abode. In the
case of a firm, copartnership, corporation or other business, the entity
shall be deemed a resident of Oak Forest if its principal place of business
is located in the city. Principal place of business shall be established by
corporate charter, Assumed Names Act registration or other documents
acceptable to the City Clerk.



      (3)   If any motor vehicle has been purchased or lawfully
obtained by the applicant, said vehicle must display a vehicle license within
30 days of purchase.



(2000 Code, § 10.20.030)  (Ord. 2454, § 1 (part), passed --2000; Ord.
2729, § 1, passed --2003; Am. Ord. 2008-05-0182O, passed 5-13-2008; Am. Ord.
2010-02-0278O, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-04-0438O, § 3, passed
4-23-2013)



§ 70.23  APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   All applications for a motor vehicle license or for a transfer
thereof shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on forms to be furnished
by him or her, which forms shall state the applicant’s name and address and
the type of motor vehicle to be licensed and which completed applications
shall be accompanied by the license fee.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, signed
by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, and deliver the same to the
applicant, together with a tag or sticker to be affixed to the motor vehicle.



(2000 Code, § 10.20.040)



§ 70.24  DISPLAY OF STATE REGISTRATION PLATES AND REGISTRATION STICKERS.



   (A)   Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle other than a
motorcycle, trailer, semitrailer or truck-tractor shall be attached thereto,
one in the front and one in the rear.



   (B)   The registration plate issued for a motorcycle, trailer or
semitrailer shall be attached to the rear thereof only.



   (C)   The registration plate issued for a truck-tractor shall be
attached to the front thereof only.



   (D)   Every registration plate shall, at all times, be securely
fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as
to prevent the plate from swinging. The plate shall be fastened at a height
of not less than 12 inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom of the
plate. The plate shall be fastened in a place and position so as to be
clearly visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a
condition as to be clearly legible.



   (E)   Registration stickers issued as evidence of renewed annual
registration shall be attached to registration plates as required by the
Secretary of State.



   (F)   No person shall operate or park, nor shall an owner permit to
be operated or parked, on any public street or highway in the city, any
vehicle required to be registered under the provisions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code or this Traffic Code, either:



      (1)   Without valid registration plates and registration
stickers or other proper evidence of registration, as required for that
vehicle by the Illinois Vehicle Code or the Secretary of State; or



      (2)   With cancelled, suspended, revoked or expired
registration plates, registration stickers or other proper evidence of
registration as required for that vehicle by the Illinois Vehicle Code or the
Secretary of State.



(2000 Code, § 10.20.050)




VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT




§ 70.35  VEHICLES SUBJECT TO SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   A motor vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this
subchapter where the motor vehicle is used in the commission of any of the
following:



   (A)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized
and forfeited pursuant to § 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1);



   (B)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs,
an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in
violation of § 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-501);



   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Illinois Cannabis
Control Act;



   (D)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;



   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of §§ 24-1, 24-1.5, and
24-3.1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1, 24-1.5, and 24-3.1);



   (F)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to § 6-303 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303); except that vehicles
shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an
unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission
testing;



   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting,
possessing or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance, as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Control Act; excluding ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4(a) and (b) (10 grams of cannabis or less);



   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code § 6-101 (ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 6-101), if the period of expiration is greater than one year;



   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been
issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101), or operating a motor vehicle without ever
having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age;



   (J)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated §§ 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501);



   (K)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 (ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, §§ 16 or 16A);



   (L)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or in
the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation
of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;



   (M)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of § 11-503
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503):



      (1)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or



      (2)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession;



   (N)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Drug
Paraphernalia Act;



   (O)   Operation or use of a motor in violation of any sound
amplification system as defined in § 12-611 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-611) as amended; or



   (P)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of §§
11-401,11-402, or 11-403 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 11-401, 11-402, or 11-403).



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 70.36  SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever a police officer has a preponderance of evidence to
believe that vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
subchapter, and none of the circumstances delineated in § 70.37 below are
present, the police officer shall cause the motor vehicle to be towed to a
facility controlled by the city or its agents.



   (B)   When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any
person identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle or any
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation, if there is a person, of the fact of the seizure and of
the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing as provided in the
chapter.



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 70.37  EXCEPTION TO VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   The police officer is vested with discretion to determine if, under the
totality of the circumstances, the motor vehicle is capable of being operated
in a safe manner by either a properly-licensed owner of the motor vehicle or
a properly-licensed passenger where the owner gives permission for release of
the motor vehicle to a properly-licensed passenger within the motor vehicle.
If the police officer so concludes, then a motor vehicle shall not be
impounded, but rather be released into the custody of the owner or passenger
in accordance with the regulations and procedures specified herein.



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 70.38  POSTING A BOND.



   (A)   If a bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the city, the
impounded vehicle shall be released to the owner of record, upon the payment
by the owner of record of the towing and storage costs.



   (B)   If a penalty is imposed for a violation of the chapter, the
bond will be forfeited to the city provided, in the event that a violation of
this subchapter is not proven, the bond shall be returned to the person
posting the bond.



   (C)   All bond money posted pursuant to this subchapter shall be
held by the city until the City's Administrative Hearing Officer issues a
decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until a reviewing court issues a
final decision.



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 70.39  PRELIMINARY HEARING.



   Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of the
chapter requests a preliminary hearing within 12 hours after the seizure of
the motor vehicle, the watch commander or any supervising officer must
conduct a preliminary hearing within 24 hours after the request for a
preliminary hearing is received by the city; provided that if the date for
the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the preliminary
hearing will be held on the next business day following the Saturday, Sunday
or legal holiday. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply.



   (A)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to be heard at the preliminary hearing.



   (B)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing,
and hearsay testimony will be allowed and shall be admissible.



   (C)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the watch commander
or supervising officer determines that there is probable cause to believe
that the vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in § 70.35 above and that
no driver fulfilling all of the criteria set forth in § 70.37 above was
available to remove the motor vehicle from the scene of the traffic stop, the
watch commander or supervising officer shall order the continued impoundment
of the vehicles, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the
city in the amount of $500, plus the towing and storage costs.



   (D)   If the watch commander or supervising officer determines that
there is not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as
hereinabove provided in § 70.35 above, or that an alternative driver
fulfilling all of the criteria set forth in § 70.37 above was available to
safely remove the motor vehicle from the scene of the traffic stops, then the
motor vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without
any penalty or other costs.



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 70.40  FINAL HEARING.



   (A)   Notice of hearing.



      (1)   Within 45 days after a motor vehicle is seized and
impounded pursuant to this subchapter, the city shall notify the owner of
record of the vehicle of the date, time and location of a final hearing.



      (2)   The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on the records of the
Illinois Secretary of State.



      (3)   Notice by certified mail need not be given when the
owner of the vehicle has been personally served with notice in written form
of the time, date and location of the hearing.



   (B)   Requesting a hearing.



      (1)   A person whose vehicle is seized pursuant to this
section may apply for a hearing to assert that he or she or the person
driving the vehicle was not in violation of this subchapter at the time the
vehicle was seized.



      (2)   The application for a hearing shall be made no later
than seven days after notice has been given either personally or by certified
mail, whichever is applicable in the given circumstance.



      (3)   The application to request a hearing shall be provided
by the city at the time notice is given.



      (4)   The bond shall be forfeited in the event a hearing is
not requested as provided for in this section.



      (5)   After an application for hearing is received by the
city, a subsequent notice shall be sent to the person that requested the
hearing notifying that person of the date, time and location of the hearing.



   (C)   Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following shall
apply at an owner's final hearing:



      (1)   Unless continued by order of the City's Administrative
Hearing Officer, the hearing shall be held within 60 days after the motor
vehicle was seized;



      (2)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the hearing;



      (3)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing
Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
used as provided in § 70.35 and that no driver fulfilling all of the
criteria set forth in § 70.37 was available to remove the motor vehicle from
the scene of the traffic stop, the Hearing Officer shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to the city a
penalty in the amount of $500, plus the towing and storage costs. The penalty
and costs shall be a debt due to the city;



      (4)   If the owner or record fails to appear at the hearing,
the Hearing Officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the city,
which order shall require the payment to the city of an administrative
penalty of $500; and



      (5)   If the Hearing Officer determines that the vehicle was
not used as provided in § 70.35 above, or that the vehicle was so used but
that a driver fulfilling all of the criteria set forth in § 70.37 would have
been available to safely remove the motor vehicle from the scene of the
traffic stop, then the motor vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record
of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs, or, if a cash bond had
previously been posted, the cash bond shall be returned.



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 70.41  UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within 30 days after the
expiration of time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of
the action of the city under this subchapter, or the time at which a final
judgment is rendered in favor of the city by a court of proper jurisdiction,
or the time at which a final administrative decision is rendered against an
owner or record who is in default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or
unclaimed vehicle, as otherwise provided by law.



   (B)   If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid
within 80 days after a penalty is imposed pursuant to this subchapter, the
vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles,
unless a petition for judicial review is filed with a court of proper
jurisdiction. Where a petition for judicial review of the Hearing Officer's
determination is filed and pending in a court of proper jurisdiction, the
vehicle shall not be deemed to be abandoned and shall not be sold. If the
petition for judicial review is resolved in favor of the city, the vehicle
shall be deemed abandoned and may be disposed of by the city if the penalty
and towing and storage costs are not paid within 30 days after the date of
the court's order.



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 70.42  LIABILITY FOR PENALTY AND COSTS.



   (A)   The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or
impounded shall be liable to the city for a penalty of $500 in addition to
any fees for the towing and storage of the motor vehicle.



   (B)   Fees for towing and storage are established by the city.



   (C)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this subchapter shall remain
impounded until the earlier of the following events occurs:



      (1)   The penalty is paid to the city, and all towing and
storage costs are paid to the towing company;



      (2)   A bond in amount equal to the liability of the owner as
herein provided in division (A) above is posted with the city and all
applicable towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company;



      (3)   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the
vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles; and



      (4)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no
owner, lien holder or any other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a motor vehicle impounded under this subchapter until the
penalty and all towing and storage costs applicable under this subchapter
have been paid in full.



(Ord. 2015-09-0557O, passed 9-22-2015)




TRAFFIC REGULATION AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATE PROPERTY




§ 70.55  OPTION TO ENTER AGREEMENT.



   On occasion, the city may choose to enter into traffic regulation
agreements with private property owners.



(Ord. 2006-09-0055O, passed 9-12-2006, § 1)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   In general. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of
the provisions of this Traffic Code, for which no penalty is otherwise
provided in the following schedule of fines or elsewhere in this Traffic
Code, is guilty of a petty offense for a first and second offense and upon
conviction shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500; for a third
or subsequent conviction within one year after the first conviction, that
person is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each
occurrence during or at which time a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.



(2000 Code, § 10.08.070) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0284O, passed 3-23-2010)



CHAPTER 71:  ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE



Section



   71.01   Adopted by reference



§ 71.01  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 5/20-204, the 1994 Illinois Vehicle
Code, that code, as amended through the date of the adoption of the 1994
replacement pages for these codified ordinances, being Chapter 625 of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, is adopted by reference as if set
forth at length herein.



(2000 Code, § 10.04.010)



CHAPTER 72:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Exhibitions of speed



   72.02   Vehicle weight limit



   72.03   Trucks on sidewalks



   72.04   Attaching to vehicles or trains



   72.05   Personal use of motorized or motor- assisted vehicles



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED.



   (A)   Motor vehicle exhibitions of speed, commonly referred to as
“burning rubber,” “peeling out” or “donuts,” and other maneuvers
of speed, are declared to be a nuisance.



   (B)   No operator of a motor vehicle shall perform a motor vehicle
exhibition of speed upon any street or highway in the city.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, STREETS AND HIGHWAYS means
the entire width between boundary lines of every way or place, of any kind,
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right
for purposes of vehicular traffic.



(2000 Code, § 10.16.010)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMIT.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any street in the city,
other than a state route, where the gross weight of the vehicle is in excess
of 10,000 pounds. On state routes, the weight limits established by state law
shall govern.



   (B)   An application may be made in certain cases to the City Clerk
for permission to drive a vehicle whose gross weight exceeds 10,000 pounds
over designated streets in the city.



   (C)   The permission provided for in division (B) above shall be
granted only if the applicant deposits with the City Clerk a bond in the sum
of $5,000, payable to the city, to pay for any damage caused by the vehicle
while driving over any city street, bridge or culvert.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to any street in the city unless
a notice of the weight limit established in this chapter is posted thereon.



(2000 Code, § 10.16.020)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  TRUCKS ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall cause, suffer, permit or allow any truck to cross any
city sidewalk without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works.



(2000 Code, § 10.16.030)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  ATTACHING TO VEHICLES OR TRAINS.



   No person shall jump upon, hitch onto, cling to or in any way attach
himself or herself to any vehicle or railroad train while the same is in
motion.



(2000 Code, § 10.16.040)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed - -1999)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  PERSONAL USE OF MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED.  Includes gasoline powered engines,
diesel powered engines, electric powered engines or any combination thereof.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE.  A device 50
inches or less in width, having a manufacturer’s dry weight of 600 pounds
or less, traveling on three or more tires, designed with a seat or saddle for
operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control, and
which is motorized or motor assisted and is not licensed for street use by
the state of Illinois.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED BICYCLE.  A device capable of being
propelled by both human and motorized or motor-assisted power upon which any
person may ride having two tandem wheels and which is not licensed for street
use by the State of Illinois.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED GO-CART.  A device having two or
more tandem axles and a combination of wheels connected by a platform
designed for sitting which any person may ride and which is motorized or
motor-assisted and is not licensed for street use by the State of Illinois.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED MINI-BIKE.  A device having two
tandem wheels designed to be powered by motorized or motor-assisted power
upon which any person may ride and which is not licensed for street use by
the State of Illinois.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED PEDICYCLE.  A pedal-driven device
capable of being propelled by both human and motorized or motor-assisted
power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels and which is
not licensed for street use by the State of Illinois.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED ROLLER SKATES.  Devices worn on the
feet with a combination of wheels which are motorized or motor-assisted. This
definition includes devices commonly known as in-line skates.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTER.  A device with two or more
wheels connected by a platform with a steering handle or wheel which is
designed for standing on, or has a seat for sitting upon, and which is
motorized or motor-assisted and is not licensed for street use by the State
of Illinois.



      MOTORIZED OR MOTOR-ASSISTED SKATEBOARDS.  Devices with two or
more tandem axles and a combination of wheels connected by a platform
designed for standing which are motorized or motor-assisted.



   (B)   Prohibition.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for, and no person shall use,
operate, or be in control of any motorized or motor-assisted skateboard,
roller skates, scooter, pedicycle, bicycle, mini-bike, go-cart or all-terrain
vehicle, except as to areas privately owned and authorized by the owner for
motorized or motor-assisted vehicle use.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for, and no person shall operate or
propel any motorized or motor-assisted skateboard, roller skates, scooter,
pedicycle, bicycle, mini-bike, go-cart or all-terrain vehicle upon any
sidewalk, roadway, street, public way or upon any municipal parking area
within the corporate limits of the city.



   (C)   Applicability.



      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of
the above-referenced devices when participating in a parade authorized by the
city.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall also not apply to a
motorized or motor-assisted wheelchair or scooter which is being used to
transport a physically challenged person.



   (D)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be fined as allowed by the City of Oak Forest general code penalty
provision § 10.99.



(2000 Code, § 10.16.060)  (Ord. 2763, § 1, passed - -2003)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.



(2000 Code, § 10.16.050B)



CHAPTER 73:  PARKING



Section




Parking Generally




   73.01   Prima facie responsibility of owner



   73.02   Parking on sidewalks, driveways and aprons



   73.03   Parking on parkway or private property



   73.04   Diagonal parking; parking prohibited for street cleaning



   73.05   Display for sale and use of vehicles for business purposes
prohibited



   73.06   Parking of boats and trailers



   73.07   Tampering with parked vehicles



   73.08   Snow emergencies



   73.09   Commercial and heavy vehicles



   73.10   Prohibited and limited parking areas; signs



   73.11   Violations; impounding




Commuter Parking Facility




   73.25   Definitions



   73.26   Manner of parking; parking in areas reserved for handicapped
persons



   73.27   Handicapped permits



   73.28   No-parking areas



   73.29   Commercial parking uses



   73.30   (Reserved)



   73.31   (Reserved)



   73.32   Enforcement by Police Department



   73.33   Fees




PARKING GENERALLY




§ 73.01  PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this article prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose name the
vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and
subject to the penalty therefor.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.010)



§ 73.02  PARKING ON SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND APRONS.



   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with directions of a police officer or official traffic sign or
signal, no operator of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle on any
sidewalk (including partial parking), from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., except
that it is lawful to park across and perpendicular to the path of a sidewalk
between the driveway and driveway apron area of a single-family residence
during the 24-hour period following a snowfall of more than two inches.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.020)



§ 73.03  PARKING ON PARKWAY OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, or when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in case of roadway
construction, excavation or repair, or within 12 hours following a snowfall
of two inches or more, or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or official traffic sign or signal, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle on a parkway or in the area between a residence and the
roadway.



   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any private
parking lot or private property unless authorized by the owner or proprietor
thereof.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.04  DIAGONAL PARKING; PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING.



   (A)   No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle diagonally
to the edge of a roadway except where the diagonal parking is permitted by
suitable signs and markings.



   (B)   For the purpose of facilitating the cleaning of streets, the
Director of Public Works is authorized to erect temporary signs designating
the days of the week, the hours of the day and the part of a street in which
the parking of vehicles is prohibited during the periods and at the location
designated on those signs, as provided in division (A) above.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.040)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.05  DISPLAY FOR SALE AND USE OF VEHICLES FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Property owners within the city shall be allowed to display
one vehicle for sale on their property. Any vehicle displayed for sale must
be currently licensed, in good repair, driveable and registered at that
property address.



   (B)   Other than allowed by this section no person shall park any
vehicle within the city for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or park
any vehicle upon which merchandise is being offered to the public for sale.



   (C)   Nothing in this section is intended to nor shall restrict any
licensed car sales business within the city from conducting their business as
allowed by statute and ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.050)  (Ord. 2573, § 1, passed - -2001)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 73.06  PARKING OF BOATS AND TRAILERS.



   No person shall park a boat, house trailer or other trailer, or any
device designed to be towed by a motor vehicle, on any city street between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.07  TAMPERING WITH PARKED VEHICLES.



   No person shall start or cause to be started the engine of any motor
vehicle, or shift, change, move or use the levers, brakes, starting device,
gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than
that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.08  SNOW EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle on any public street in the
city at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of two inches or more has
occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or otherwise removed from the
street. Council may, at its discretion, designate certain streets as snow
routes. These routes will be posted as such and will have priority in snow
removal.



   (B)   In order to help ensure that all city streets can be
adequately plowed during and after snowfalls of two inches or more, the Chief
of Police is authorized to have removed from any city street any vehicle
which obstructs the operation of snow removal equipment.



   (C)   Although designated snow routes will receive primary attention
during and after snowfalls, all city streets are equally subject to this
section.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.080)



§ 73.09  COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES.



   (A)   In Residence Districts.



      (1)   No person shall park any vehicle with a gross weight of
over 8,000 pounds, which is required ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815 to have a
Class D or above license, on any residential property or street in the city,
except in accordance with this section.



      (2)   Vehicles defined in division (A)(1) above may be parked
in certain specified places in residence districts, as follows.



         (a)   Carports. A carport is a detached or attached
structure with a covered roof containing one or more parking spaces and open
on one or more sides. A carport located upon a lot developed with a
residential dwelling serves a similar use as a private garage.



         (b)   Private garages. A private garage is a detached or
attached structure located upon a lot developed with a residential dwelling
(or a portion of a main residential building), used by the occupants residing
upon the premises principally for the storage of passenger vehicles and other
vehicles and equipment permitted upon the lot.



         (c)   Parking spaces. A parking space is a permanently
surfaced area of not less than 180 square feet, either within a structure or
in the open, excluding driveways, access drives and public streets, for the
parking of a vehicle.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the
contrary, the parking of a vehicle on a street remains subject to the parking
regulations of this Traffic Code, the Illinois Vehicle Code and the Zoning
Code of the city.



   (B)   On streets. No person shall park any vehicle that in any way
is used for commercial purposes on any street for a longer period than is
necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading and unloading of the
vehicle, or for a longer period, during daytime hours, than is necessary to
complete the business transaction which requires that the vehicle be present
on any street.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.090)  (Ord. 2418, (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2417,
(part), passed - -1999)



§ 73.10  PROHIBITED AND LIMITED PARKING AREAS; SIGNS.



   (A)   Council may, from time to time, designate areas in which
parking is prohibited, or prohibited during certain hours, or limited in
time, or otherwise regulated or restricted.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall erect, install and maintain
suitable signs or markings, giving notice of the regulations and restrictions.



   (C)   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any sign or
marking, except that this requirement shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled on the paved, improved or main traveled portion of
a highway in a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.11  VIOLATIONS; IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   Every vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this section is declared to be a nuisance which may be abated by any police
officer by removing and conveying the vehicle to the vehicle pound designated
by Council.



   (B)   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any
legally impounded vehicle may remove the same, he or she shall furnish
evidence of ownership or right to possession and shall pay for the cost of
towing or removal to the vehicle pound and the cost of vehicle storage for
each day or fraction thereof in the pound.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.110)




COMMUTER PARKING FACILITY




§ 73.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HANDICAPPED PERSON.  A person who displays a license plate on his or
her motor vehicle which has been issued to him or her by the Motor Vehicle
Division of the Secretary of State’ s office and which, on its face,
indicates that the owner and driver of the vehicle is a handicapped person
and is thus entitled to display the special license plate on his or her motor
vehicle.



   PARKING SPACE.  A space in the commuter parking facility for the
parking of motor vehicles, which space is identified by plainly marked
stripes painted on the surface of the paving and by being numbered.



   RESTRICTED HANDICAPPED PARKING AREA.  An area in the commuter parking
facility for the parking of motor vehicles, which area is marked by signs
clearly indicating that it may be used by handicapped persons only.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.120)  (Ord. 2486, § 1 (part), passed - -2000; Ord.
2006-04-0016O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 73.26  MANNER OF PARKING; PARKING IN AREAS RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED
PERSONS.



   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any designated parking
space in a manner that the motor vehicle protrudes over and into any other
parking space immediately contiguous to it so as to prevent the use of the
latter space by another motor vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in a parking space which
is designated and marked for the use of handicapped persons only, unless the
vehicle is operated by a handicapped person.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.130)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.27  HANDICAPPED PERMITS.



   (A)   The Office of the City Clerk shall, upon application by any
handicapped person, issue that person a handicapped permit for a period of
time not to exceed one year.



   (B)   The permit shall be prominently displayed so that it is
clearly visible and shall be intended for use on the vehicle owned and
registered to the applicant.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.140)



§ 73.28  NO-PARKING AREAS.



   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any area within the commuter
parking facility in which parking is prohibited. A restricted area shall be
plainly marked with no-parking signs in a manner as to be clearly seen by the
public.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.150)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.29  COMMERCIAL PARKING USES.



   (A)   No operator of a commercial vehicle shall drive that vehicle
into the commuter parking facility for the purpose of picking up freight from
or delivering freight to the Rock Island Railroad facility, or for any other
commercial purpose, except as provided in this section.



   (B)   Any person wishing to use the facility for those purposes
shall, at least 24 hours prior thereto, appear, by himself or herself or by
his or her authorized representative, at the Police Department, and then and
there register with the Department. At that time the registrant shall give
the following information to the Department:



      (1)   The name of the person picking up or delivering the
freight;



      (2)   The type of vehicle to be used;



      (3)   The name of the driver involved; and



      (4)   The date and time of the pick-up or delivery of the
freight.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.160)



§ 73.30  (RESERVED).



§ 73.31  (RESERVED).



§ 73.32  ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The Police Department shall enforce this subchapter through the
issuance of citations and the towing of vehicles that are in violation of any
of the provisions of this section. Nothing in this section is intended to
preclude concurrent enforcement as elsewhere provided in these codified
ordinances.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.180)  (Ord. 2486, § 1 (part), passed - -2000)



§ 73.33  FEES.



   (A)   Every person who uses the commuter parking facilities shall be
permitted to park their vehicle for one 24-hour period and shall pay a daily
fee of $1.25 as decided by the City Council in accordance with budgetary
needs.  No person shall use the commuter parking facilities without paying
the daily commuter parking fee as established by the City Council.



   (B)   The fee shall be paid daily and collected pursuant to the
regulations as are, from time to time, adopted by the Chief of Police.



   (C)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be
subject to impounding pursuant to § 73.11 above, in addition to the penalty
provided in § 10.99.



(2000 Code, § 10.24.190)  (Ord. 2486 § 1 (part), 2000; Am. Ord.
2011-04-0340O, passed 4-26-11)



CHAPTER 74:  ABANDONED AND HAZARDOUS VEHICLES



Section



   74.01   Definitions



   74.02   Authorization for towing



   74.03   Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles



   74.04   Pre-tow hearing procedures



   74.05   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles



   74.06   Post-tow hearing procedures



   74.07   Form for post-tow notice and signs



   74.08   Form for pre-tow notice



   74.09   Form for post-tow hearing



   74.10   Form for owner’s permission to tow stolen vehicle



§ 74.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to
it in other ordinances of the municipality, and if not defined in any other
municipal ordinance, it shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Vehicle Code. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle parked or otherwise located on a public way:



         (a)   In a state of disrepair that it is incapable of
being driven; or



         (b)   That has been unmoved for a period of at least 24
hours, and from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved,
or some other circumstance, it appears to have been, and will be presumed to
have been, abandoned by its owner.



      (2)   A vehicle parked in a public parking lot or on private
property without the consent of the lot owner or the proprietor or agent of
the property, which person has requested that the vehicle be towed; or



      (3)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being
towed, by any other city ordinance, and which does not fall into the
categories of “hazardous” or “unlawful” vehicles and therefor is not
subject to an immediate tow.



   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is
disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator thereof;



      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the
health or welfare of members of the public;



      (3)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way
or alley that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or that poses a
potential danger to pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or



      (4)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper
municipal snow removal from a public street, way or alley.



   OWNER.  A person who holds legal title to a vehicle or the right of
possession of the vehicle.



   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or that is the
subject of a search and seizure by the Police Department; or



      (2)   A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or city
ordinances which prohibit parking at the location in question or for a period
of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute
or the ordinance authorizes the vehicle to be towed and the signs posted at
the general location note that fact.



   VEHICLE.  Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way,
including snowmobiles, except the devices moved by human power and devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails and tracks.



(2000 Code, § 10.36.010)



§ 74.02  AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   The towing of vehicles by the municipality, or by its
approved towing service operators on behalf of the municipality, shall be
authorized only by the Police Department and only under the circumstances
provided in this chapter.



      (2)   Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities
designated by the Police Department until lawfully claimed or disposed of
pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (B)   Towing without notice; immediate tows.



      (1)   A hazardous or unlawful vehicle may be towed without
prior notice, unless the vehicle is an unlawful vehicle which has been
reported as stolen and is not towable for some other specific reason, in
which case the owner should, when practical, be notified by telephone or
other means and given the opportunity to claim or move the vehicle in order
to avoid incurring the expenses of a police-ordered tow. However, the vehicle
may be towed if the owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle was
reported stolen, or at any time thereafter, on the form provided in § 74.10
below.



      (2)   Within 24 hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this
chapter, a notice shall be sent or personally delivered to the owner of the
vehicle, thereby affording the owner the opportunity for a hearing as
provided for in §§ 74.05 and 74.06.



   (C)   Towing with prior notice; abandoned vehicles. Abandoned
vehicles may be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and after
affording an opportunity for a hearing as provided for in §§ 74.03 and
74.04 below.



(2000 Code, § 10.36.020)



§ 74.03  PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered
to the owner of the vehicle or shall be forwarded by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, to his or her address as indicated in the
most current registration list of the Secretary of State. The notice shall be
on the form provided in § 74.08 below. If an out-of-state vehicle is
proposed to be towed, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made
of the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing
of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle,
and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished.
However, in no case will the city be required to delay towing more than seven
days after the date of the mailing or personal delivery of the notice if no
request for a hearing has been received within that seven-day period.



   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker, with the earliest date upon
which the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the police
department, shall be placed on the vehicle.



(2000 Code, § 10.36.030)



§ 74.04  PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Opportunity for hearing.



      (1)   The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle
to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven days, after the date of
mailing or personal delivery of the notice, to request, in writing, a pre-tow
hearing.



      (2)   Subsequent to this seven-day period, the vehicle may be
towed if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the
seven-day period, and any hearing rights under this chapter will be deemed
waived.



   (B)   Scheduling of hearing. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the pre-tow
notice. The city shall not be required to delay towing longer than the 14-day
period.



   (C)   Request for hearing.



      (1)   A request for a pre-tow hearing shall be made in person
to the office indicated on the notice.



      (2)   A request for a hearing by a person who resides more
than 50 miles from the city may be made by mail.



      (3)   Forms for the requests shall be made available by the
Police Department.



      (4)   At the time of making the request, the owner will be
provided a hearing date and time, by mail or in person, as the circumstances
require.



   (D)   Appointment of Hearing Officer.



      (1)   The city shall choose an officer or employee of the city
to serve as Hearing Officer.



      (2)   In no case shall a Hearing Officer be an individual who
was involved in the initial decision to tow the vehicle.



      (3)   The Hearing Officer shall have the opportunity to
require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed
tow or any other city personnel.



   (E)   Nature of hearing.



      (1)   The hearing shall be informal in nature and the rules of
evidence shall not apply.



      (2)   The hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate,
any citation relative to any vehicle.



      (3)   After receiving all relevant evidence, the Hearing
Officer shall render a written decision based upon a preponderance of the
evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the
state or the ordinances of the city, with a specific statutory or ordinance
section cited in the decision.



      (4)   The owner shall be provided a copy of the pre-tow
hearing decision.



   (F)   Decision to tow; rates to be charged.



      (1)   If a preponderance of the evidence supports towing and
compliance with this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the
vehicle be towed, with any towing and storage costs to then be imposed upon
the owner thereof.



      (2)   The fees to be charged for towing and storage services
shall be not more than the maximum rates set by the Chief of Police pursuant
to § 74.05(E) below.



      (3)   The owner of the vehicle, having had such a hearing, may
avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper
location to a lawful location and correcting any unlawful conditions of the
vehicle.



   (G)   Decision not to tow.



      (1)   If a preponderance of the evidence fails to support the
towing of a vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle not be
towed.



      (2)   The city shall furnish a copy of the decision to the
owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible from
the outside, such as on the dashboard or inside the rear window.



      (3)   No vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered
shall be towed by the city, unless the circumstances under which the decision
was rendered have changed.



      (4)   If at some subsequent time the municipality should wish
to tow the vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same
procedures required for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle.



   (H)   Retention of reports and documents; contesting decisions. All
original and copies of notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports and
any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The city or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.



(2000 Code, § 10.36.040)



§ 74.05  POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.



   (A)   Mailing or delivery of notice. Notice pursuant to this section
shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the Secretary of State, unless the notice is personally
delivered to the owner, in which case the date of delivery, the time of
delivery and the name of the police officer making the delivery shall be
noted in the Police Department records or reports. The notice shall be on the
forms provided in § 74.07 below and shall be mailed or delivered within 24
hours of the tow, as provided in § 74.02(B) above. If the city has towed an
out-of-state hazardous or unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or
letter shall be made of the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction
for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the
owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the
address furnished.



   (B)   Posting of signs showing hearing rights. All approved towing
service operators shall prominently post at least one sign, with dimensions
of at least 12 inches by 18 inches, indicating the opportunity and procedures
for a hearing to contest the validity of a towed vehicle. The sign, the form
for which is set out in § 74.07(A), shall be placed in locations readily
visible to the public transacting business at any towing facility. If a
towing service operator performs services for more than one city, the
information for contacting the various appropriate municipal offices can be
listed in one sign, the format for which shall be substantially similar to
the form set forth in § 74.07(A).



   (C)   Requests for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings may be
made in person at the office indicated on the notice within 15 days of the
mailing or personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the
vehicle, whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be
deemed waived. Requests for hearings by persons who reside more than 50 miles
from the city may be made in person or by mail received by the city within
the 15-day period.



   (D)   Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled
to possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same,
the owner or person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his or
her identity, ownership of the vehicle or right to possession, shall sign a
receipt for the vehicle and shall pay the amount currently owed for towing
and storage fees to the towing service operator. The Chief of Police is
authorized to promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof
necessary to establish these facts.



   (E)   Establishment of maximum towing and storage rates.



      (1)   The owner shall pay fees to the towing service operator
for towing and storage on police-ordered tows at rates not to exceed maximum
amounts to be administratively established by the Chief of Police and which
may be revised from time to time.



      (2)   The basic rates for the fees shall be shown in the form
and sign concerning vehicle release requirements, as set forth in §
74.07(A). However, nothing in this section is intended to prevent a
competitive towing service operator from charging less than the established
maximum rates for police-ordered tows or any other tows. In arriving at the
maximum rates for various services, the Chief shall consider the matters as
the prevalent market rates in the area for the different types of vehicles,
the types of storage and area requirements for categories as large trucks and
commercial vehicles and the relative difficulties and amount of work required
to perform various types of towing operations.



      (3)   For particularly difficult or unusual towing jobs, such
as large or serious accidents, the Chief is authorized to allow towing
operators to charge rates above those established for normal situations.
Those special charges must be based upon the cost of services provided,
taking into account matters as the man-hours and equipment time required for
the job.



      (4)   A towing service operator shall fully itemize, in
writing, the details of a billing at special rates for a particularly
difficult or unusual tow and shall supply a copy of the itemized bill to the
owner and to the Police Department. Any special rates charged shall be
customary in the towing industry in the area for the nature and extent of the
services provided.



      (5)   Every towing service operator and the Police Department
shall make available a copy of the complete current rate schedule and any
special rate policy established by the Chief of Police, for vehicle owners to
view upon request.



(2000 Code, § 10.36.050)



§ 74.06  POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an
immediate tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the Police Department as
set forth in § 74.02 above, shall be provided an opportunity for a post-tow
hearing to determine the validity of the tow and any towing or storage
charges. The hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any
citation issued relative to any towed vehicle.



   (B)   Nature of the hearing; appointment of Hearing Officer. The
nature of the hearing and the appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be the
same as set forth in § 74.04(D) and (E).



   (C)   Scheduling of hearings. Hearings shall take place as follows:



      (1)   In those instances where a vehicle has been released
upon the deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage
charges, and the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall
take place within 15 days after the release of the vehicle, unless the owner
requests a later date convenient to all parties.



      (2)   In those instances where a vehicle remains impounded,
the hearing shall take place, at the option of the owner:



         (a)   On the next day after an owner’s demand for the
hearing, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, if such demand is made
after 3:00 p.m.;



         (b)   On the second day following the demand, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, if the unavailability of a necessary witness
or evidence creates a particular difficulty in conducting the hearing on the
next calendar day; or



         (c)   Within 15 days of the request, on a date
convenient to all parties, if acceptable to the owner.



   (D)   Conduct of hearings. The Hearing Officer shall review all
evidence presented by the vehicle owner and the Police Department or other
city employees and shall make a finding, based upon a preponderance of the
evidence presented, as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage of
the vehicle. The city must establish the authority by a preponderance of the
evidence.



   (E)   Hearing decision. For each hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
complete a post-tow hearing decision, shall attach the decision to the Police
Department’s original vehicle towing report, and shall supply a copy of the
decision to the owner by personal delivery, if the owner is present, or by
mail, if the owner isn’t present. The decision and findings shall be
substantially as stated in the form for a post-tow hearing decision, set
forth in § 74.09 below.



   (F)   Retention of reports and documents; contesting decisions. All
originals and copies of notices, post-tow hearing decisions, towing reports
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the
Police Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or
after each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The city or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.



   (G)   Compliance with chapter. Notwithstanding any other ordinance
or statutory provision to the contrary, any towing service operator
authorized to perform tows on behalf of the city must perform its services
subject to the provisions of this chapter. However, the towing company shall
have the right to recover the reasonable value of its services for
police-ordered tows, which are not paid by the vehicle owner, from the city.
However, if a tow or the charge for a tow is found to be illegal and the
towing service operator is required to return the charge for the tow to the
owner of the vehicle, the city shall not be liable to reimburse the operator
for the towing charges.



(2000 Code, § 10.36.060)



§ 74.07  FORM FOR POST-TOW NOTICE AND SIGNS.



   (A)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of
§§ 74.05 and 74.06 above for posting in towing establishments and for
mailing or delivering to owners:



NOTICE OF VEHICLE RELEASE REQUIREMENTS AND HEARING RIGHTS



   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any impounded
vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from custody of the Police
Department or towing service operator, he shall furnish evidence of his
identity and ownership of the vehicle and right of possession thereto, shall
sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay a fee not exceeding $ _____ 
and for a truck or commercial vehicle, to cover the cost of towing or removal
to a vehicle pound or authorized garage, and, in addition thereto, the cost
of storage, not exceeding $ ______  per day for a passenger vehicle of not
more than seven passengers, and $ ______ per day for a truck or commercial
vehicle.



   However, higher fees may necessarily be charged in particularly
difficult or unusual towing or storage circumstances, for which rate
information is available upon request at the Police Department or towing
business location. If the owner or person entitled to possession wishes to
contest the validity of the tow, he may obtain a hearing under the conditions
of either paragraph (A) or (B) stated below:



TO OBTAIN HEARING



   (A)   If the vehicle has been released, he may, within fifteen days
of the release of the vehicle or the mailing or personal delivery to him of
the notification of the tow, whichever occurs first, request a hearing by
contacting in person the office of (Name of office, address and phone number)
Anyone residing more than fifty miles away from the City of Oak Forest may
make a request for a hearing by mail. The right to any hearing will be deemed
waived unless a written request for hearing is received by the above office
within the applicable fifteen-day period.



   (B)   If the vehicle is still impounded, he may contact the above
officer and obtain a hearing within the next day after the request, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, unless the request is made after 3:00 p.m.,
or unless there are particular difficulties in having the hearing on the next
day, in which case the hearing will take place on the second day thereafter,
excluding weekends and holidays.



NATURE OF HEARING



   (A)   The hearing shall be conducted according to municipal
ordinance provisions and shall determine the validity of the impounding of
the vehicle and the imposition or refund of any towing or storage charges,
but the hearing will not determine or adjudicate any citations issued. If the
Hearing Officer sustains the validity of the tow and storage, the owner or
person entitled to possession will be required to pay all unpaid towing and
storage fees before obtaining the release of the vehicle.



   (B)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of
§§ 74.05 and 74.06 for the mailing or delivery of post-tow notices to
owners, including the form set forth in division (A) above:



Post-Tow Incident Report No.



No.   ___________________



To:   _________________________________________  (name)



   _________________________________________  (address)



Date of certified or registered mailing:



_______________________________



or



Date and time of and name of person making personal delivery:



____________________________________________________



(make) ________________________  (model/year) 
____________________________________________



(other identifying features) ______________________________________



(license plate number and state) __________________________________



which is impounded at: _________________________________________(name and
address of towing service operator or municipal auto pound)



   The vehicle was towed from (location) ______________ on _______________
(date)  by the authority of the municipality of Oak Forest, as an unlawful
or hazardous vehicle, to wit:



(facts forming basis of tow)



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________



as defined in: ___________________________________________________ (ordinance
or statutory section)



   The towing was authorized by (ordinance or statutory section ) which
provides that:__________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
___________
_______________________________________________________________________________
____________



   You have the rights and payment obligations as set forth in the
enclosed notice of vehicle release requirements and hearing rights.



(2000 Code, § 10.36.070)



§ 74.08  FORM FOR PRE-TOW NOTICE.



   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
74.03 and 74.04 above for the mailing or delivery of pre-tow notices to
owners:



Pre-Tow Incident Report No: _________________



To: ______________________________  (name)



__________________________________  (address)



Date of certified or registered mailing:



_______________________________



or



Date and time of and name of person making personal delivery:



____________________________________________________



PRE-TOW NOTICE



   You are listed as the registered owner or person entitled to possession
of the following described vehicle:



(make) ________________________  (model/year) 
____________________________________________



(other identifying features) ______________________________________



(license plate number and state) __________________________________



which is impounded at: ____  (location)____________________________



in an apparently abandoned or unusable condition, to wit: (facts forming
basis of proposed tow):_____________
_______________________________________________________________________________
___________
_______________________________________________________________________________
___________



as defined in (ordinance or statutory section):
_____________________________________________________



   The City of Oak Forest will tow the vehicle or cause it to be towed
after seven days from the above date of mailing or personal delivery, unless
you move the vehicle to a lawful location or request a hearing as set forth
below. Any such hearing will only concern the proposed towing and will not be
determinative of or adjudicate any parking ticket or other citation
concerning the vehicle. If the vehicle is towed, you will be required to pay
all towing and storage charges before the vehicle is released.



   The towing is authorized by (ordinance or statutory section)
_____________  which provides that:



   If you wish to request a hearing on the legality of the present
location and condition of your vehicle, you must contact the office listed
below and file in person a request for such hearing within seven days of the
above date of mailing or personal delivery, unless you live more than fifty
miles from the City of Oak Forest, in which case you may mail a request for
hearing that must be received by the office listed below within seven days
from the mailing or personal delivery of this notice:  ________________ 
(name of office, address and phone number)



_______________________________________________________________________________
___________



(2000 Code, § 10.36.080)



§ 74.09  FORM FOR POST-TOW HEARING.



   The following form shall be utilized by the Hearing Officer for
post-tow hearing decisions as required in § 74.06 above:



Pre-Tow Incident Report No: ______________________



POST-TOW HEARING DECISION



   Following a hearing held after the towing of the vehicle as identified
in post-tow notice bearing the same number as the report number stated above
concerning the vehicle owned by or under the control of (name of owner)
(“owner”), the following findings and order are hereby entered, as
checked in the appropriate box and entered on the appropriate lines:



Amount previously paid by owner for towing and storage: $ __________



__   1.   Tow Authorized: Owner Responsible for All Charges. The towing
and storage of the vehicle was authorized by the following law of the State
of Illinois: ___________ or Municipal Ordinance No. ___________



and the owner is liable for the full amount of towing and storage fees
incurred to date, in the amount of: $____.



__   2.   Tow Not Authorized. There was no authorization in law for the
towing and storage, or the municipal employee causing the vehicle to be towed
did not comply with the requirements of the applicable statute or ordinance,
as follows: 
________________________________________________________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
____________



   The owner will not be charged for towing and storage and any amount
previously paid will be refunded by the municipality as shown here:



__   3.   Tow Authorized: Storage Partially  Reimbursable. The towing
of the vehicle was authorized by State law: ___________, or Municipal
Ordinance No. ____________ but the owner was caused to incur additional
improper storage charges because of improperly late notification of towing or
other reasons for which the municipality or towing company is responsible, as
follows:___________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
____________



   Storage amount to be excused or reimbursed to owner: $ _____ Towing and
storage balance for which owner is responsible: $ ______.



__   4.   Owner Failed to Appear: No Continuance Requested. This
finding constitutes a default against the owner on the matters stated in the
posttow notice. The owner is responsible for all towing and storage charges
incurred to date, in the amount of: $ ________.



   After making the appropriate computations with the amounts stated above
in the right-hand column for any amount previously paid by the owner, and
adding or subtracting the appropriate amounts listed under paragraphs 1, 2, 3
or 4, the final amount either owed by the owner to date or to be refunded to
the owner IS HEREBY ORDERED AS FOLLOWS:



Amount currently owed by owner: $ ______



or



Amount to be refunded to owner: $ _______



IMPORTANT FURTHER INFORMATION



   If the vehicle is presently still impounded, an order for the release
of the vehicle is attached to this decision. The owner must take possession
of the vehicle within twenty-four hours of the entry of this decision, or he
may be responsible for further storage charges.



ENTERED: __________________________ (date and time)



SIGNATURE: _________________________



      (Hearing Officer)



______________________________________



(star number)



(2000 Code, § 10.36.090)



§ 74.10  FORM FOR OWNER’S PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE.



   The following form shall be used by police officers when obtaining
permission from vehicle owners to tow stolen vehicles that are recovered:



PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE FORM



   I, _____________________(name of owner), am the owner of a motor
vehicle which I have reported to the Oak Forest Police Department as having
been stolen. The vehicle is described as follows: _________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
____________



____________________________________________________________________ 
(description of the vehicle)



   I understand that the Oak Forest Police Department may transmit notice
of this vehicle theft to other police agencies which may attempt to recover
the vehicle. I understand that if the vehicle is recovered, I have the option
of requesting that the vehicle be towed to a vehicle pound location or left
at the place where the vehicle has been found. While not requiring the law
enforcement agency which finds the vehicle to do so, I do hereby grant my
permission to have the vehicle towed. I understand that if the vehicle is
towed, I will be required to pay reasonable towing and storage charges.



Dated: _______________, 20____.



_______________________________



Owner of Vehicle



(2000 Code, § 10.36.100)



CHAPTER 75:  BICYCLES



Section



   75.01   Registration required



   75.02   Application for registration



   75.03   Registration tags or stickers



   75.04   Sales or transfers



   75.05   Responsibility of rental agencies



   75.06   Bicycle stores; records of sales



   75.07   Destruction of manufacturer’s serial number



§ 75.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   No person residing within the city shall operate or permit to be
operated any bicycle upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city,
unless the bicycle is registered as provided in this chapter and unless the
city registration tag or sticker is affixed in a prominent place to the
bicycle.



(2000 Code, § 10.40.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.02  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.



   All applications for a bicycle registration, or for the transfer
thereof, shall be made in writing to the City Clerk or his or her designee,
on forms to be furnished by the City Clerk, which shall state the make,
serial number, model and description of the bicycle to be registered, the
name and residence address of the owner of the bicycle, the signature of the
owner, the owner’s age, and, if the owner is under 18 years of age, the
name and address of his or her parent or guardian, the name and address of
the person from whom the bicycle was purchased and the date of purchase.



(2000 Code, § 10.40.020)



§ 75.03  REGISTRATION TAGS OR STICKERS.



   Upon receipt of an application for registration of a bicycle, the City
Clerk or his or her designee shall register the bicycle and deliver to the
applicant a registration tag or sticker to be affixed to the bicycle.



(2000 Code, § 10.40.030)



§ 75.04  SALES OR TRANSFERS.



   Upon the sale or transfer of any bicycle registered under this chapter,
the purchaser or transferee, within ten days of the date of the sale or
transfer, shall register the bicycle in his or her name in the manner
provided for in the case of an original registrant.



(2000 Code, § 10.40.040)



§ 75.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF RENTAL AGENCIES.



   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is registered in accordance with this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 10.40.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.06  BICYCLE STORES; RECORDS OF SALES.



   Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or
secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the City Clerk of every bicycle
purchased or sold by that person, giving the name and address of the person
from whom the bicycle is purchased or to whom sold, and the make, serial
number, model and registration number, if any, of the bicycle.



(2000 Code, § 10.40.060)



§ 75.07  DESTRUCTION OF MANUFACTURER’S SERIAL NUMBER.



   No person shall destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the
manufacturer’s serial number on any bicycle and no person shall own or have
custody of a bicycle if the original manufacturer’s serial number thereof
has been destroyed, removed, altered, covered or defaced.



(2000 Code, § 10.40.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 76:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Limited vehicular access



   II.   Turning movements



   III.   Stop and yield signs



SCHEDULE I.  LIMITED VEHICULAR ACCESS.



   Vehicular access from the frontage referenced in Ord. 2125, passed
12-19-1995, to 167th Street, Dan Ryan Expressway (1-57), Cicero Avenue and/or
Crawford Avenue/Pulaski Road, at locations other than the existing frontage
road termini, is prohibited.



(2000 Code, § 10.16.050A)



SCHEDULE II.  TURNING MOVEMENTS.



   Left turn only (3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.): Southbound Oak Avenue at 160th
Street.



(Ord. 2007-11-0140O, passed 11-27-2007)



SCHEDULE III.  STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   Stop intersections. The following intersections shall be
designated as stop intersections:



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


66th Court
 
147th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Albert Drive
 
Stuart Lane
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Albert Drive
 
Edward Drive
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Albert Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Ann Marie Drive
 
155th Sreet
 
1
 
S/B


Ann Marie Lane
 
Adeline Place
 
1
 
N/B


Arroyo Drive
 
157th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Arroyo Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Arroyo Drive
 
Rob Roy Drive
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Arroyo Drive
 
Boca Rio Drive, Alameda Avenue, Forestview Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Barton Lane
 
Fieldcrest Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Becky Court
 
149th Street
 
3
 
S/B, W/B, E/B


Belle Street
 
Jessica Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Betty Ann Lane
 
155th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Blair Lane
 
Wagman Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Boca Rio Drive
 
Catalina Avenue
 
1
 
S/B


Boca Rio Drive
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Bonnie Trial East
 
Jessica Drive
 
3
 
S/B, W/B, E/B


Bonnie Trial West
 
Jessica Drive
 
3
 
S/B, W/B, E/B


Bramblewood Drive
 
156th Place
 
3
 
S/B, W/B, E/B


Brenden Lane
 
Fieldcrest Drive
 
1
 
S/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Brenden Lane
 
Barry
 
1
 
W/B


Brenden Lane
 
Scott Street
 
1
 
N/B


Briar Lane
 
Rob Roy Drive
 
3
 
S/B, W/B, E/B


Briar Lane
 
Colina Avenue
 
1
 
W/B


Briar Lane
 
School Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Briar Lane
 
Condado Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Brockton Lane
 
Fieldcrest Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Cental Avenue
 
158th Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Cental Avenue
 
Christopher Drive
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Carol Belle Trail
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Independence Avenue
 
1
 
E/B


Central Avenue
 
Victoria Drive
 
1
 
E/B


Central Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
1
 
E/B


Central Avenue
 
LaPalm Drive
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Central Avenue
 
Fern Avenue
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Central Avenue
 
Scarborough Lane
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Adeline Place
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Leslie Lane
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Margie Lane
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Babette Court
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Mary Ann Court
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
163rd Street
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Jessica Drive
 
1
 
W/B


Central Avenue
 
Ellen Court
 
1
 
W/B


Chaucer Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
1
 
S/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Chestnut Lane
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Church Lane
 
Westview Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Cicero Avenue
 
149th Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
1
 
W/B


Cicero Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
154th Street
 
1
 
E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
156th Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
157th Street
 
1
 
E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
160th Street
 
1
 
E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
161st Street
 
1
 
E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
162nd Street
 
1
 
E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
163rd Street
 
1
 
E/B


Cicero Avenue
 
Knottingwood Avenue
 
1
 
W/B


Cicero Avenue
 
171st Street
 
1
 
W/B


Club Circle Drive
 
147th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Condado Drive
 
Chaucer Drive
 
1
 
W/B


Condado Drive
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Craig Drive
 
Henry Street
 
1
 
N/B


Craig Drive
 
Wagman Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Craig Drive
 
Richard Avenue
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Craig Drive
 
Lisa Lane
 
1
 
E/B


Craig Drive
 
Fieldcrest Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Crescent Green Drive
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Crescent Green Lane
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


David Lane
 
Rob Roy Drive
 
1
 
N/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Debra Drive
 
163rd Street
 
3
 
S/B, W/B, E/B


Debra Drive
 
Pamela Court
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Debra Drive
 
Margie Lane
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Debra Drive
 
Jamie Lane
 
1
 
W/B


Debra Drive
 
Leslie Lane
 
1
 
E/B


Debra Drive
 
159th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Duncan Road
 
Albert Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Duncan Road
 
James Drive
 
1
 
N/B


ElVista Avenue
 
147th Street
 
1
 
N/B


ElVista Avenue
 
Grange Road
 
1
 
W/B


ElVista Avenue
 
Fern Avenue
 
1
 
E/B


ElVista Avenue
 
LaPalm Drive
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


ElVista Avenue
 
Vine Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


ElVista Avenue
 
151st Street
 
1
 
S/B


Fielcrest Drive
 
Barry Lane
 
1
 
E/B


Forest Avenue
 
160th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Forest Avenue
 
162nd Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Forest Avenue
 
167th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Forest Avenue
 
Timber Court
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Forest Avenue
 
Cypress Court
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Forest Avenue
 
Sycamore Lane
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


George Brennan Hwy
 
Arrowhead Trace
 
1
 
E/B


George Brennan Hwy
 
Arrowhead Trace
 
1
 
E/B


George Drive
 
Terry Lane
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Harbor Drive
 
Carriage Way
 
1
 
S/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Harbor Drive
 
Daniels Lane
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Harlem Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
1
 
WB


Harold Street
 
Henry Street
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Hickory Lane
 
157th Street
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Hillside Avenue
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Hillside Avenue
 
School Street
 
2
 
S/B, E/B


Holly Court
 
Diamond Drive
 
1
 
S/B


James Drive
 
Edward Drive
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


James Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


James Drive
 
Lancaster Lane
 
1
 
W/B


James Drive
 
Rob Roy Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Justamere Road
 
Conway Court
 
1
 
W/B


Kara Court
 
167th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Keating Avenue
 
155th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Kenton Avenue
 
151st Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Kenton Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Kenton Avenue
 
Waverly Avenue
 
1
 
S/B


Kenton Avenue
 
Waverly Avenue
 
1
 
S/B


Kenton Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
1
 
E/B


Kilbourne Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
4
 
Null


Kilbourne Avenue
 
Frontage Road
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Kilbourne Avenue
 
166th Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Kilpatrick Avenue
 
151st Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Kilpatrick Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Kilpatrick Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Kilpatrick Avenue
 
155th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Kilpatrick Avenue
 
167th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Knottingwood Avenue
 
Fieldcrest Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Knottingwood Avenue
 
Milford Avenue
 
1
 
N/B


LaCrosse Avenue
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


LaCrosse Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
1
 
S/B


Lamon Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
1
 
N/B


Lamon Avenue
 
154th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Lamon Avenue
 
155th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Lamon Avenue
 
156th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Lamon Avenue
 
157th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Lamon Avenue
 
158th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Landings Lane
 
151st Street
 
1
 
S/B


Landings Lane
 
Carriage Way
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LaPalm Drive
 
Vine Street
 
1
 
S/B


LaPorte Avenue
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


LaPorte Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
1
 
S/B


Laramie Avenue
 
147th Avenue
 
1
 
N/B


Laramie Avenue
 
148th Street
 
1
 
W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
149th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Laramie Avenue
 
151st Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Laramie Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
1
 
W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
154th Street
 
1
 
W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
156th Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Laramie Avenue
 
155th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Laramie Avenue
 
157th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Laramie Avenue
 
158th Street
 
1
 
W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
160th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Laramie Avenue
 
161st Street
 
1
 
W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
167th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Laramie Avenue
 
Bellaire Avenue
 
1
 
W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
Newport Drive
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
Deerpath Road
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
Greentree Road
 
1
 
W/B


Laramie Avenue
 
Hawthorne Road
 
1
 
W/B


Las Flores Lane
 
Rob Roy Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Las Flores Lane
 
School Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Latrobe Avenue
 
157th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Latrobe Avenue
 
160th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Latrobe Avenue
 
159th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Laura Lane
 
Wagman Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Laura Lane
 
Barry Lane
 
2
 
S/B, W/B


Lavergne Avenue
 
149th Street
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


LaVergne Avenue
 
151st Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LaVergne Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Lavergne Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Lavergne Avenue
 
154th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LaVergne Avenue
 
155th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


LaVergne Avenue
 
156th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LaVergne Avenue
 
157th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LaVergne Avenue
 
158th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
149th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
151st Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
152nd Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
153rd Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
154th Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
156th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
157th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
158th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
159th Street
 
1
 
N/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
160th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
167th Street
 
1
 
N/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
Deerpath Avenue
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
Hawthorne Avenue
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
159th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Linden Drive
 
Maple Drive, Maple Court
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Linden Drive
 
Elm Lane
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Linder Avenue
 
147th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Lockridge Avenue
 
Fieldcrest Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
155th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
157th Street
 
3
 
S/B, W/B, E/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
159th Street
 
1
 
N/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Lockwood Avenue
 
160th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
161st Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
167th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
169th Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
170th Street
 
1
 
W/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
170th Place
 
1
 
W/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Forest Court
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Martha Lane
 
1
 
E/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Judy Court
 
1
 
E/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Kathleen Court
 
1
 
W/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Jessica Drive
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Harcourt Street
 
1
 
W/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Nicholas Court
 
1
 
W/B


Lockwood Avenue
 
Christopher Drive
 
1
 
E/B


Long Avenue
 
149th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Long Avenue
 
147th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Long Avenue
 
151st Street
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Long Avenue
 
155th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Long Avenue
 
157th Street
 
2
 
S/B, W/B


Long Avenue
 
159th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Long Avenue
 
160th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Long Avenue
 
Abbe Court
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Long Avenue
 
Janet Court,162nd Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Lorel Avenue
 
147th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Lorel Avenue
 
157th Street
 
1
 
S/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Lorel Avenue
 
159th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Lorel Avenue
 
162nd Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Lorel Avenue
 
161st Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Lorel Avenue
 
159th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Lorel Avenue
 
160th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Lynne Court
 
149th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Major Avenue
 
147th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Maple Drive
 
Forestview Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Massasoit Avenue
 
Fern Avenue
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Massasoit Avenue
 
Grange Avenue
 
1
 
N/B


Meadowdale Drive
 
Aldersyde Road
 
1
 
N/B


Meadowdale Drive
 
Coulter Road
 
1
 
S/B


Menard Avenue
 
Caletta Terrace
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Menard Avenue
 
147th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Michaele Drive
 
155th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Mission Avenue
 
151st Street
 
1
 
S/B


Mission Avenue
 
LaPalm Drive, LaPalm Court
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Mission Avenue
 
149th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Moorings Lane
 
151st Street
 
1
 
S/B


Moorings Lane
 
Carriage Way
 
2
 
N/B, E/B


Natalie Drive
 
Central Avenue
 
1
 
W/B


Natalie Drive
 
155th Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Natalie Drive
 
Ann Marie Lane
 
1
 
E/B


Natalie Drive
 
Adeline Place
 
1
 
E/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


New England Avenue
 
156th Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Oak Avenue
 
162nd Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Oak Avenue
 
161st Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Oak Avenue
 
160th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Oak Avenue
 
159th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Oak Park Avenue
 
156th Street
 
1
 
E/B


Oak Park Avenue
 
Westview Drive
 
1
 
E/B


Oak Park Avenue
 
Oak View Court
 
1
 
E/B


Oak Park Avenue
 
Ridge Point Drive
 
1
 
E/B


Oak Park Avenue
 
Winding Trail
 
1
 
E/B


Orogrande Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Oxford Drive
 
Chaucer Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Oxford Drive
 
151st Street
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Oxford Drive
 
Vine Street
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Park Avenue
 
LaPalm Drive
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Park Avenue
 
Fern Avenue
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Park Avenue
 
149th Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Parkside Avenue
 
LaPalm Drive
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Peggy Lane
 
Independence Avenue
 
1
 
N/B


Peggy Lane
 
159th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Pine Drive
 
Forestview Drive
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Pine Drive
 
Linden Drive
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Reynolds Lane
 
Independence Avenue
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Reynolds Lane
 
Essex Road
 
1
 
E/B


Reynolds Lane
 
Stuart Lane
 
1
 
N/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Ridgeland Avenue
 
Victoria Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Ridgeland Avenue
 
Catalina Avenue
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Ridgeland Avenue
 
Elm Lane
 
1
 
E/B


Ridgeland Avenue
 
Forestview Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Ridgeland Avenue
 
Cedar Road
 
1
 
E/B


Ridgeland Avenue
 
ElMorro Lane
 
1
 
W/B


Ridgeland Avenue
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Ridgeland Avenue
 
157th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Ridgewood Drive
 
151st Street
 
1
 
S/B


Rob Roy Drive
 
157th Street
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Rob Roy Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Rob Roy Drive
 
Chaucer Drive
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Rob Roy Drive
 
159th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Scarborough Lane
 
Sussex Court
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Scarborough Lane
 
147th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Scarborough Lane
 
Cromwell Lane
 
1
 
W/B


Spruce Lane
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Spruce Lane
 
Cedar Road
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, W/B


Sunset Court
 
147th Street
 
1
 
N/B


Terrace Drive
 
Liberty Square
 
1
 
N/B


Terrace Drive
 
159th Street
 
1
 
S/B


Terrace Drive
 
Corey Lane
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Terry Lane
 
George Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Terry Lane
 
Richard Avenue
 
1
 
W/B


Tudor Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
2
 
N/B, S/B




 



 



NORTH-SOUTH STREET
 
EAST-WEST STREET
 
NUMBER STOP WAYS
 
DIRECTION STOPPED
N/B - Northbound
S/B - Southbound
E/B - Eastbound
W/B - Westbound


Tudor Drive
 
Rob Roy Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Ventura Street
 
Forestview Drive
 
3
 
N/B, W/B, E/B


Walnut Road
 
Linden Drive
 
4
 
N/B, S/B, W/B, E/B


Walnut Road
 
Victoria Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Warwick Drive
 
Victoria Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Warwick Drive
 
Warwick Court, Rob Roy Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Waverly Avenue
 
155th Street
 
3
 
N/B, S/B, E/B


Waverly Avenue
 
155th Place
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Waverly Avenue
 
156th Street
 
1
 
E/B


Waverly Avenue
 
157th Street
 
1
 
W/B


Willow Lane
 
151st Street
 
1
 
N/B


Willowick Drive
 
Fieldcrest Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Willowick Drive
 
Lisa Lane
 
1
 
N/B


Woodland Drive
 
Laramie Avenue
 
1
 
E/B




 



   (B)   Yield intersections. The following intersections shall be
designated as yield intersections:



 




NORTH-SOUTH STREET

 

EAST-WEST STREET

 

NUMBER YIELD WAYS

 

DIRECTION YIELD



Alameda Avenue
 
Boca Rio Drive
 
2
 
N/B, S/B


Beth Court
 
Margie Lane
 
1
 
N/B


Boca Rio Drive
 
Forestview Drive
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Boca Rio Drive
 
El Morro Lane
 
2
 
W/B, E/B


Cherry Lane
 
Linden Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Debra Drive
 
Aimee Court
 
1
 
W/B, E/B


Hickory Lane
 
Linden Drive
 
1
 
N/B




 



 




NORTH-SOUTH STREET

 

EAST-WEST STREET

 

NUMBER YIELD WAYS

 

DIRECTION YIELD



Hillside Avenue
 
Condado Drive
 
1
 
W/B, E/B


Laramie Avenue
 
Aldersyde Road
 
1
 
W/B, E/B


Las Robles Street
 
Forestview Drive
 
1
 
N/B


LeClaire Avenue
 
Aldersyde Road
 
1
 
E/B


Oak Road
 
Linden Drive
 
1
 
S/B


Oak Road
 
Pine Drive
 
1
 
E/B


Orchard Lane
 
Linden Drive
 
1
 
N/B


Rob Roy Drive
 
Gainesborough Place
 
1
 
W/B, E/B


Spruce Lane
 
Forestview Drive
 
1
 
S/B




 



(Ord. 2008-08-0195O, passed 8-12-2008)



CHAPTER 77:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Prohibited parking



   II.   Residential parking areas



SCHEDULE I.  PROHIBITED PARKING.



   (A)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle in any of
the following areas: On the east side or west side of Central Avenue between
163rd Street on the south and Margie Lane on the north.



   (B)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle on 163rd
Street from Long Avenue to Central Avenue on either side of the street from
9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. of the following day.



   (C)   Parking shall not be permitted along 151st Street from Oak
Park Avenue to Chestnut Road within the city limits. Council shall prohibit
future parking at locations on or immediately adjacent to 151st Street as may
be determined and directed by the County of Cook to be necessary to ensure
the free flow of traffic and safety to the motoring public.



   (D)   No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle on El
Vista Avenue from 151st Street to LaPalm Drive, or on Vine Street from Sunset
Avenue to Mission Avenue. Limits: "Resident Parking Only - No Parking on
School Days 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m."



   (E)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle at 151st
Street on El Vista Avenue. Limits: "No Parking Here to Corner."



   (F)   No person shall park any vehicle between the signs posted on
Mission Avenue at 151st Street.



   (G)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle from
Waverly Avenue to Cicero Avenue on the south side of 156th Street. Limits:
"No Parking Anytime."



   (H)   Parking shall not be permitted along Route 50 (Cicero Avenue)
from 149th Street to Route 6 within the city limits. Council shall prohibit
future parking at locations on or immediately adjacent to Route 50 (Cicero
Avenue) as may be determined and directed by the state and the city to be
necessary to ensure the free flow of traffic and safety to the motoring
public.



   (I)   No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle on the
north side of 151st Street between Central Avenue and Long Avenue. Limits:
"No Parking Anytime."



   (J)   No person shall park, stand or stop any motor vehicle on Fawn
Court. Limits: "Resident Parking Only - No Parking on School Days - 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m."



   (K)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the
areas and in violation of the limits as indicated below: Area: North side of
Waverly Avenue between Cicero Avenue and 156th Street. Limits: "6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m."



   (L)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not displaying a
residential parking permit, excluding service or delivery vehicles whose
operators are doing business with the residents living at these addresses, at
the following location: Chaucer Drive from Victoria Drive to Rob Roy Drive.
Limits: "Resident Parking Only - No Parking on School Days 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m."



   (M)   The area commonly described as the west side of Long Avenue
from 151st Street to Woodland Drive is designated as a "No Parking Area."



   (N)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the
area and in violation of the limits as indicated below: Area: Ann Marie and
Natalie Drives south of 155th Street. Limits: Posted signs on the side of the
streets where fire hydrants exist.



   (O)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the
area and in violation of the limits as indicated below: Area: From 15420/21
and Hickory Lane to Victoria Drive. Limits: "No Parking Here to Corner
-School Days Only."



   (P)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not registered to a
resident of that street, excluding service or delivery vehicles whose
operators are doing business with the residents living at these addresses, at
the following location: Sunset Park and El Vista Avenues from LaPalm Drive
South. Limits: "Resident Parking Only - No Parking on School Days 8:00 a.m.
to 2:00 p.m."



   (Q)   No person shall park, stand or stop a motor vehicle from 12:00
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. during school days on Long Avenue from Diamond Drive to
155th Street.



   (R)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not registered to a
resident of that street, excluding service or delivery vehicles whose
operators are doing business with the residents living at these addresses, at
the following location: 5340 and 5350 West 146th Street.



   (S)   It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within the
areas and in violation of the limits as indicated below: No parking here to
corner on both the East and West sides of Laramie Avenue from 16700 to
Aldersyde.



   (T)   Parking shall not be permitted along the following streets:



      (1)   Oak from 159th Street to 160th Street;



      (2)   160th Street from Oak Street to Cicero Avenue;



      (3)   160th Street from Oak Avenue to Grove Avenue (north
side); and



      (4)   Forest Avenue from 159th Street to 160th Street (east
side).



   (U)   Pursuant to § 73.10. it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
in the following location: north side of Victoria Drive (between 5630
Victoria Drive and Chaucer Drive).



   (V)   Pursuant to § 73.10. it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
between the east exit and west entrance at 5151 W. 149th Street commonly
known as Ridge School. This will be indicated by "No Parking" signs erected,
installed and maintained by the City of Oak Forest Director of Public Works.



(2000 Code, § 10.28.010)  (Ord. 2675, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2002; Ord. 2662,
§§ 1, 2, passed - -2002; Ord. 2757, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2003; Ord. 2756,
§§ 1, 2, passed - -2003; Ord. 2731, § 2, passed - -2003; Ord. 2838, § 1,
passed - -2004; Ord. 2809, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2004; Ord. 2895, §§ 1, 2,
passed - -2005; Ord. 2890, §§ 1, 2, passed - -2005; Ord. 2006-11-0070O,
passed 11-28-2006; Ord. 2007-11–0134O, passed 11-13-2007; Ord.
2007-11-0138O, passed 11-27-2007; Am. Ord. 2010-03-0284O, passed 3-23-2010;
Am. Ord. 2018-07-0695, passed 7-24-2018)



SCHEDULE II: RESIDENTIAL PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Establishment. The city creates certain residential parking
areas. These areas shall include the following:



      (1)   Mission Avenue between 151st Street and LaPalm Drive;



      (2)   Sunset Avenue between Vine Street and LaPalm Drive;



      (3)   Park Avenue between Vine Street and LaPalm Drive;



      (4)   Lamon Avenue from 155th Street on the south to 153rd
Street on the north;



      (5)   The area from 15300 to 15400 Kilpatrick Avenue;



      (6)   The area on Fern Avenue between Central and Major
Avenues;



      (7)   The area on Chestnut Lane between 151st Street and
Forestview Drive;



      (8)   The area on Willow Lane between 151st Street and
Forestview Drive;



      (9)   The area on Spruce Lane between 151st Street and
Forestview Drive;



      (10)   Oak Avenue Commuter Lot Area Permit Parking Only Zone 2
weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. on:



         (a)   Forest Avenue from 159th Street to 160th Street
(west side only);



         (b)   Forest Avenue from 160th Street to 162nd Street;



         (c)   Oak Avenue from 160th Street to 162nd Street;



         (d)   Grove Avenue from 159th Street to 160th Street;



         (e)   Lavergne Avenue (north and south of 160th to the
terminus);



         (f)   160th Street from Oak to Lavergne (south side);



         (g)   160th Street from Grove Avenue to Laverne Avenue
(north side); and



         (h)   161st Street from Cicero to Forest Avenue;



      (11)   The area on Long Avenue between 151st and Diamond Drive;



      (12)   The area north of 155th Street on Ann Marie Drive,
Betty Ann Lane, Michaele Drive and Natalie Drive is designated as a
residential parking permit only area on school days from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m.;



      (13)   Creekside Drive and Crescent Lane are designated as
residential parking permit only areas on school days;



      (14)   Kara Court is designated as a residential parking
permit zone;



      (15)   Latrobe from 157th Street to 160th Street; and



      (16)   158th Street from Laramie Avenue; and



      (17)   East side of Laramie Avenue from 158th to 159th and the
north property line of 15742 Laramie to 159th Street on the west side of
Laramie Avenue.



   (B)   Parking permits required.



      (1)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle not displaying a
residential parking permit in an area designated as a residential parking
area in division (A)(1) through (3) above, excluding service or delivery
vehicles whose operators are doing business with residents in such areas,
between 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on days when school is in session at Oak
Forest High School.



      (2)   It is unlawful for anyone to park any motor vehicle in
an area designated as a residential parking area in division (A)(4) through
(17) above unless it displays a parking permit.



   (C)   Permit issuance. The city shall issue one residential parking
permit for each vehicle bearing a current City of Oak Forest vehicle sticker
and which is based from a single-family dwelling on the street designated as
a residential parking permit area. The permits shall be restricted to use to
the vehicle for which the permit was issued.



   (D)   In addition, the city shall issue two residential parking
permits for visitors to any residence in the residential parking permit area.
Visitors' parking is limited to the time that the person driving the visiting
vehicle is actually in the residence or on the property being visited.
Additional one-day visitor's permits may be obtained from the city for
special events. Any misuse of any permits shall render them invalid and
additional permits shall not be issued to the person or household which
originally held the same.



   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any service
or delivery vehicle when used to provide services or to make deliveries to
residences within a residential parking permit area, provided that the
parking of the vehicle does not exceed the time the services or deliveries
are being made.



   (F)   Display of permits; limitations.



      (1)   All resident permits shall be displayed on or about the
left side of the front windshield of the vehicle so as to be easily visible
from the outside of the vehicle.



      (2)   The parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a
parking space within the designated residential parking permit area. The
permit shall not authorize the standing or parking of any vehicle in such
places as the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is otherwise
prohibited. Nothing in this chapter shall excuse the observance of any
traffic regulation.



   (G)   (1)   If otherwise allowed by city ordinance the city may
issue a residential parking permit for motor vehicles owned by the resident's
employer and regularly used by the resident. Before issuance of a permit for
such vehicle, the city shall be provided the following proof:



         (a)   Vehicle ownership;



         (b)   A statement from the employer that the vehicle has
been permanently assigned to the resident for his or her use; and



         (c)   As a condition of the resident's employment the
employee is authorized or directed to keep the vehicle in the employee's
possession.



      (2)   Supplemental documentation may be requested by the city.
Nothing in this provision is intended to nor shall it allow the parking of
any vehicles above a "B" classification.



   (H)   Permits shall be issued on an annual basis concurrent with the
issuance of municipal vehicle stickers.



   (I)   Permits shall be permanently displayed in the lower left hand
corner of the vehicle’s rear window.



   (J)   Misrepresentations; duplicate permits.



      (1)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to represent that a vehicle is entitled to a parking permit authorized by
this chapter when it is not so entitled. The display of a parking permit on a
vehicle not entitled to a parking permit shall constitute a representation.



      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
to duplicate or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a parking permit
authorized by this chapter. It shall also be a violation of this chapter for
any person to display on any vehicle a duplicate parking permit.



   (K)   Violation; penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
10.99 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.



      (2)   In addition, the city expressly incorporates the
provisions of the city towing ordinances, specifically including, but not
limited to, Chapter 74.



(2000 Code, §§ 10.32.010 through 10.32.060)  (Ord. 2676, § 2, passed -
-2002; Am. Ord. 2018-07-0695, passed 7-24-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-08-0700O,
passed - -2018)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         90.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



         91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY



         92.   ALARM SYSTEMS



         93.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



         94.   FIRE CODES AND FIREWORKS



         95.   ANIMALS



CHAPTER 90:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



Section




Street and Bridge Construction




   90.001   IDOT standard specifications for road and bridge
construction; file copies



   90.002   Compliance required



   90.003   Conflict of laws




Sidewalk Construction




   90.015   Sidewalks required



   90.016   Permit required



   90.017   Permit applications



   90.018   Permit fees



   90.019   Grade and alignment standards



   90.020   Variances



   90.021   Grade and line required



   90.022   Construction standards



   90.023   Inspections



   90.024   Occupancy permits



   90.025   Waiver; payment to city in lieu of sidewalks



   90.026   Sidewalk fund




Driveway Construction and Curb Cuts




   90.040   Driveway required



   90.041   Maximum numbered allowed



   90.042   Driveway widths



   90.043   Driveway grades and curbs



   90.044   Connection to collector or arterial streets



   90.045   Placement of driveway



   90.046   Removal of parkway trees



   90.047   Impervious surface limitation



   90.048   Driveways over drainage ditches; culvert required



   90.049   Culvert permit required



   90.050   Grade and size



   90.051   Materials



   90.052   Installation



   90.053   Change of grade prohibited



   90.054   Refuse in culverts; obstructions to water flow



   90.055   Notice to clean; cleaning by city



   90.056   Application to existing culverts



   90.057   Removal and replacement by city



   90.058   Permit required



   90.059   Concrete drives in residential areas



   90.060   Asphalt drives in residential areas



   90.061   Gravel drives



   90.062   Aprons and accessways



   90.063   Curb cuts




Excavations




   90.070   Permit required; application and fee



   90.071   Restoration of streets and surfaces; cash deposit



   90.072   Supervision by Director of Public Works




Street and Sidewalk Use Regulations




   90.085   Solicitation of funds by charitable organizations



   90.086   Encroachments on Route 50 (Cicero Avenue)



Trees and Parkways



   90.100   Purpose



   90.101   Residential parkway standards



   90.102   Tree removal permit



   90.103   Tree determination



   90.104   Tree species



   90.105   Nuisance trees on private property



   90.106   Pruning, right-of-way clearance of private trees



   90.107   Violations of tree regulations



   90.108   Interference with the city



Honorary Designation of Streets



   90.120   Request



   90.121   Process



   90.122   Duration



   90.999   Penalty




STREET AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION




§ 90.001  IDOT STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROAD AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION;
FILE COPIES.



   (A)   There is adopted by and for the city, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing construction and material specifications
for streets and other public ways in the city, that certain document known as
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the most current
edition, prepared and promulgated by the Illinois Department of
Transportation (IDOT), or any successor edition of the aforementioned
publication.



   (B)   At least three copies of that document are on file with the
City Clerk for inspection by the public.



(2000 Code, § 12.04.010)



§ 90.002  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as adopted in
§ 90.001 above, in the repair, improvement or construction of any street or
other public way in the city.



(2000 Code, § 12.04.020)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.003  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   (A)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as adopted in
§ 90.001 above, and any provision of these codified ordinances, or any other
local ordinance or resolution, the provision of the Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction shall control.



   (B)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
the document and a provision of any other technical code adopted or referred
to by the city as a standard, the higher or stricter standard shall control.



(2000 Code, § 12.04.030)




SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION




§ 90.015  SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Public sidewalks shall be installed on all new residential,
commercial and institutional construction.



   (B)   Sidewalks shall also be required where they do not exist on
any remodeling projects and where, in the determination of the Director of
Public Works, the interest of the city would require installation of the
sidewalk.



   (C)   Sidewalks are required on the full street frontage of the lot
and on the side lot frontage on corner lots that border a public street.



   (D)   This section shall also apply to properties governed by the
subdivision regulations.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.010)  (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)



§ 90.016  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall repair or install a public sidewalk without first
obtaining a written permit therefor from the City Building Department.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.020)  (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)  Penalty,
see § 90.999



§ 90.017  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for sidewalk repair or installation permits shall be made
on forms furnished by the city.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.030)



§ 90.018  PERMIT FEES.



   Fees for a sidewalk installation permit shall be in accordance with the
applicable building permit fees and inspection fees as prescribed in Title 15
of this code.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.040)  (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001; Ord.
2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)



§ 90.019  GRADE AND ALIGNMENT STANDARDS.



   Applicants shall comply with the following standard provisions for
sidewalk construction:



   (A)   The minimum width shall be five feet;



   (B)   The minimum thickness shall be five inches with a two-inch
sand or stone cushion;



   (C)   The beginning distance from the property line shall be one
foot;



   (D)   The grade shall follow a line sloping up and away from the top
of the curb at a slope of one-fourth inch per foot; and



   (E)   Concrete shall be subject to a 28-day compression test for a
six-bag mix; three to six percent air entrainment shall be 3,500 psi.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.060)



§ 90.020  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The city may authorize variances from standard sidewalk
provisions set forth in § 90.019 where no curb exists or when unusual
topographical conditions, nature of existing construction or similar factors
would make adherence to the provisions unreasonable.



   (B)   The variance shall only be approved by the Mayor and City
Council.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.070)  (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001; Ord.
2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)



§ 90.021  GRADE AND LINE REQUIRED.



   No sidewalk shall be installed unless a grade and line are established
therefor. If no grade or line is available, a sidewalk may be installed with
an appropriate permit. However, if or when the city establishes a grade and
line, the city may remove, modify or replace the sidewalk to conform to the
grade and line at the city’s expense.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.080)  (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)  Penalty,
see § 90.999



§ 90.022  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with details and
specifications in § 90.019 above.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.090)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.023  INSPECTIONS.



   All work shall be subject to inspection by the city during construction
and upon completion. A permittee shall notify the city after forms are set,
and no concrete shall be poured or further construction started until the
forms are approved by the city.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.100)  (Ord. 2506, § 2 (part), passed - -2001)



§ 90.024  OCCUPANCY PERMITS.



   (A)   The requirements set forth in this chapter must be met before
an occupancy permit is issued by the city.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner may issue a temporary occupancy
permit, as provided for in the city’s Building Codes and regulations.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.110)  (Ord. 2006-09-0054O, passed 9-12-2006)



§ 90.025  WAIVER; PAYMENT TO CITY IN LIEU OF SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Whenever, in the opinion of the city, the installation of a
public sidewalk would serve no public purpose, that requirement may be waived.



   (B)   If it is determined that the installation of a public sidewalk
is unnecessary, the owner shall, in lieu thereof, pay over to the city an
amount of money, which shall be equal to the current cost of construction of
the sidewalk based on the city’s most recent per lineal foot cost of
sidewalk installation times the lineal width of the subject lot.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.120)  (Ord. 2506, § 2 (part), passed - -2001)



§ 90.026  SIDEWALK FUND.



   The City Treasurer shall establish a sidewalk fund. Moneys paid to the
city pursuant to § 90.025 above shall be deposited and held by the City
Treasurer in the fund and shall be disbursed from time to time for the
purpose of installation, improvement and repair of city sidewalks upon the
direction of Council.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.130)




DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND CURB CUTS




§ 90.040  DRIVEWAY REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall be granted an occupancy permit under this
chapter without construction of an approved driveway connecting the street to
any garage or automobile storage facility constructed on the property for
which an occupancy permit is being issued.



   (B)   All driveways constructed shall be as specified by the
Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001; Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed
6-27-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.041  MAXIMUM NUMBER ALLOWED.



   (A)   Only one driveway ingress and egress point onto public or
private right-of-way shall be permitted per lot in any single-family
residence zoning district, except that if any such lot has a minimum front
lot width of 90 feet or more, than a circular drive consisting of two ingress
and egress points onto public or private right-of-way driveway may be allowed.



   (B)   All other uses shall be allowed the number of driveways as
approved by the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.042  DRIVEWAY WIDTHS.



   (A)   The maximum width for driveways for in any single family
residence zoning district shall be 20 feet at the property line and 26 feet
at the street where the garage is located within 30 feet of the property
line.  Garages located greater than 30 feet from the property line and
circle drives shall be ten feet from the property line and 16 feet at the
street.



   (B)   Where a three-car garage is located within 30 feet of the
property line, the driveway shall not exceed 30 feet at the property line and
36 feet at the street.



   (C)   No driveway shall encroach upon any portion of the parkway in
front of the adjoining property.



   (D)   The maximum width for driveways for all other uses shall be
approved by the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-11-0362O, passed
11-22-2011)



§ 90.043  DRIVEWAY GRADES AND CURBS.



   (A)   Driveways shall be level with existing adjoining sidewalk
grades.



   (B)   Where it is necessary to saw, cut or break the existing curb
for the driveway opening, the curb and gutter shall be completely removed and
a new section constructed.



   (C)   Each such driveway shall be constructed and maintained so as
to permit free and unobstructed passage in such a manner as not to interfere
with the proper drainage of the streets.



   (D)   Gradual approaches to the regular sidewalk grade shall be one
inch above the gutter slab.



   (E)   The slope of the driveway and to the approaches thereto shall
not exceed a six percent slope in any direction.



   (F)   Each such driveway shall be constructed and maintained so that
its surface, at the point of crossing any sidewalk pavement, shall be flush
with the adjoining sections of the sidewalk.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.044  CONNECTION TO COLLECTOR OR ARTERIAL STREETS.



   (A)   Driveways connecting to collector or arterial streets must
provide an on-site turn around.



   (B)   Where a lot fronts both a local street and a collector or
arterial street, no driveways shall be installed along the property line of
the lot that fronts the arterial or collector street



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.045  PLACEMENT OF DRIVEWAY.



   At no time shall any portion of a driveway be closer to a side property
line than one foot.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.046  REMOVAL OF PARKWAY TREES.



   (A)   At no time shall any parkway tree be removed to allow for the
installation or portion thereof, of any driveway; provided, however, that the
property owner may request in writing that the Mayor and City Council waive
this prohibition upon a finding of undue hardship.



   (B)   Where an undue hardship is determined, in the sole and
absolute discretion, by the Mayor and City Council, this provision may be
waived, for removal of the tree.



   (C)   The Mayor and City Council may require that the property owner:



      (1)   Reimburse the city for the current fair market value of
the tree that is removed; or



      (2)   Replace the parkway tree with the same or similar
species with approximately the same caliper width.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.047  IMPERVIOUS SURFACE LIMITATION.



   Any new driveway, or additions to an existing driveway shall conform to
the drainage requirements as set forth in §§ 152.30 through 152.37 of this
code.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.048  DRIVEWAYS OVER DRAINAGE DITCHES; CULVERT REQUIRED.



   No person shall construct or maintain a private drive or roadway from
any public street in the city over or across any drainage ditch now or
hereafter existing, unless he or she installs and maintains a culvert
thereunder in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.049  CULVERT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall install a culvert under any private drive or roadway
unless a permit therefor is first applied for and obtained from the Director
of Public Works.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.050  GRADE AND SIZE.



   Upon an application for a permit required by § 90.049, the Director of
Public Works or the City Engineer shall forthwith establish the grade for and
prescribe the size of the proposed culvert.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.051  MATERIALS.



   Every culvert shall be of a size determined by the Director of Public
Works to be adequate to permit the free flow of water in a ditch and shall be
corrugated galvanized steel, reinforced concrete, cast iron or such other
material that meets with the approval of the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.052  INSTALLATION.



   Every culvert shall be installed in conformity with the flow of a ditch
and in a manner prescribed by the Director of Public Works so it will not
impede the normal flow of water in the ditch and so there will be no stagnant
water standing or retained behind it.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.053  CHANGE OF GRADE PROHIBITED.



   No person installing a culvert shall change the grade of the ditch in
which the culvert is being installed from the grade established and
prescribed by the Director of Public Works or the City Engineer.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.054  REFUSE IN CULVERTS; OBSTRUCTIONS TO WATER FLOW.



   Any person who maintains a private drive or roadway across any ditch
into premises owned or occupied by him or her shall keep the culvert
thereunder clean and free from all refuse and matter which may impede the
free flow of water in the ditch.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.055  NOTICE TO CLEAN; CLEANING BY CITY.



   (A)   If a culvert becomes plugged or clogged, the owner or occupant
of the property into which a private drive or roadway over the culvert leads
shall be notified to clean the same within 24 hours after notification. The
notification shall be made in writing and may be served by delivering the
same to the owner or occupant personally or by posting the same on the
premises.



   (B)   If the owner or occupant fails to clean the culvert within 24
hours after notification, the city shall cause the culvert to be cleaned and
shall charge all expenses of such cleaning to the owner or occupant.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.056 APPLICATION TO EXISTING CULVERTS.



   If an existing culvert under any private drive or roadway fails to
comply with this chapter, or impedes the free flow of water in the ditch in
which it is installed, the owner or occupant of the property into which the
drive or roadway leads, upon notice from the city, shall install a proper
culvert in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.057  REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT BY CITY.



   Any existing culvert that has been approved as to size, material and
location by the city and any such culvert hereafter approved as to size,
material and location by the city, which subsequently is ordered to be
removed by the city, shall be removed and replaced at the sole expense of the
city.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.058  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall repair or install a driveway, or any addition to an
existing driveway, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the
City Building Department.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.059  CONCRETE DRIVES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide
specifications for materials and construction of concrete drives in all
residentially zoned districts.



   (B)   General specifications. Materials and construction for
residential drives shall conform to § 406, Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, Illinois Department of Transportation, most current
edition,, or any successor edition thereto, except as stated in divisions (C)
through (E) below.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   Aggregate. The stone aggregate shall conform to § 704
of the standard specifications, except as follows:



         (a)   The gradation of the stone shall be CA6 or CA7,
that is “State Road Mix;”



         (b)   No pea gravel, chips or tunnel rock shall be
allowed; and



         (c)   No slag shall be used; only limestone is permitted.



      (2)   Concrete. Concrete driveways shall be constructed with a
minimum of six sacks of cement per cubic yard. The minimum compressive
strength of 4,000 psi at 28 days, maximum size aggregate of one inch, air
entrainment of 6% plus 1%, maximum slump of four inches, maximum water
content including moisture in the aggregate of six gallons per sack of
cement, and all concrete shall contain a water-reducing admixture with no
reduction in cement content permitted.



   (D)   Thickness.



      (1)   Aggregate base. The aggregate base shall be a minimum of
two inches thick.



      (2)   Concrete. The concrete for a driveway, other than the
apron, shall be a minimum of four inches thick with reinforcement or five
full inches thick without reinforcement. The apron shall consist of a full
seven inches with no reinforcement.



   (E)   Forms. Side forms shall be of lumber of not less than two
inches nominal thickness or steel of equal rigidity. The minimum depth of the
side forms shall be equal to the driveway thickness. No two-inch by four-inch
lumber forms shall be permitted. Forms shall be held securely in place by
stakes or braces with the top edge true to line and grade.



   (F)   Expansion joints. Expansion joints of the thickness specified
below shall consist of a premolded filler strip with the top strip placed
one-fourth inch below the surface of the driveway. One-half inch thick
expansion joints shall be provided at the junction of the driveway apron and
the sidewalk and at the junction of the driveway apron and the curb.



   (G)   Backfill. After the concrete has been cured, forms shall be
removed and the space near the edges of the driveway shall be backfilled to
the required elevation and the material shall be compacted until firm and the
surface evenly graded.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.060  ASPHALT DRIVES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide
specifications for materials and construction of asphalt drives in
residentially zoned districts.



   (B)   General specifications. Materials and construction for
residential drives shall conform to § 406, Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, Illinois Department of Transportation, adopted
October 1, 1983, as amended, except as stated in divisions (C) to (E) below.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   Aggregate. The stone aggregate shall conform to § 704
of the standard specifications, except as follows:



         (a)   The gradation of the stone shall be CA6, that is
“State Road Mix;”



         (b)   No pea gravel, chips or tunnel rock shall be
allowed; and



         (c)   No slag shall be used; only limestone is permitted.



      (2)   Bituminous asphalt. The bituminous asphalt surface
course shall be Class 1, Mixture C, modified in accordance with §§ 406 and
704.03 of the standard specifications, except that CA16 aggregate gradation
shall be used. The asphalt cement shall be AC WO to 120, that is a “State
Fine Mix.”



   (D)   Thickness.



      (1)   Aggregate base. The crushed stone aggregate base shall
be eight inches thick.



      (2)   Bituminous asphalt surface course. The surface course
shall be two inches thick.



   (E)   Construction.



      (1)   Sub-base preparation.



         (a)   The overdig of the foundation in front of a garage
door shall be backfilled with crushed stone. No clay or black dirt shall be
used as backfill. The backfill shall be hand tamped.



         (b)   The drive area shall be cleared of all
construction debris, drywall, wood, loose clay and black dirt. Should the
sub-base need to be brought to grade, no clay backfill is allowed. Any
sub-base overdig shall be filled with stone.



         (c)   The sub-base shall be rolled and compacted to a
distance of one foot beyond the width of the drive. The sub-base must be dry,
so that no sub-base material sticks to the roller.



      (2)   Aggregate base. The crushed stone aggregate shall be
placed in two four-inch lifts, compacted after each lift. The contractor
shall wet each lift before rolling.



      (3)   Asphalt surface course.



         (a)   The asphalt surface shall be placed in one
two-inch lift.



         (b)   The surface shall be rolled smooth such as to
leave no roller marks.



         (c)   Care shall be taken to hand tamp and roll next to
walks and garage apron areas.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.061  GRAVEL DRIVES.



   No existing gravel driveway shall be enlarged, altered or otherwise
changed without the property owner:



   (A)   Obtaining a permit, as required by the chapter; and



   (B)   Constructing any such enlargement, alteration or change in
conformity with the standards set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



§ 90.062  APRONS AND ACCESSWAYS.



   (A)   Aprons or other accessways constructed from the edge of the
pavement of a curbed city street across public and/or private property to
serve residential, commercial or other purposes can be of asphalt, concrete
or brick paver materials. Any material installed in the apron of other than
plain concrete or plain asphalt will be installed at the owner's risk.  An
apron or accessway of an alternate material such as brick paver, stamped,
colored or aggregate concrete or stamped asphalt will require a waiver from
the owner releasing and absolving the city of any responsibility or liability
in connection with the apron or accessway.  The waiver must be signed by
owner at time of building permit procurement.  New driveway and apron or
replacement of driveway and apron shall be of the same material.



   (B)   The concrete and any supporting material shall conform with
the concrete specifications as listed in § 90.059 above. Concrete shall not
be poured prior to inspection.



   (C)   The asphalt and any supporting material shall conform with the
asphalt specifications as listed in § 90.060 above.  Asphalt shall not be
poured prior to inspection.



   (D)   The brick pavers and any supporting material shall conform
with ASTM C 902 Standard Specification for Pedestrian and Light Traffic
Paving Brick.  Brick pavers shall not be installed prior to inspection.



   (E)   Public sidewalk construction must follow § 90.015 above.
Public sidewalks must be of plain concrete and separate of apron and driveway.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. 2010-08-0303O, passed
8-10-2010)



§ 90.063  CURB CUTS.



   (A)   No person shall cut, break or change the stoop or slope of any
curb in the city without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of this section shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her building bond or
bonds.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)




EXCAVATIONS




§ 90.070  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE.



   (A)   No person shall make any opening, excavation or tunnel in any
public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place in the city
without first obtaining a permit therefor.



   (B)   Applications for such a permit shall be made to the City Clerk
and shall specify the intended location and purpose of the excavation.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall immediately notify the Director of Public
Works of the application for the permit.



   (D)   The fee for the permit is $100.



   (E)   The city may waive this fee upon written request provided that
the excavation is in the best interests of the City of Oak Forest.



(2000 Code, § 12.16.010)  (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), 2001)  Penalty, see §
90.999



§ 90.071  RESTORATION OF STREETS AND SURFACES; CASH DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Each applicant shall restore a street, alley, sidewalk,
parkway or other public place, and the surface thereof, to the condition that
existed before an opening, excavation or tunnel was made.



   (B)   The applicant shall do all necessary backfilling or cause the
same to be done.



   (C)   All backfilling shall be done with care and caution and only
bank or lake sand shall be used as backfill. After the backfilling has been
properly done, any material excavated or not used shall be removed from the
location of the excavation to the places as the Director of Public Works
directs.



   (D)   In restoring the street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other
public place, the city may use its own employees and equipment and make
reasonable charges therefor, or it may engage the services of other persons
and equipment and charge the cost thereof to the applicant.



   (E)   Applicants not restoring a street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or
other public place shall be liable for all restoration costs and shall be
fined $100 per day from the date specified in written notice from the city.



(2000 Code, § 12.16.020)  (Ord. 2506 § 2 (part), passed - -2001)



§ 90.072  SUPERVISION BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   All openings, excavations, tunnels, refills and resurfacing in the city
shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.



(2000 Code, § 12.16.030)  Penalty, see § 90.999




STREET AND SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS




§ 90.085  SOLICITATION OF FUNDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   All religious or charitable organizations seeking to solicit
funds on streets in the city must hereafter this date complete a permit
application available at City Hall or on the city's web site. This permit
application must be completed in its entirety, dated and signed by an officer
of the religious or charitable organization seeking to solicit funds in the
city.



   (B)   Any religious or charitable organization seeking to solicit
funds on streets in the city must also provide a not-for-profit certificate
issued by the Attorney General of the State of Illinois, as well as a
certificate of insurance with an appropriate level of insurance as noted on
the permit application.



   (C)   The religious or charitable organization must submit the
permit application, not-for-profit certificate and certificate of insurance
to the Mayor or his or her designee. All solicitation on public roadways in
the city must comply with the following provisions:



      (1)   A soliciting person or agency shall be registered with
the Illinois Attorney General as a charitable organization, as provided by
ILCS Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 1 et seq., An Act to Regulate Solicitations and
Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes. The soliciting person or agency
must be engaged in statewide fund raising activity and will be liable for any
injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is causally
related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.



      (2)   No person shall stand on a roadway for the purpose of
soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except after
receiving a fully executed permit from the city.



      (3)   No religious or charitable organization will be given a
permit to solicit for more than two  12- hour periods on roadways in the
city in any calendar year (January - December).



      (4)   No more than one permit shall be issued by the city for
the same date at the same intersection. Applications will be treated on a
first come, first served basis.



      (5)   Solicitations shall only be conducted at traffic control
intersections when traffic has come to a full stop during the hours of
daylight, but in no event earlier than 7:00 a.m. in the morning or later than
7:00 p.m. in the evening.



      (6)   Any person engaged in the act of soliciting on a public
roadway shall be 16 years of age or more and wear a high visibility yellow or
orange safety vest and clear identification of the organization undertaking
the solicitation.



      (7)   Solicitors may only solicit an behalf of a permitted
organization and such solicitation may only occur during a charitable
solicitation event.



      (8)   Solicitors shall not approach a moving vehicle or one
that does not have a window down and an occupant has given some sign of
assent to approach.



      (9)   Solicitors shall only enter the roadway while the
traffic signal for that lane is red and shall not enter the roadway while
traffic is moving.



      (10)   No solicitor shall at any time enter or remain in the
traveled portion of the roadway or solicit in a manner which impedes the flow
of traffic.



      (11)   No person shall solicit in the public right-of-way at
any time or place not designated in the application permit under which the
person is conducting the solicitation.



      (12)   Any violation of the provisions of this section or
extraordinarily adverse weather conditions will constitute a reason for the
city to cease all soliciting activities.



   (D)   The permit application, not-for-profit certificate and
certificate of insurance must be submitted to the Mayor's office at least 30
calendar days before the requested date(s) of solicitation. The city will
have seven calendar days to either approve or reject the request for
solicitation.



   (E)   The provisions of this application process will encourage
religious and charitable organizations to make their plans to solicit funds
on roadways in the city well in advance of their requested date(s). It will
also allow proper processing of requests by the municipality, afford an equal
opportunity to all those religious and charitable organizations that wish to
solicit funds in the city, and promote activities that result in the safer
solicitation of funds on crowded public roadways.



(2000 Code, § 12.20.020) (Am. Ord. 2011-09-0352O, passed 9-27-2011) 
Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.086  ENCROACHMENTS ON ROUTE 50 (CICERO AVENUE).



   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall install, place,
maintain or construct any structure that encroaches upon the state
right-of-way on Route 50 (Cicero Avenue) within the limits of the city.



(2000 Code, § 12.20.030)  Penalty, see § 90.999



TREES AND PARKWAYS



§ 90.100  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the proper
parkway standards and establishment of new trees, the protection and
maintenance of existing trees and the timely removal of hazardous or
infectious diseased trees on both public and private property.



   (B)   It is further intended to balance the property rights of
individual property owners with those of the overall health, safety and
welfare interests of the city.  Trees enhance and preserve the air quality
of the city through the filtering effect of trees on air pollutants, reduce
noise within the city through the baffle and barrier effect of trees on the
spread of noise, reduce topsoil erosion through the soil retention effect of
tree roots, reduce energy consumption through the wind break and shade
effects, provide nesting areas for birds and other wildlife which in turn
assist in the control of insects, reduce storm water runoff and the costs
associated therewith, replenish ground water supplies and protect and
increase property values.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.101  RESIDENTIAL PARKWAY STANDARDS.



   All uses which require site plan or special use approval shall install
and maintain trees along any parkway which abuts the perimeter of the
property.



   (A)   The parkway shall be grass or low ground cover, except where
covered by driveway pavement. A minimum of one parkway tree per 40 feet of
frontage is required for all development.



   (B)   The use of loose stone, rock, or gravel is prohibited on
public parkways.



   (C)   Other than trees, no landscaping shall be taller than two feet.



   (D)   No tree or bush with a mature height of more than two feet
shall be planted within a distance of 33 feet of any street corner, measured
from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines as extended. 
No tree shall be planted closer than six feet of any fire hydrant.



   (E)   Trees shall be planted on the center line of parkways or as
close to five feet from the sidewalk as possible and located so as not to
interfere with overhead wires or traffic or pedestrian safety.



   (F)   A minimum parkway width of four feet is required for trees in
a parkway.



   (G)   Wherever feasible, parkway trees shall be planted on the
public parkway and not on the private property side of the sidewalk.



   (H)   Parkway trees shall consist of shorter trees if overhead
utilities exist.  Otherwise, taller trees are required as shown in the
following list.  No species shall comprise more than 30% of the overall
parkway tree count for new development.  A mixture of trees shall be planted
whenever feasible.



   (I)   No person shall attach any object to a parkway tree.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.102  TREE REMOVAL PERMIT.



   No person shall remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any street,
parkway or other public place without first securing a permit from the
Department of Public Works. Any permit authorizing removal may be subject to
such conditions as the Director of Public Works or his or her designee may
deem necessary or appropriate to minimize damage to other trees or vegetation
on a site, and may include the installation of protective fencing.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.103  TREE DETERMINATION.



   The city shall designate a specified list of trees to be planted within
the city limits, only trees on this list have been approved.  The Public
Works Director or his or her designee may from time to time allow deviation
from this list at his or her sole discretion.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.104  TREE SPECIES.



   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways



   No Overhead Utilities



   Minimum 2.5 Caliper



   Native to Illinois



Buckeye, Ohio Aesculus glabra



Baldcypress Taxodium distichum



Catalpa Catalpa speciosa



Coffeetree, Kentucky Gymnocladus dioicus



Hackberry, Common Celtis occidentalis



Hickory, Bitternut Carya cordiformis



Hickory, Shagbark Carya ovata



Honeylocust, Thornless Gleditsia triacanthos



Horsechestnut, Common Aesculus hippocastanum



Ironwood Carpinus caroliniana



Linden, Beetree Tilia heterophylla



Maple, Black Acer nigrum



Maple, Freeman Acer x freemani



Maple, Red Acer rubrum



Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum



Oak, Black Quercus velutina



Oak, Bur Quercus macrocarpa



Oak, Chestnut Quercus prinus



Oak, Chinkapin Quercus muehlenbergii



Oak, Red Quercus rubra



Oak, Schumard Quercus shumardii



Oak, Shingle Quercus imbricaria



Oak, Swamp White Quercus bicolor



Oak, White Quercus alba



Pecan Carya illinoensis



Persimmon, Common Diospyros virginiana



Oak, English Quercus robur



Sassafras, Common Sassafras albidum



Oak, Sawtooth Quercus acutissima



Serviceberry, Allegheny Amelanchier laevis



Serviceberry, Downy Amelanchier arborea



Sourgum (Black Tupelo) Nyssa sylvatica



Pear, Callery Pyrus calleryana



Sycamore Platanus occidentalis



Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandiflora



Yellowwood Cladrastis kentukea



   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways



   No Overhead Utilities



   Minimum 2.5 caliper



   Non-native to Illinois



Buckeye, Yellow Aesculus flava



Catalpa, Chinese Catalpa ovata



Cherry, Amur Chokeberry Prunus maackii



Cherry, Sargent Prunus sargentii



Chestnut, Chinese Castanea mollissima



Corktree, Amur Phellodendron amurense



Elm, English Ulmus procera



Elm, Homestead Ulmus x 'Homestead'



Elm, Chinese or Lacebark Ulmus parvifolia



Elm, Regal Ulmus x 'Regal'



Filbert, Turkish Corylus colunia



Ginkgo Gingko biloba



Holly, American Ilex opaca



Lilac, Japanese Tree Syringa reticulata



Linden, Bigleaf Tilia platyphyllos



Linden, American (Basswood) Tilia americana



Linden, Silver Tilia tomentosa



Lily of the Valley, Sourwood Oxydendrum arboreum



Maple, Hedge or Field Acer campestre



Maple, Miyabe Acer miyabei



Maple, Norway Acer platanoides



Maple, Purpleblow Acer truncatum



Maple, Sycamore or Planetree Acer pseudoplatanus



Maple, Tartarian Acer tataricum



Oak, English Quercus robur



Oak, Sawtooth Quercus acutissima



Pagoda-tree, Japanese Sophora japonica



Pear, Callery Pyrus calleryana



Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandilora



Serviceberry, Shadblow Amelanchier canadensis



Sweetgum, (Liquidamber sp.) Liquidambar styraciflua



   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways



   With Overhead Utilities



   Minimum 2.5 caliper



   Native to Illinois



Buckeye, Red Aesculus x carnea



Crabapple, variety Malus



Fringetree, White Chionanthus virginicus



Ironwood Carpinus caroliniana



Viburnum, Blackhaw Viburnum prunifolium



   Shade Trees Allowed in Parkways



   With Overhead Utilities



   Minimum 2.5 caliper



   Non-native to Illinois



Dogwood, Cornelian-cherry Cornus mas



Hawthorn, Thornless Cockspur Crataegus crusgalli



  (thornless)



Lilac, Pekin Syringa pekinensis



Lilac, Japanese Tree Syringa reticulata



Maple, Amur Acer ginnala



Maple, Hedge Acer campestre



Pear, Autumn Blaze Pyrus calleryana



Pear, Chanticleer Callery Pyrus calleryana



Redbud, (Northern selection) Cercis canadensis



Serviceberry, Apple Amelanchier x grandiflora



Smoketree, Common Cotinus coggygria



Viburnum, Siebold Viburnum sieboldii



Zelkova, Japanese Zelkova serrata



   Prohibited Trees



The following trees are prohibited in parkways and parking lot landscaping
due to disease potential and invasive nature.



All Ash (green, white, blue and all their varieties)



  Fraxinus



Boxelder Acer negundo



Cottonwood, Eastern Populous deltoides



Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima



Willow Salix



Siberian Elm Ulmis pumila



Maple, Silver Acer sacchiarinum



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.105  NUISANCE TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The city, in accordance with the law, shall have the right to cause the
removal of any dead, diseased, or trees that are deemed a nuisance on private
property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and
property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat
to other trees within the city.  The city will notify in writing the owners
of such trees. Removal is the responsibility of said owners and shall be done
by the owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service
of notice or such other time as may be agreed upon by the city and the
property owner. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such
provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and file a
lien against the property for the amount of the costs of removal.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.106  PRUNING, RIGHT-OF-WAY CLEARANCE OF PRIVATE TREES.



   Every owner of any privately owned tree overhanging any street or
right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches
shall not obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there
shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or
sidewalk.  Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
privately owned trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace
to the safety of the public. The city, in accordance with the law, shall have
the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or
interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.107  VIOLATIONS OF TREE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whoever violates this subchapter, in addition to any other
fines, or fees, shall be subject to the following provisions:



      (1)   Fines: first offense, $500; second offense, $1,000;
third and subsequent offense, $2,500.



      (2)   All violations that are committed by the same person or
any firm controlled by such person shall be counted, regardless of whether or
not the violations occur at the same time. Any finding or plea of guilty or
plea of "no contest" upon a citation shall be deemed a violation.



   (B)   Any entity or person who injures a public tree shall be held
responsible for the costs of repairs, such as pruning or cabling, if the
injured tree will not die as a result of such injuries. In cases where the
tree has been damaged beyond repair and cannot remain in the public
right-of-way, the entity or person responsible for the damage shall remove
the tree and stump at their own costs, or if the tree is an immediate hazard,
the entity or person shall pay the cost the city incurs in its removal.



   (C)   In addition to any fines that may be assessed for violation of
this section, the person shall pay to the city a sum equal to the value or
partial value of the tree lost as a result of the violation. The value or
partial value of the tree lost shall be as determined by the Department of
Public Works using the most current edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal
prepared by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, and edited,
published and copyrighted by the International Society of Arboriculture.
Various factors used in the tree value calculations for northern Illinois
shall be obtained from the most current edition of the Species Ratings and
Appraisal Factors for Illinois prepared by the Illinois Arborist Association.
The collection of this fee shall be used by the city for the replacement of
the damaged or destroyed tree. Any remaining funds after the damaged or
destroyed tree has been replaced will be deposited into a tree planting fund
to be administered by the Director of Public Works.



   (D)   If the entity or person cannot pay the fines and fees, a lien
shall be placed against the property.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 90.108  INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the city or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees,
park trees, or dead, nuisance, or diseased trees on private grounds.



(Ord. 2008-11-0207O, passed 11-25-2008)



HONORARY DESIGNATION OF STREETS



§ 90.120  REQUEST.



   (A)   Every request for the honorary designation of a street shall
be presented in writing to the City Clerk.



   (B)   All requests must include the following information:



      (1)   Name of the person, organization or entity to be honored;



      (2)   The humanitarian, civic, community or other reasons
which make the honor appropriate; and



      (3)   The name, address and phone number of the person
submitting the request.



   (C)   The request shall also be accompanied by either a petition
signed by occupants of at least 75 residential locations within the city or a
memorandum submitted by at least three aldermen or the Mayor.



(2000 Code, § 12.28.010)  (Ord. 2632 § 1, passed --2002)



§ 90.121  PROCESS.



   After receipt and review of the application to determine compliance
with the request criteria the City Clerk shall forward the request to the
City Council for consideration and approval.



(2000 Code, § 12.28.020)  (Ord. 2632, § 2, passed --2002)



§ 90.122  DURATION.



   (A)   If approved, the honorary designation shall be placed and
maintained until the end of the calendar year following approval.



   (B)   At the end of this time the honorary sign shall be removed and
delivered to the family of the honored party.



(2000 Code, § 12.28.030)  (Ord. 2632 § 3, passed --2002)



§ 90.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of this §§ 90.001 through 90.003 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her
building bond or bonds.



(2000 Code, § 12.04.040)



   (C)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of §§ 90.015 through 90.026 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her
building bond or bonds.



(2000 Code, § 12.08.140)



   (D)   Whoever violated or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of §§ 90.040 through 90.055 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her
building bond or bonds.



(Ord. 2006-06-0038O, passed 6-27-2006)



   (E)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of §§ 90.070 through 90.072 shall suffer the forfeiture of his or her
building bond or bonds.



(2000 Code, § 12.16.040)



CHAPTER 91:  HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section




Health and Safety Regulations Generally




   91.001   Adoption of State Department of Public Health rules and
regulations by reference



   91.002   Regulation of contagious disease



   91.003   Notice and report of contagious disease



   91.004   Insect and rodent control



   91.005   Use of utensils and towels in public places



   91.006   Dangerous buildings and premises



   91.007   Swimming pools



   91.008   Barbershops and beauty salons



   91.009   Campgrounds and facilities



   91.010   Landlord-tenant services



   91.011   Fireworks



   91.012   Unwholesome food



   91.013   Cemeteries




Lock Boxes




   91.025   Lock boxes required



   91.026   Specifications



   91.027   Contents



   91.028   Compliance of existing and new buildings



   91.029   Current keys required




Mobile Intensive Care Unit




   91.040   Definitions



   91.041   Establishment of unit



   91.042   Responsibility of probationary appointees



   91.043   Extension of probationary period



   91.044   Length of service



   91.045   Management and control



   91.046   Co-directors



   91.047   Termination of employment




Property Maintenance Code




   91.060   Code adopted



   91.061   Amendments to adopted code



   91.062   Incorporation




Implementation of Smoke Free Illinois Act




   91.075   Definitions



   91.076   Smoking prohibited in public places and places of employment



   91.077   Exemptions



   91.078   Designation of other no-smoking areas



   91.079   Responsibilities of proprietors



   91.080   Enforcement



Vacant Building and Registry Regulations



   91.090   Declaration of policy



   91.091   Other ordinances



   91.092   Definitions



   91.093   Determination



   91.094   Appeal of determination



   91.095   Obligation to register



   91.096   Approval of plan



   91.097   Authority to modify plan, right of appeal



   91.098   Failure to comply with plan



   91.099   Other enforcement



   91.100   Certification



   91.101   Boarding of buildings



   91.102   Enforcement



   91.999   Penalty




HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS GENERALLY




§ 91.001  ADOPTION OF STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH RULES AND
REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Rules and Regulations for the Control of Communicable
Diseases, adopted July 1, 1970, as amended, of the State Department of Public
Health, or any applicable successor rules and regulations thereto, are made a
part of this chapter and shall be enforced by the City Health Commission.
Where there is a conflict between any of those rules and regulations and a
provision of this chapter, the stricter standard shall govern.



   (B)   Three copies of the rules and regulations adopted herein shall
be kept on file for public use, inspection and examination at the office of
the City Clerk.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.010)



§ 91.002  REGULATION OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.



   (A)   No person or thing liable to propagate cholera, smallpox,
yellow fever, diphtheria, typhoid fever or other contagious or infectious
disease shall be brought or shall come into the city without a special permit
and direction from the City Health Commissioner. Whenever it comes to the
attention of any other person that a person or thing has been brought or has
come into the city, he or she shall immediately give notice thereof to the
City Health Commissioner, a City Health Commission member, a city police
officer or one of the aldermen of the city, together with the location
thereof.



   (B)   No person shall, within the city, without a permit from the
City Health Commissioner or a member of the City Health Commission, carry or
remove from one building to another any person afflicted with a contagious
disease or move from one building to another himself or herself if he or she
is afflicted with a contagious disease.



   (C)   No person afflicted with a contagious disease shall be shipped
or removed from the city to any other place, except under the charge and
direction of the City Health Commissioner or a member of the City Health
Commission, and with proper precaution against the spread of contagion.



   (D)   No person, by an exposure of any individual sick of any
contagious or infectious disease, or by an exposure of the body of a dead
person, or by a negligent act connected therewith or with respect to the care
or custody thereof, or by a needless exposure of himself or herself when sick
and not fully recovered, shall cause, contribute to or promote the spread of
disease from any such person or from any dead body.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.020)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.003  NOTICE AND REPORT OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.



   Anyone within the city in whose dwelling there occurs a case of
cholera, typhoid fever, diphtheria, smallpox or other contagious or
infectious disease, shall immediately notify the City Health Commissioner, a
member of the City Health Commission or a city police officer. Until
instructions are received from the Commissioner or member, no clothing or
property that may have been exposed to the infection shall be removed from
the house, nor shall any occupant of the infected dwelling change his or her
residence without the consent of the commissioner or member during the
prevalence of any public danger from the disease. All physicians or other
persons who attend a person sick with smallpox, typhoid fever, diphtheria or
other disease dangerous to the public health shall forthwith report the same
to the Commissioner and the Commissioner shall at once notify the State Board
of Health of the existence of such disease and shall cause a full report to
be made to the Cook County Department of Public Health upon the blank forms
furnished for the purpose.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.030)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.004  INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.



   (A)   The City Health Commissioner shall supervise any insect and
rodent control program instituted or maintained by the city.



   (B)   Sections ES-301.4 (Insect and Rat Control), ES-303.6 (Insect
and Rat Harborage) and ES-802.0 (Extermination) of the BOCA National Existing
Structures Code, most current edition, or any successor edition of the
aforementioned publication, are made a part of this chapter and shall be
enforced by the City Health Commission.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.040)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.005  USE OF UTENSILS AND TOWELS IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall maintain any common drinking cup, dipper or
similar utensil, for the use of more than one person, in any public hall,
theater, store or other place frequented by the public.



   (B)   No person shall maintain in or about any public lavatory or
washroom any towel for common use. The term COMMON USE, as used in this
section, shall be construed to mean by more than one person.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.050)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.006  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.



   (A)   No person shall permit any building, structure or place to be
or remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any
way. Any such building, structure or place is declared to be a nuisance.



   (B)   Sections PM-301.1 (Sanitation), PM-302.1 (General), PM-303.1
(General), PM-301.4 (Weeds), PM-303.4 (Lead-Based Paint) and PM-303.5
(Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage) of the BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code, most current edition, or any successor edition of the
aforementioned publication, are made a part of this chapter and shall be
enforced by the City Health Commission.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.060)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.007  SWIMMING POOLS.



   All public swimming pools, including, but not limited to, all pools
operated by apartment complexes, homeowners associations, condominium
associations and similar organizations, and any organization charging a fee
for membership or admittance, shall be required to pass an annual health
inspection.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.070)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.008  BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY SALONS.



   (A)   The terms BARBER SHOP and BEAUTY SHOP, as used in this
section, shall be construed to mean a place where the hair is cut, cleansed,
treated or dressed, or the face shaved or beard trimmed, for a charge, and
where, also, manicure, chiropody or massage treatments are sometimes
furnished for a charge. The terms shall also be deemed to include hair
dressing establishments commonly patronized by women.



   (B)   Premises used for a barber shop or beauty shop shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition. No person shall permit waste materials of
any kind to accumulate therein. No person shall employ in such an
establishment any person afflicted with a venereal or contagious disease.



   (C)   No person shall use in any establishment used as a barber shop
or beauty shop any implement or tool upon the premises after the same has
been used upon a person afflicted with any skin disease without sterilizing
the tool or implement afterwards. No person shall use any towel upon any
customer after the same has been used before without having the towel
sterilized and cleaned prior to the second use.



   (D)   No person infected with any disease of the face or head shall
have the same barbered or treated in any manner in a barber shop or hair
dressing establishment in the city, nor shall any person with a hand disease
be manicured therein.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.080)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.009  CAMPGROUNDS AND FACILITIES.



   All campgrounds and facilities in the city shall maintain those
sanitary conditions set forth by state statutes, city ordinances and City
Health Commission rules and regulations.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.090)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.010  LANDLORD-TENANT SERVICES.



   (A)   No landlord shall discontinue any heat, water or sewer
services without a court order.



   (B)   Sections PM-601.1 (Heating Facilities - Residential Buildings)
and PM-601.2 (Heating Facilities - Nonresidential Structures) of the BOCA
National Property Maintenance Code, most current edition, or any successor
edition of the aforementioned publication, are made a part of this chapter
and shall be enforced by the City Health Commission.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.100)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.011  FIREWORKS.



   No person shall shoot off, fire or explode any firecrackers or
fireworks of any kind in the city. However, the Mayor may license any
responsible club, body or organization to have a fireworks display on the
fourth of July and may provide in the license such provisions as he or she
deems proper to prevent injury to persons or damage to property in connection
with the fireworks display.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.120)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.012  UNWHOLESOME FOOD.



   No person shall sell, offer to sell, dispose of or offer to dispose of,
for human consumption, any unwholesome food.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.130)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.013  CEMETERIES.



   No person shall establish, operate or maintain a cemetery within the
city or within one mile thereof. However, any cemetery lawfully established
prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (Ord.
21, passed 1-16-1948) may be continued.



(2000 Code, § 8.04.140)  Penalty, see § 91.999




LOCK BOXES




§ 91.025  LOCK BOXES REQUIRED.



   All properties, businesses or multifamily buildings of five units or
more or three floors or more, where common ways (hallways) are encountered or
as prescribed by the fire prevention bureau, shall be required to have lock
boxes.



(2000 Code, § 8.24.010)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.026  SPECIFICATIONS.



   All lock boxes shall be of U.L. listing and shall be compatible with
existing Fire Department equipment and current master keys to keep current
uniformity, as approved by the Fire Department.



(2000 Code, § 8.24.020)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.027  CONTENTS.



   All lock boxes shall contain keys for the following:



   (A)   All entrance/exit doors, whether on the exterior or the
interior of the building;



   (B)   Mechanical and electrical rooms;



   (C)   Closet storage rooms;



   (D)   Fire alarm control panels;



   (E)   Elevator controls (where applicable); and



   (F)   Any other keys required by the fire prevention bureau.



(2000 Code, § 8.24.030)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.028  COMPLIANCE OF EXISTING AND NEW BUILDINGS.



   Existing properties and buildings must comply with the provisions of
this chapter within 12 months from the date of enactment of the ordinance
codified in this chapter. All newly constructed buildings or buildings
currently under construction must comply with the provisions of this chapter
immediately.



(2000 Code, § 8.24.040)



§ 91.029  CURRENT KEYS REQUIRED.



   The owner, tenant or organization in control of a building shall have
current keys placed in the lock box by the Fire Department upon any change of
locks in the building or ownership of the premises.



(2000 Code, § 8.24.050)  Penalty, see § 91.999




MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE UNIT




§ 91.040  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVANCE LIFE SUPPORT/MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE SERVICES.  The initiation
of treatment of acute life-threatening conditions under the direction of a
physician authorized by law to practice medicine in the state or a person
authorized by the laws of this state to act as a qualified registered
professional nurse, by a person who has satisfactorily completed a course of
training in emergency care approved, for purposes of the State Pre-Hospital
Emergency Medical Services Act, by the State Department of Public Health and
where authorized by the Project Medical Director, Approved Advanced Life
Support System.



   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES.  The rendering of basic emergency care,
including, but not limited to, airway management, cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, control of bleeding and splinting of fractures.



   CERTIFIED PARAMEDIC.  A paramedic who is certified by both the
resource hospital and the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.



   EMERGENCY.  Any condition which, if not corrected, will cause death,
permanent disability or deterioration of an individual’s condition.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-AMBULANCE (EMT-A).  A person who has
successfully completed a course of instruction in basic life support
services, as required, and who is certified by the State Department of Public
Health.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC (EMT-P).  A person who has
successfully completed a course of instruction in advanced life
support/mobile intensive care services, approved by the State Department of
Public Health, and who is certified by the department. An EMT-P is qualified
by training and education to perform advanced life support/mobile intensive
care services, including, but not limited to, mechanical resuscitation, fluid
resuscitation and electrical and pharmacological resuscitation procedures,
under the provisions of the State Pre-Hospital Emergency Medical Services Act.



   PRE-HOSPITAL EMERGENCY SERVICES.  Emergency care initiated by an
advanced life support/mobile intensive care system prior to arrival at a
hospital and the continuation of such emergency services by advanced life
support/mobile intensive care system personnel as may be necessary until the
responsibility for the care of the patient is assumed by the medical
personnel of a hospital emergency department or other facility within the
hospital to which the patient is first delivered by the personnel.



   RESOURCE HOSPITAL.  A hospital which is designated as such by the
area-wide Hospital Emergency Services Committee, State Department of Public
Health (Division of Emergency Medical Services and Highway Safety), has total
responsibility for training of both hospital and field paramedic personnel,
monitors all medical direction transmission within the network, nominates
field personnel for state certification and recertification, assumes medical
control at both hospital and field levels, maintains records and data
pertaining to the program’s function, and ensures conformity with all
local, state and federal rules, regulations and standards related to mobile
intensive care operation.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.010)



§ 91.041  ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIT.



   There is established in and for the city a mobile intensive care unit
whose membership shall consist of certified emergency medical
technicians-paramedics and emergency medical technicians-ambulance from the
Fire Department, both regular and paid-on-call.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.020)



§ 91.042  RESPONSIBILITY OF PROBATIONARY APPOINTEES.



   All individuals who are appointed by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners to a probationary status within the Fire Department must be
advised that during their respective probationary period they are required to
become state certified paramedics through the then established resource
hospital with which the city is associated, and those individuals shall
comply with the requirement prior to the termination of their probationary
period. Advertisements for examination shall include this provision.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.030)



§ 91.043  EXTENSION OF PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   The probationary period of a firefighter/ paramedic may be extended by
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners upon the written recommendation of
the Fire Chief. Cumulative extensions shall not exceed six months.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.040)



§ 91.044  LENGTH OF SERVICE.



   A firefighter/paramedic will be required to remain a certified
paramedic and shall continue to serve until relieved for good cause by the
Chief with the approval of the Board. Preference for the relief shall be
given to those who have served ten years.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.050)



§ 91.045  MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL.



   (A)   The management, supervision and control of the mobile
intensive care unit is hereby vested in the Chief, who shall be responsible
for the government, efficiency and good conduct of the members thereof and
who shall be considered the head of the unit.



   (B)   The Chief shall have sole control and command over all persons
connected with the unit program of the city. He or she shall have full power
to prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the
members of the unit, which shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of
the city, the laws of the state or the rules and regulations promulgated by
the mobile intensive care unit resource hospital.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.060)



§ 91.046  CO-DIRECTORS.



   The Chief, in his or her capacity as administrator of the mobile
intensive care unit program, shall appoint directors who are certified
paramedics within the unit and who shall carry out the directives of the
Chief.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.070)



§ 91.047  TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   If a firefighter/paramedic is not certified during his or her
probationary period or an extension thereof, he or she shall be terminated.



   (B)   If a firefighter/paramedic is not recertified as required by
the resource hospital, then his or her base salary shall be immediately
decreased by 20% until he or she has completed ten years of service in his or
her respective department, after which he or she shall be restored to the
then current base salary.



(2000 Code, § 8.28.080)




PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE




§ 91.060  CODE ADOPTED.



   The City of Oak Forest adopts the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2003 Edition, as published by the International Code Council as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Oak Forest. This enactment shall
regulate and govern the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures in providing the City of Oak Forest the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential
to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupancy and use,
and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, as well as the demolition of such existing structures as provided in
this chapter. This legislation shall provide for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees.



(2000 Code, § 8.32.010)  (Ord. 2874, § 1, passed - -2005)



§ 91.061  AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODE.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, as adopted
in § 91.060 above of this chapter is amended as follows.



   (A)   Section 101.1 Insert: The City of Oak Forest.



   (B)   Section 304.14 Insert: From January through December.



   (C)   Section 602.3 Insert: From January through December.



   (D)   Section 602.4 Insert: From January through December.



   (E)   Section 701 to 704.4 entitled “Fire Department
Requirements” shall be deleted.



(2000 Code, § 8.32.020)  (Ord. 2874, § 2, passed - -2005)



§ 91.062  INCORPORATION.



   The provisions of the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc. (BOCA) National Property Maintenance Code, Fifth Edition,
1996, Chapter 7 “Fire Safety Requirements” are expressly incorporated
into the ordinance codified in this chapter. The provisions of Chapter 7
shall continue to remain in full force and effect.



(2000 Code, § 8.32.030)  (Ord. 2874, § 3, passed - -2005)




IMPLEMENTATION OF SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT




§ 91.075  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BAR.  An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more
than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
BAR includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities and cabarets.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who is employed by an employer in consideration
for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers
his or her services for a non-profit entity.



   EMPLOYER.  A person, business, partnership, association or
corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity
that employs the services of one or more individual persons.



   ENCLOSED AREA.  All space between a floor and a ceiling that is
enclosed or partially enclosed with:



      (1)   Solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or



      (2)   Solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of
doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without
limitation, lobbies and corridors.



   ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA.  Any sports pavilion,
stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice
rink, bowling alley or other similar place where members of the general
public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic
competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural,
recreational or other events.



   GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES.  Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in
the Illinois Gaming Council Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.



   GAMING FACILITY.  An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes
of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the
purposes of accruing business revenue.



   HEALTHCARE FACILITY.  An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics,
nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories and
offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists
and all specialists within these professions.



   HEALTHCARE FACILITY.  Includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private
rooms, semi-private rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.  Any area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees are required to enter, leave or pass through
during the course of employment, including, but not limited to entrances and
exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms;
conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common
areas. A private residence or home-based business, unless used to provide
licensed child care, foster care, adult care or other similar social service
care on the premises, is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   PRIVATE CLUB.



      (1)   A not-for-profit association that:



         (a)   Has been in active and continuous existence for at
least three years prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the
95th General Assembly, whether incorporated or not;



         (b)   Is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or
portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times;



         (c)   Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain; and



         (d)   Only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its
operation.



      (2)   For purposes of this definition, PRIVATE CLUB means an
organization that is managed by a Council of directors, executive committee,
or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established
bylaws, a constitution or both to govern its activities, and has been granted
an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C.
§ 501.



   PRIVATE RESIDENCE.  The part of a structure used as a dwelling,
including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium,
apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For the purposes of
this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or
other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home or assisted living
facility shall not be considered a private residence.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  That portion of any building or vehicle used by and
open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in
whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, the
City of Oak Forest, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a
fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a
private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed
child care, foster care or other similar social service care on the premises.
A PUBLIC PLACE includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants,
retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor
theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational
facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports
arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities,
polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government-owned
vehicles and facilities, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping
centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational
facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms,
waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks,
reception areas, and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters within a
hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.



   RESTAURANT.  An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or
employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on
the premises for serving elsewhere. RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the
restaurant.



   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE.  A retail establishment that derives more than
80% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and
related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any
type of liquor, food or restaurant license.



   SMOKE or SMOKING.  The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or
exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs
or any other lighted smoking equipment.



(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)



§ 91.076  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public
place or place of employment within the City of Oak Forest.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place
designated as a “No Smoking Area,” as provided in §§ 91.078 and 91.079
below.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit
smoking in any enclosed area in any place of employment.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or
lessee in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any
enclosed area in the public place.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or
lessee in control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove ash
trays, as provided in § 91.079.



(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.077  EXEMPTIONS.



   The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this subchapter shall not
apply to:



   (A)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and
are designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same
floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this subchapter. Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to
guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is
permitted. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed,
except to add additional nonsmoking rooms;



   (B)   Private vehicles, not including public transportation
facilities or government vehicles;



   (C)   Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a
child care, adult day care, health care facility, or any other home-based
business open to the public;



   (D)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term
care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are
smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is
permitted; or



   (E)   Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco
dealer, whose principal business is the sale of retail of tobacco and
tobacco-related products; provided that smoke generated by smoking on the
premises of the tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where
smoking is otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been
granted.



(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)



§ 91.078  DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO-SMOKING AREAS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, any employer,
owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager or other person in control of any
public place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of the
public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area
where smoking is also prohibited, provided that the employer, owner, lessee
or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner
described in § 91.079 below.



(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)



§ 91.079  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPRIETORS.



   Each owner, lessee, occupant, employer or other person in control of a
public place or a place of employment shall be responsible for all the
following:



   (A)   Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by seven
inches in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place,
place of employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may
be, bearing the text “No Smoking” or the international “No Smoking”
symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed
in a circle with a bar across it. Those signs shall also be posted outside of
the main entrance to the public place or place of employment, shall reference
the 15-foot buffer zone in which smoking is prohibited, and contain the
telephone numbers of the designated enforcement authorities noted in this
subchapter, in addition to the telephone number and website designated by the
Illinois Department of Public Health for registering complaints;



   (B)   Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended for the
deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products from
public places;



   (C)   Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke,
request the person to leave; and



   (D)   Notify employees regarding the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.080  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be enforced by the City of Oak Forest
Police Department.



   (B)   Notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be given to
all applicants for a business license in the City of Oak Forest.



   (C)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this
subchapter may initiate enforcement by contacting the City of Oak Forest
Police Department.



   (D)   An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator or employee of
an establishment regulated by this subchapter shall inform persons violating
this subchapter of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that the
violator cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to
smoke, request the person to leave.



(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)



VACANT BUILDING AND REGISTRY REGULATIONS



§ 91.090  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare by enactment of this subchapter which:



      (1)   Establishes a program for identification, registration,
and regulation of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the
effective date of this subchapter.



      (2)   Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant
buildings.



      (3)   Provides for administration, enforcement, including
abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of penalties.



   (B)   This subchapter shall be construed liberally to effect its
purposes.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.091  OTHER ORDINANCES.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of
other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of
conflict, the most restrictive shall apply.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.092  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context,
the following terms shall, for the purpose of this subchapter, have the
meanings indicated in this section.



   BOARDED BUILDING.  A building which has had, in a manner intended to
be temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or
doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress,
some material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings,
from the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or
preventing access or damage to the building or its components.



   BUILDING.  Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or
sheltering any occupancy.



   DANGEROUS BUILDING.  A building defined as a dangerous building in §
91.006, as it may be amended.  Such buildings are public nuisances.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Community Development or his or her
designee.



   OWNER.  Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian
of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the
estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.



   PERSON.  Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as
well as an individual.



   PREMISES.  A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure
thereon.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Includes the following:



      (1)   The physical condition, or uses of any building regarded
as a public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or
under this code;



      (2)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy or any building
or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations, and unsafe fences or structures;



      (3)   Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing
facilities;



      (4)   Any building designated by the Director as unsafe for
human habitation or use;



      (5)   Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire
hazard, or manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or
property;



      (6)   Any building which is unsanitary, or which is littered
with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds;



      (7)   Any building that is dangerous, in a state of
dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; open or vacant and
the doors, windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured, by any means
other than conventional methods used in the design of the building or
permitted for new construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent
as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to
anyone on or near the premises; or



      (8)   Any building defined as a dangerous building by §
91.006, as it may be amended.



   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING.  A building or portion thereof which lacks the
habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the
premises, including buildings ordered vacated by the Director pursuant to
authority granted to him by this Code.  In determining whether a building is
UNOCCUPIED, the Director may consider these factors, among others:



      (1)   A building at which substantially all lawful residential
or business activity has ceased.



      (2)   The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied
to unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units
shall be considered.



      (3)   The building is substantially devoid of contents. The
condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are
relevant to this determination.



      (4)   The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer,
electric or natural gas.



      (5)   The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.



      (6)   The building is not actively for sale as part of a
contractual agreement to sell the building, the building lacks "for sale",
"for rent" or similar signage.



      (7)   The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code
violations.



   VACANT BUILDING. 



      (1)   A building or portion of a building which is:



         (a)   Unoccupied and unsecured;



         (b)   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other
similar means;



         (c)   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;



         (d)   Unoccupied and condemned by the Director pursuant
to applicable provisions of this Code;



         (e)   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations;



         (f)   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has
been the site of unlawful activity within the previous six months;



         (g)   Condemned by the Director and unlawfully occupied;
or



         (h)   Unoccupied for over 90 days and during which time
the Director has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and
same have not been corrected in a code compliant manner; or



         (i)   Unoccupied for over one year.



      (2)   VACANT BUILDING does not include: unoccupied buildings
which are undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which
are in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and
regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is
proceeding diligently to completion.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.093  DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Within 60 days after the effective date of this subchapter,
the Director shall evaluate all buildings in the city he believes to be
unoccupied on the effective date of this subchapter and make a determination
for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning
of § 91.092.  The Director may determine that a building which meets any of
the criteria set forth in § 91.092 is not to be regulated under this
subchapter for a stated period, if upon consideration of reliable,
substantiated and sufficient evidence, he or she determines that regulation
of the building under this subchapter would not serve the public health,
welfare, and safety and makes written findings in support of his decision. 
The determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for
the determination.  For buildings the Director determines to be "vacant
buildings", he shall, within seven days of making that determination, send
notice of his written determination with the factual findings to the last
taxpayer of record listed on the most recent Cook County tax roll. Said
notice of determination shall be sent first class United States mail, with
proper postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from
complying with this chapter. The Director may personally serve or cause
personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making such
service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The
Director shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of
determination sent.



   (B)   The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner
shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant
building to determine the extent of compliance with city property, building
codes, health, fire, water and sewer codes. The owner shall pay the $500
inspection fee to the city within 30 days of the inspection. An unpaid fee
shall be a lien upon the premises.



   (C)   The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the
owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the
registration form the owner is required to file pursuant to § 91.095, and a
notice of the owner's right to appeal the Director's determination.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.094  APPEAL OF DETERMINATION.



   (A)   An owner of a building determined by the Director to be a
vacant building as provided for in this subchapter may appeal that
determination to the City Administrator.  Such appeal shall be in writing
and shall be filed with the City Administrator within 15 days of the date of
mailing of the notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the
owner's obligation to register his building as required by § 91.095.  The
appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes
the Director's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support
thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the
appeal. The City Administrator shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts
presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the Director's
written determination.



   (B)   The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to
persuade the City Administrator that had the evidence been known to the
Director at the time the Director made the determination, the Director would
more likely than not have determined that the subject building was not a
"vacant building" within the meaning of this subchapter.



   (C)   The City Administrator shall send written notice of his
decision to the owner within ten days of his or her receipt of the appeal. 
The City Administrator may, but is not required to, seek additional
information from the owner. The City Administrator may, upon written notice
thereof to the owner, take no more than ten additional days, to decide the
appeal if he or she determines that such additional time is required for
consideration of the appeal.



   (D)   An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this
subchapter to his or her building without the Director's determination having
been made, shall set forth specific facts to support nonapplicability in a
writing to the Director.  In the event the Director determines that the
subject building is a "vacant building", the owner shall have the right to
appeal the Director's determination to the City Administrator as provided for
herein.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.095  OBLIGATION TO REGISTER.



   The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and
circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a
"vacant building" within the meaning of this subchapter after the effective
date of this subchapter or the owner of a building, which the Director
determines at any time to be a "vacant building", or the owner of a building
whose appeal from the Director's determination has been denied by the City
Administrator shall take the actions provided for in this section within 15
days after either the date of the Director's notice of determination or
occurrence of the facts which would cause a reasonable person to believe that
the building was a "vacant building", or denial of the appeal, whichever is
applicable. Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with
all applicable codes and ordinances, including this subchapter, nor does it
preclude any of the actions the city is authorized to take pursuant to this
subchapter or elsewhere in this Code.



   (A)   Registration requirements.



      (1)   (a)   Register the building with the Director of
Community Development, on a form provided by the Director and pay the $200
annual nonprorated vacant building registration fee. The form shall include,
as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner;
the case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting
the building, including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, and
telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the building or
the premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural person
21 years of age or older who maintains a permanent address in Cook County,
Illinois, to accept service on behalf of the owner with respect to any
notices the Director sends pursuant to this subchapter or service of process
in any proceeding commenced to enforce any provision of this subchapter, and
file with the Director on the registration form, the name, address, telephone
number, of said person. A street address is required. A post office box is
not an acceptable address.



         (b)   The form shall state that the owner, by affixing
his or her signature, is advised that the city will not issue real estate
transfer tax stamps without city inspectors having first conducted an
interior inspection for code compliance.



      (2)   Renew the vacant building registration each year on the
anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant
and pay the required $200 annual fee.



      (3)   File an amended registration within 15 days of any
change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new
registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever.



   (B)   Notice; inspection.



      (1)   The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her
"acceptance of notice by posting" consenting to service of notices sent or
required to be sent, pursuant to this subchapter, by posting on the building
if the owner fails to renew the registration if required, or maintain as
current with the Director the information required regarding the person
designated to accept notice and service of process.



      (2)   The owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection
of the interior of the vacant building and shall pay the $500 fee therefor
within 30 days of the inspection. Such inspection will determine the extent
of compliance with city property, building codes, health, fire, water and
sewer codes. The city shall send the inspection report to the owner within 30
days.



   (C)   Insurance.  Obtain liability insurance and maintain such
insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such
insurance with the Director, as follows: $500,000 for a vacant residential
building of one to three units; $750,000 for a vacant residential building of
four to 11 units; $1,000,000 for a vacant residential building of 12 to 48
units; $2,000,000 for a vacant residential building of more than 48 units;
and $2,000,000 for a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or
nonresidential commercial building.



   (D)   Vacant building plan.  At the time a building is registered
as required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The
Director may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the
plan as provided for by this subchapter, the Director may determine the plan.
The plan shall contain the following as a minimum:



      (1)   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other
openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings
being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or
by methods permitted for new construction of similar type with board removed.
Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the
Director and available from the Director. The owner shall maintain the
building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or
made available for immediate occupancy.  If the owner demonstrates that
securing of the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the
Director of Community Development may waive the requirement of an enclosure.



      (2)   For buildings and premises thereof which are determined
by the Director as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in §
91.092, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to
remedy such public nuisance(s).



      (3)   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of
repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening
and nuisance identified by the Director.



      (4)   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building,
then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.



      (5)   A plan of action to maintain the building and premises
thereof in conformance with this subchapter.



      (6)   A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the
date the building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or
sale. The time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion
of all actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which provides for
compliance with this chapter or, which will not, as determined by the
Director, achieve such compliance, within three months, in the case of a
vacant boarded building, and one year, in the case of a vacant, unboarded,
and code compliant building will be approved.



      (7)   All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings
are located and the exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance
with this Code.



      (8)   Exterior lighting according to standards established by
the Director and available from the Director.



   (E)   Security guard service.  On written notice of the Director,
provide bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building
between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Such service to remain in place
until the Director gives written notice that the service is no longer
required. Such service shall be required when the Director makes a written
determination that the vacant building constitutes a fire hazard, is
otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or
improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under such conditions that boarding
and securing the building are insufficient to prevent the actual or
threatened harm.



   (F)   Signage.  Affixed to any building which is boarded, no
smaller than two feet by two feet and compliant with the city's sign
regulations, Chapter 160 of this Code, and providing the following
information: The name, address, and telephone number of the owner, and in
addition, for buildings which are the subject of a foreclosure action, the
name, address, and telephone number of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's
attorney, if any, in the foreclosure action. The sign must be placed so that
its message is legible from the public way.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.096  APPROVAL OF PLAN.



   (A)   Review building plan.  The Director shall review the proposed
vacant building plan in accordance with the standards below. The Director
shall send notice to the owner of the vacant building of his determination.



   (B)   Standards for plan approval.  In considering the
appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the Director shall include the
following in his or her consideration and shall make written findings as to
each:



      (1)   The purposes of this subchapter and intent of the City
Council to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.



      (2)   The effect of the building and the proposed plan on
adjoining property.



      (3)   The length of time the building has been vacant.



      (4)   The presence of any public nuisances on the property.



      (5)   The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will
prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.097  AUTHORITY TO MODIFY PLAN, RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   The Director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the
right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of
performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional
requirements consistent with this subchapter he or she deems necessary to
protect the public health, safety, or welfare.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.098  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PLAN.



   Failure to have an approved plan within 30 days of filing the
registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter subjecting the owner of the
building to penalties as provided in this subchapter and to any remedies the
city may avail itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in this Code,
including, but not limited to, an action to compel correction of property
maintenance violations.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.099  OTHER ENFORCEMENT.



   The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the
city to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to
other provisions of this subchapter, this code, or other applicable
legislation.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.100  CERTIFICATION.



   A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the
Community Development Department and payment in full of all fees imposed
pursuant to this subchapter are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant
building.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.101  BOARDING OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city that boarding is a temporary
solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that
boarded buildings are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain
boarded longer than three months unless an extension of that time is part of
a plan approved by the Director.



   (B)   A vacant building which is unboarded and code compliant and
for which boarding is determined by the Director on the basis of police
reports, citizen complaints, and other information of other type considered
reliable by reasonable persons, to not require boarding to prevent
unauthorized entry may not remain vacant for more than one year without an
approved plan for occupancy, sale, demolition, or other disposition of the
building.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.102  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The city may enforce this subchapter in its administrative
adjudication system or through the court system.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from
immediately condemning as provided for in this Code a building or taking
other immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public
nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the
public, health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



§ 91.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 91.025
through 91.029 shall be fined $150 for the first offense and $300 for the
second offense.



      (2)   Whoever fails to place the required keys inside his or
her lock box shall be fined $100.



(2000 Code, § 8.24.060)



   (C)   (1)   Any person who shall violate § 91.076(A) or (B)
shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $100 for a first
violation and $250 for any subsequent violations within one year. Each day in
which a violation of § 91.076(A) or (B) occurs constitutes a separate and
distinct violation.



      (2)   Any person who shall violate § 91.076(C) or (D) shall,
on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $500 upon conviction for the
first violation and $750 for each subsequent conviction stemming from a
violation within one year of the initial violation of § 91.076(C) or (D).
Each day in which a violation of § 91.076(C) or (D) occurs constitutes a
separate and distinct violation.



      (3)   Any person who shall violate § 91.076(E) shall, on
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $250 for each violation. Each
day during which a violation of § 91.076(E) continues beyond the specified
time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable offense, although
owners, operators, managers or other controllers of public places and places
of employment shall be given a reasonable time to come into compliance with
§ 91.076(E) following issuance of a notice of violation, but that period
shall not, in any event, exceed one week.



      (4)   In addition to the fines established by this division
(C), violation of §§ 91.075 through 91.080 by a person who owns, manages,
operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may
result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the
person for the premises on which the violation occurred.



      (5)   Violation of §§ 91.075 through 91.080 is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by an action in the
Circuit Court for injunctive relief, or other means provided for by law,
including hearing cases, finding liability and imposing the above-noted fines
via the administrative adjudication system, and the city may take action to
recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.



      (6)   Charges of municipal code violations shall be heard and
adjudicated by a hearing officer in accordance with the provisions governing
the city’s administrative adjudication system.



(Ord. 2008-02-0154O, passed 2-12-2008)



   (D)   (1)   Any person found to have violated any provision of
§§ 91.090 through 91.102 shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100 per day
per violation to a maximum of $750 per day per violation, in addition to any
other legal or equitable remedies available to the city. Such other remedies
include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of
competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation,
contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any
lien the city may have thereon.



      (2)   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each
day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of §§
91.090 through 91.102.



(Ord. 2008-07-0193O, passed 7-22-2008)



CHAPTER 92:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Alarms required



   92.03   Authorization required; application



   92.04   Fees



   92.05   License for alarm equipment supplier



   92.06   Notice to Police or Fire Departments of alarm installation



   92.07   Inspection and maintenance of alarm devices



   92.08   Dial alarm receiving equipment



   92.09   Local alarms



   92.10   Responsibility to answer alarms



   92.11   Determination to be public nuisance



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM DEVICE.  Any local alarm, dial alarm, direct alarm, holdup
alarm, fire alarm or trouble alarm installed as defined herein, which purpose
is to give notice of a criminal act, fire emergency, medical emergency or
other emergency which may require police or fire response.



   ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS.  Any person who sells, leases, maintains,
monitors, or installs automatic protection devices, local alarms, police
alarms, fire alarms, dial alarms and direct alarms.



   ALARM USER.  A person who uses one or more police or fire alarm
devices which may require police or fire response, and a person who contracts
for or receives service or maintenance with respect to an alarm device from
an alarm equipment supplier.



   ALARM USER PERMIT.  A permit required for an alarm user to operate an
alarm device which may require police or fire response.



   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A building designed to contain or contains a
commercial business.



   DIAL ALARM. Any police or fire alarm device which is a telephone device
or telephone attachment that automatically or electronically selects a
telephone line connected to a receiving alarm station and reproduces a
prerecorded message to report a criminal act or other emergency requiring
police response.



   FALSE ALARM. The activation of any police or fire alarm device by other
than a forced entry, attempted forced entry, unlawful entry, or actual
hold-up or attempted robbery, fire or medical emergency on the premises.



   INSTALLATION.  Any police or fire alarm device or aggregation of any
police or fire alarm devices installed on or within a single building or on
or within more than one building or area adjacently located on a common site
at a specific location.



   LOCAL ALARM.  Those alarms that sound audibly on the premises whether
or not connected to any receiving station by any means and sounding on the
premises where the alarm is connected.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE. A building containing three or more
dwelling units as defined in § 151.165 of this code.



   OWNER.  The person or legal entity that owns a commercial or
multi-family dwelling building, whether occupied by a tenant or not.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.02  ALARMS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All commercial buildings and multi-family dwelling structures
are required to have a functional, properly maintained and monitored fire
alarm system.



   (B)   All required fire alarm systems and automatic fire detection
systems shall be supervised by a central station, proprietary station or
remote station in accordance with NFPA 72.



   (C)   In the event the building is vacant, the owner is responsible
and required to have a fire alarm device system as defined in this code.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011; Am. Ord. 2018-08-0699O, passed
8-28-2018)



§ 92.03  AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No alarm system user shall operate an alarm system without
first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this section. The permit
shall be renewable on an annual basis by May 1 of each year.



   (B)   The alarm user applying for the authorization required by this
section shall complete an application form as provided by the city. The form
shall contain at minimum his or her name, the address of the residence or
business in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed, his
or her telephone number, the type of alarm system (burglar, panic, hold-up,
etc.), the alarm business selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting,
responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system and the name and telephone
number of at least two other persons who can be reached at any time, day or
night, and who are authorized to respond to an alarm signal and who can open
the premises in which the system is installed.



   (C)   No alarm system user, after having an authorization revoked,
shall fail to disconnect his or her alarm system.



   (D)   At the discretion of the Fire or Police Chief, failure to
apply for or renew an alarm permit may be grounds not to respond to an alarm
activation.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.04  FEES.



   (A)   Any structure with an alarm device must be registered with the
city on an annual basis by May 31 of each year.  There is no cost for the
registration.



   (B)   False alarms.



      (1)   For the first two false alarm responses in a 12-month
period, no fee shall be charged, unless the city can show willful and wanton
misconduct on the part of the alarm user or his/her employees and/or agents.



      (2)   For the third false alarm response within a 12-month
period, a fee of $25 shall be charged.



      (3)   For the fourth false alarm response within a 12-month
period, a fee of $200 shall be charged.



      (4)   For the fifth false alarm response and for each and
every succeeding false alarm within a 12-month period, a fee of $300 shall be
charged for each response.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011; Am. Ord. 2011-04-0336O, passed
4-26-2011)



§ 92.05  LICENSE FOR ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER.



   No person shall engage in, carry on or conduct the business of being an
alarm equipment supplier, as hereinabove defined, within the city, unless he
or she is licensed to do so by the state pursuant ILCS Ch. 225, Act 447, Art.
10, Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor,
and Locksmith Act of 2004.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.06  NOTICE TO POLICE OR FIRE DEPARTMENTS OF ALARM INSTALLATION.



   (A)    No police or fire alarm device installation is to be made in
the city, whether residential or commercial, unless there is on file with the
Police or Fire Department an alarm user permit for police response or the
Fire Department for a fire, trouble, or medical emergency response. The alarm
user permit will be supplied by the Police or Fire Department upon request.



   (B)   It will be the responsibility of the alarm equipment supplier
to obtain the original information required on the alarm user permit. It will
be the responsibility of the alarm user to keep the information updated.
Failure to supply information for the alarm user permit or failure to keep
the information on the permit current shall be grounds for the revocation of
alarm user permit, and other penalty as provided herein.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.07  INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF ALARM DEVICES.



   (A)   For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
the Police Chief, Fire Chief or designee, shall have the authority to enter
any premises in the city in or upon which any alarm system subject to this
chapter is located, to inspect the installation and/or operation of such
alarm system. If such inspection reveals any violation of the provisions of
this chapter or if in the opinion of the inspecting officer that the alarm is
detrimental to the safety of the user, a written report detailing such
violation shall be promptly sent to the Police or Fire Chief. If the Police
or Fire Chief agrees with the written report, the owner, lessee or other
person responsible for the alarm system in violation will be notified. Such
notification shall require that corrections be made within five days after
date of notice of the violation.



Failure to comply shall result in the disconnection of the alarm at the
location of the violation, revocation of alarm user permit, and other penalty
as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Each alarm user shall employ the services of an alarm
equipment supplier which has licensed employees and supplies and equipment so
located as to be able to respond to a request for repair or adjustment of the
alarm system.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.08  DIAL ALARM RECEIVING EQUIPMENT.



   No automatic protection devices known as dial alarms installed after
the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived
(Ordinance 2011-01-0325O) by any person on premises of any kind in the city
shall be keyed to any police emergency trunk line or to any line used by the
police or fire for either emergency purposes or for general information from
the Police or Fire Departments.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.09  LOCAL ALARMS.



   (A)   No person shall have a local alarm on any building, place or
premises in the city without first obtaining authorization therefor from the
Police or Fire Chief.



   (B)   Local alarms shall not make a sound similar to that of sirens
on emergency vehicles or of civil defense warning systems. Owners of such
local alarms shall maintain the alarms and turn the audible signal off at the
request of the Police or Fire Department or an officer thereof. The continued
sounding of those local alarms for more than ten minutes after the
appropriate agency has responded is declared to be a violation of this
section.



   (C)   Alarms affixed to vehicles of any type are not classified as
local alarms and are exempt from this section.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.10  RESPONSIBILITY TO ANSWER ALARMS.



   When an alarm has been activated at a business or private residence and
the police and/or fire respond, the owner or his or her representative shall
be present at such location after being requested to do so by the Police or
Fire Department or alarm equipment supplier responsible for making such
notification. Response will be as soon as possible but shall not exceed one
hour from time of request. Refusal to respond or excessive response time
shall constitute grounds for revocation of alarm user permit and a fine.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 92.11  DETERMINATION TO BE PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   The Police or Fire Chief may determine an alarm to be a public
nuisance or adverse to the safety of the public based on a violation within
this chapter. Upon such determination, the Police or Fire Chief shall notify
the alarm user of such fact and require that the alarm user take reasonable
steps to eliminate the problem as soon as possible but not to exceed five
days after receipt of such notice.



   (B)   If the alarm user fails to take reasonable steps to eliminate
the problem, then the Police or Fire Chief shall issue written notice to the
alarm user, by first class mail, of his or her intent to revoke the alarm
user permit. The alarm user permit may be revoked for:



      (1)   Failure to pay false alarm fees;



      (2)   Failure to complete or renew an alarm permit;



      (3)   Failure to respond to alarms when summoned by the Police
or Fire Department;



      (4)   Excessive or prolonged noise caused by local alarms.



   (C)   If the city finds it necessary to revoke an alarm permit or
refuse to respond to an alarm without a valid alarm user permit, the city
shall incur no liability for such action.



(Ord. 2011-01-0325O, passed 2-8-2011)



CHAPTER 93:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Declaration



   93.03   Curfew imposed



   93.04   Additional orders



   93.05   Duration



   93.06   Notice



   93.07   Powers not impaired



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.



      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together without
authority of law; or



      (2)   Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including a
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the
city, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of
property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   CURFEW.  A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, public property or vacant
premises within the city, except officials of any governmental unit and
persons officially designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency.



(2000 Code, § 8.12.010)



§ 93.02  DECLARATION.



   Whenever a civil emergency exists, the Mayor shall declare the
existence of the emergency by means of a written declaration setting forth
the facts which constitute the emergency.



(2000 Code, § 8.12.020)



§ 93.03  CURFEW IMPOSED.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may
order a general curfew applicable to the general geographical areas of the
city or to the city as a whole as he or she deems advisable, and applicable
during such hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in the
interests of the public safety and welfare.



(2000 Code, § 8.12.030)



§ 93.04  ADDITIONAL ORDERS.



   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare:



   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including
taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted;



   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by
any wholesaler or retailer;



   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving
away of gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquid products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing
or giving away of any firearm or ammunition of any kind; and/or



   (E)   Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary for the
protection of life and property.



(2000 Code, § 8.12.040)



§ 93.05  DURATION.



   The proclamation authorized by this section shall be effective for 48
hours, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating
that the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to
re-proclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-hour
period during the time that the civil emergency exists.



(2000 Code, § 8.12.050)



§ 93.06  NOTICE.



   Upon issuing the proclamation authorized by this section, the Chief of
Police shall notify the news media serving the city and shall cause three
copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at three public places to be determined by the Chief at such time.



(2000 Code, § 8.12.060)



§ 93.07  POWERS NOT IMPAIRED.



   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair the powers granted
to the Police Department and the Fire Department in these codified
ordinances. This section shall be construed together with other provisions of
these codified ordinances and other ordinances of the city now in effect for
the safety and welfare of the residents of the city.



(2000 Code, § 8.12.070)



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE CODES AND FIREWORKS



Section




Fire Prevention Code




   94.01   Adoption by reference; file copies



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Bureau of Fire Prevention; authority of Fire Chief



   94.04   Amendments to code



   94.05   Authority to modify adopted codes



   94.06   Storage of explosives and blasting agents



   94.07   Manufacture and storage of fireworks



   94.08   Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks



   94.09   Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas



   94.10   Routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting
agents



   94.11   Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and
dangerous articles



   94.12   Fire lanes; tow zones



   94.13   Elevators



   94.14   Connection of fire protection systems to central fire alarms
indicator station



   94.15   Nonenergized wiring outlets



   94.16   Placement of grills and similar devices



   94.17   Use of portable fireplaces/fire pits



   94.18   New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits



   94.19   Appeals



   94.20   Violations




International Fire Code




   94.35   Adoption of code



   94.36   Title



   94.37   Failure to comply



   94.38   Fire protection systems



   94.39   Hazardous incident prohibition



   94.40   Spiller pay requirement



   94.41   Prohibitions




Fireworks




   94.55   Title



   94.56   Definitions



   94.57   Fireworks prohibited



   94.58   Fireworks display permit; application



   94.59   Smoking by operator at fireworks display prohibited



   94.60   Disposal of unfired fireworks



   94.61   Parental liability



   94.62   Advertising restrictions



   94.63   Seizure of fireworks



 



   94.99   Penalty




FIRE PREVENTION CODE




§ 94.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE; FILE COPIES.



   (A)   There is adopted by and for the city, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, the Fire Prevention Code, recommended by the American
Insurance Association, being particularly the 1976 edition thereof, as
amended through November, 1982, save and except for such portions as may be
amended or repealed in this chapter, and the National Fire Codes, recommended
by the National Fire Protection Association, being particularly the most
current edition thereof,  or any successor edition of the aforementioned
publication, save and except for such portions as may be amended or repealed
in this chapter.



   (B)   At least three copies of those codes are on file with the City
Clerk for inspection by the public.



   (C)   The codes, together with the provisions of this chapter of
these codified ordinances, shall constitute the Fire Prevention Code of the
city.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.010)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the A.I.A. Fire
Prevention Code, it shall mean the City of Oak Forest.



   (B)   Wherever the term CORPORATION COUNSEL is used in that code, it
shall mean the City Attorney.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.020)



§ 94.03  BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; AUTHORITY OF FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   This Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the city.



   (B)   A report of the Bureau shall be made annually and transmitted
to the Mayor. The report shall contain all proceedings under this Fire
Prevention Code, with such statistics as the Chief decides to include
therein. The Chief shall also recommend any amendment to this code which, in
his or her judgment, is desirable.



   (C)   The Chief may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary, in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the municipality.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.030)



§ 94.04  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   The A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code, adopted  in § 94.01 above is amended
as follows:



   (A)   A.I.A. § 1.2. Application of Code is amended by adding
thereto the following:



      c.    All existing buildings, regardless of occupancy,
construction or size, shall conform to this Fire Prevention Code if any type
of building permit is issued. This Fire Prevention Code includes remodeling,
additions, repairs or other alterations.



   (B)   A.I.A. § 11.3. Lighting of Exit-ways is amended by adding
thereto the following:



Adequate emergency lighting shall be installed and maintained in buildings of
all types of occupancy, except in single-family dwellings.



   (C)   A.I.A. Section 14.4. Automatic Sprinkler Systems is amended as
follows:



      g.    OTHER INSTALLATIONS.



         (1)   An approved complete automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed in all buildings which have a gross area on any floor of
more than 7,000 square feet and in all buildings which are either two stories
in height or twenty-seven feet in height, when such types of buildings are
used or intended for the following uses or occupancies: assembly,
educational, industrial, institutional, mercantile, storage or sale of
combustible goods.



         (2)   An approved complete automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed in all buildings, regardless of type of construction, use
or occupancy, which exceed either three stories or forty feet in height.



         (3)   An approved complete automatic sprinkler system
and standpipe system shall be installed in all buildings, regardless of type
of construction, that are used or occupied as a hospital, infirmary, nursing
home, day care center, orphanage, sheltered care home, home for the aged or
child care or custodial care facility.



         (4)   An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed in all apartment buildings, condominiums, townhouses, motels,
hotels or other residential buildings with more than twenty-four units and/or
more than three stories. Sprinklers shall cover all areas except living units.



      h.    GROSS FLOOR AREA DEFINED: For purposes of this section,
“gross floor area” means the ground area of the buildings. The area
included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building shall include
roof overhangs and extensions and all enclosed extensions. Areas of a
building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included within the
building area if such areas are included with the horizontal projection of
the roof or floor above. Interior walls, including fire walls and party
walls, shall not be considered as walls which divide a structure into two or
more separate buildings, but structures containing such interior walls shall
be considered as one building for the purposes of this section.



      i.    INSTALLATION OF AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS: All
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed so as to provide reasonable
safety to persons and property and in accordance with all applicable
provisions of this Fire Prevention Code and other applicable codes and
ordinances of the city.



      j.    APPROVAL OF PLANS FOR AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS: All
plans for automatic sprinkler systems shall be initially approved by the
Insurance Service Office of Illinois, the Industrial Risk Insurance
Association or an insurance organization having interest in the building. The
builders, building owners or their agents shall then submit the initially
approved and stamped plans for proposed sprinkler systems to the Fire
Prevention Officer of the Bureau of Fire Prevention for additional approval.
Such plans shall show the size, capacity and location of all sprinkler heads,
pumps, tanks or pipes, and any other apparatus which is to be used in
connection with such sprinkler systems. Such plans, when approved by the Fire
Prevention Officer, shall also be stamped by him or her to that effect before
such system is installed. The Fire Prevention Officer shall not have
authority to determine what sprinkler systems shall be installed, but only to
approve plans for such proposed systems.



      k.    HYDRANTS: Standard fire hydrants shall be provided
within 300 feet of all exposed parts of all buildings.



   (D)   A.I.A. Section 27.1. Definitions is amended to read as follows:



      a.   “Decorative material” includes all such material as
curtains, draperies, streamers, surface coverings applied over the building
interior finish for decoration, acoustical or other effect, and cloth,
cotton, batting, straw, vines, leaves, trees and plastics used for decorative
effect. The term also includes floor coverings and all materials one-fortieth
of an inch or less in thickness applied directly to and adhering tightly to a
noncombustible base. All such material shall be listed by Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc. or an equivalent testing laboratory (approved by the Fire
Prevention Officer).



      b.   “Place of assembly” means a room or space used for
assembly or educational occupancy for 100 or more occupants or which has a
floor area of 1,500 square feet or more used for such purposes. Such room or
space shall include any similar occupied connecting room or space in the same
story, or in a story above or below, where entrance is common to the rooms or
space.



   (E)   A.I.A. Section 27.4. Pyroxylin Coated Fabric is amended to
read as follows:



      Pyroxylin coated materials shall not be used as a surface
covering on any interior finish or fixed furnishings.



   (F)   A.I.A. Section 28.5. Hot Ashes and Other Dangerous Materials
is amended to read as follows:



      In any residential building, other than a single-family home, no
person shall use a barbeque grill or hibachi on a porch or balcony.



   (G)   A.I.A. Article 32 - EARLY WARNING DETECTION is added to read
as follows:



      Section 32.1. Systems in Multiple Dwellings.



      All multiple dwellings, such as hotels, motels, apartments,
condominiums, etc., shall have an early warning fire and smoke detection
system. The system shall consist of products of combustion detectors in the
corridors, on top of the stairwells and in tenant storage areas, Thermal
detectors shall be placed in all boiler rooms, janitorial closets, mechanical
equipment rooms, workshop areas and laundry areas. Each floor shall have at
least two manual fire stations placed near the stairs or exit. Each floor
shall have at least two audible fire alarm devices.



      Section 32.2. Approval Required.



      The system described in Section 32.1 shall be labeled and
approved by Factory Mutual Insurance Company, Underwriters’ Laboratories,
Inc. and all local governing bodies, before installation.



      Section 32.3. Systems in Single-Family Dwellings.



      All single-family homes shall be equipped with early warning fire
and smoke detection systems. The system shall consist of products of
combustion detectors on each floor. They shall be labeled and approved by
Factory Mutual Insurance Company and Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.,
before installation. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall also approve
detectors and the location of the same. Instructions to homeowners shall be
given at the time of occupancy.



      Section 32.4. Systems in Buildings of More than 3,000 Square Feet.



      All other buildings with more than 3,000 square feet of floor
area, regardless of construction or occupancy, shall be equipped with early
warning fire and smoke detection systems, unless equipped with approved
automatic sprinkler systems with automatic flow alarms.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.040)



§ 94.05  AUTHORITY TO MODIFY ADOPTED CODES.



   (A)   The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention may modify any of
the provisions of the A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code and the National Fire Codes
upon application, in writing, by an owner or lessee, or his or her duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of those codes, provided that the intent of
the codes shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done.



   (B)   The particulars of that modification, when granted or allowed,
and the decision of the Chief thereon, shall be entered upon the records of
the Fire Department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.050)



§ 94.06  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.



   The limits referred to in § 12.5b of the A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code,
in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are
established as the entire corporate limits of the city.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.060)



§ 94.07  MANUFACTURE AND STORAGE OF FIREWORKS.



   The limits referred to in § 13.3a of the A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code,
in which the manufacture and storage of fireworks are prohibited, are
established as the entire corporate limits of the city.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.070)



§ 94.08  STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND TANKS.



   (A)   The limits referred to in § 16.22a of the A.I.A. Fire
Prevention Code, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
tanks is prohibited, are established as the entire corporate limits of the
city.



   (B)   The limits referred to in § 16.61 of the A.I.A. Fire
Prevention Code, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible
liquids are prohibited, are established as the entire corporate limits of the
city.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.080)



§ 94.09  BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.



   The limits referred to in § 21.6a of the A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code,
in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are
established as the entire corporate limits of the city.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.090)



§ 94.10  ROUTES FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.



   The routes referred to in § 12.7o of the A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code
for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are established as
follows.



   (A)   (1)   The route for interstate shipments is Illinois
Interstate 57 only.



      (2)   No stopping or parking of vehicles of interstate
shipments shall be allowed within the limits of the city, except for the
purpose of inspection by the Bureau of Fire Prevention to ensure compliance
with this Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   The route for intrastate shipments shall be determined by the
Fire Chief at the time of issuance of a permit, as the route will differ
depending on the destination of the vehicle within the city.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.100)



§ 94.11  ROUTES FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS AND DANGEROUS
ARTICLES.



   The routes referred to in § 20.14 of the A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code
for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles
are established as follows.



   (A)   (1)   The route for interstate shipments is Illinois
Interstate 57 only.



      (2)   No stopping or parking of vehicles of interstate
shipments shall be allowed within the limits of the city, except for the
purpose of inspection by the Bureau of Fire Prevention to ensure compliance
with this Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   The route for intrastate shipments shall be determined by the
Fire Chief at the time of issuance of a permit, as the route will differ
depending on the destination of the vehicle within the city.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.110)



§ 94.12  FIRE LANES; TOW ZONES.



   (A)   The fire lanes referred to in § 28.16 of the A.I.A. Fire
Prevention Code are established as follows:



      (1)   5612 West 159th Street. No-parking areas are established
at Jewel-Osco in each area where “No Parking - Fire Lane” signs or
similar signs are posted;



      (2)   5511 to 5545 West 159th Street. No-parking areas are
established at the Friendly Oaks shopping plaza in all areas which are marked
as fire lanes;



      (3)   159th and Central. No-parking areas are established at
the Oak Creek Plaza facility in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (4)   15240 South Cicero. No-parking areas are established at
the Oak Forest Bowl in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (5)   15301 and 15311 South Kilpatrick; 15301, 15311 and 15312
South Knox; 15302 and 15310 Kenton. No-parking areas are established at the
above-mentioned apartment buildings in all areas which are marked as fire
lanes;



      (6)   15530 to 15548 South Cicero. No-parking areas are
established on the west side of Cicero Avenue between 15530 and 15548 in
areas where fire lanes are posted;



      (7)   15150 to 15158 South Cicero. No-parking areas are
established on the west side of Cicero Avenue between 15150 and 15158 in
areas where fire lanes are posted;



      (8)   5300 West 155th Street. No-parking areas are established
at St. Damian’s School and Church in all areas where fire lanes are marked;



      (9)   4816, 4820 and 4823 West 157th Street. No-parking areas
are established for the above-mentioned apartment buildings in all areas
which are marked as fire lanes;



      (10)   15659 and 15701 South Lamon. No-parking areas are
established at the above-mentioned apartment buildings in all areas which are
marked as fire lanes;



      (11)   15644 South Cicero. No-parking areas are established in
all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (12)   16936 South Forest. No-parking areas are established at
the Morton-Gingerwood School in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (13)   5217 West 149th Street. No-parking areas are
established at the Oak Forest Christian Academy or Baptist Temple in all
areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (14)   147th and Central. No-parking areas are established at
the Scarborough Fare Shopping Complex in all areas which are marked as fire
lanes;



      (15)   14700, 14710, 14720 and 14730 South Central. No-parking
areas are established at the apartment complex in all areas which are marked
as fire lanes;



      (16)   151st and Central. No-parking areas are established at
the Oak Forest High School in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (17)   5151 West 149th Street. No-parking areas are
established at the Forest Ridge School in all areas which are marked as fire
lanes;



      (18)   14950 South Laramie. No-parking areas are established
at the Kerkstra School in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (19)   5900 West 159th Street. No-parking areas are
established at Community Motors in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (20)   5705 to 15037 on the east side of Vine Street.
No-parking areas are established at the Lutheran Church of the Resurrection
in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (21)   From 5750 Chaucer, between Colina and Condado.
No-parking areas are established on the north side of the street in all areas
which are marked as fire lanes;



      (22)   5800 West 151st Street. Fire lane - no-parking areas
are established at the Hine School in all areas which are marked as fire
lanes;



      (23)   5931 West School Street. Fire lane - no-parking areas
are established at the Foster School in all areas which are marked as fire
lanes;



      (24)   5003, 5009, 5013, 5017 and 5049 West 159th Street. Fire
lane - no-parking areas are established at the apartment complex in all areas
which are marked as fire lanes;



      (25)   15831, 15841 and 15859 South Le-Claire. Fire lane -
no-parking areas are established at the apartment complex in all areas where
fire lane signs are posted;



      (26)   15928 and 15938 South LeClaire. Fire lane - no-parking
areas are established at the apartment complex in all areas which are marked
as fire lanes;



      (27)   6000 West 159th Street. Fire lane - no-parking areas
are established for the Oak Terrace Condominiums Complex in all areas which
are marked as fire lanes;



      (28)   159th and Forest. Fire lane - no-parking areas are
established at the Arbor Park School in all areas which are marked as fire
lanes;



      (29)   6536 West 155th Street. Fire lane - no-parking areas
are established at the Fierke Educational Center in all areas which are
marked as fire lanes;



      (30)   157th and Central. Fire lane - no-parking areas are
established at the Oak Forest Park District Building in all areas which are
marked as fire lanes;



      (31)   4100 West Wagman. Fire lane - no-parking areas are
established at the Fieldcrest School in all areas which are marked as fire
lanes;



      (32)   5700 West Albert Drive. Fire lane - no-parking areas
are established at the Scarlet Oak School in all areas which are marked as
fire lanes;



      (33)   15620 South Central. Fire lane - no-parking areas are
established at the Acorn Library in all areas which are marked as fire lanes;



      (34)   Fieldcrest Industrial Park. Fire lane - no-parking
areas are established on the west side of Kilbourne Avenue from Frontage Road
to 167th Street;



      (35)   154th Street. Fire lane - no-parking areas are
established from Cicero Avenue to Lavergne Avenue in all areas which are
marked as fire lanes;



      (36)   157th Street (north side), from Laramie Avenue to Long
Avenue. Fire lane - no-parking areas are established in all areas which are
marked as fire lanes; and



      (37)   Kilpatrick Avenue.  Fire lane - no- parking lanes have
been established on Kilpatrick Avenue from 167th Street south 75 feet and
then east 300 feet on the south side of the street only.



   (B)   Areas designated as fire lanes, by being defined in a letter
from the owner or occupant of the private property, addressed to the Bureau
of Fire Prevention, in which letter the owner or occupant devotes such areas
as fire lanes, can only be returned to other use upon written permission of
the Fire Prevention Officer of the Bureau. Fire lanes shall be designated on
a plat prior to approval of the plat;



   (C)   The areas delineated in division (A) above are designated as
tow zones. Any vehicle parked or stopped in the designated areas shall be
removed and towed away; and



   (D)   The city shall immediately post and maintain the no-parking
fire lane tow zone signs in the general areas designated.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.120)  (Am. Ord. 2008-07-0190O, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 94.13  ELEVATORS.



   In all buildings in which elevators are installed, at least one
elevator shall be of a reasonable size to accommodate a stretcher for the
purpose of rescue or ambulance duties.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.130)



§ 94.14  CONNECTION OF FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS TO CENTRAL FIRE ALARMS
INDICATOR STATION.



   All required fire protection systems shall be connected to the central
fire alarms indicator station authorized and supervised by the city. No
automatic dialers or similar devices will be allowed.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.140)



§ 94.15  NON-ENERGIZED WIRING OUTLETS.



   (A)   All buildings which exceed two stories in height shall have
non-energized wiring from ground level with three-prong male twist outlets at
the base and three-prong female twist-lock outlets at each floor level so as
to provide at least one such outlet in all stairwells at each floor level and
not more than 100 feet of travel distance from any point at each floor level
to at least one such outlet.



   (B)   All wiring shall be No. 8 and shall be installed in accordance
with the electrical requirements of the Building and Housing Code.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.150)



§ 94.16  PLACEMENT OF GRILLS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall be allowed to use, maintain or place any
barbecue grill, Hibachi or manufactured portable fireplace or fire pit on any
balcony or porch in any multifamily unit or commercial building.



   (B)   Nothing in this section is intended to, nor prohibits, the
safe use of barbecue grills or other similar devices on either of
single-family residences or townhouses.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.160)  (Ord. 2326 § 1, passed - -1998)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.17  USE OF PORTABLE FIREPLACES/FIRE PITS.



   No portable fireplace or fire pit shall be allowed on other than
single-family residences. The use of manufactured portable fireplaces/fire
pits is further restricted as follows.



   (A)   All manufactured portable fireplaces/fire pits shall be
expressly approved by the Underwriter’s Laboratory or any successor
organization. No devices other than those approved by the Underwriter’s
Laboratory shall be allowed.



   (B)   Every portable fireplace or fire pit shall be placed at least
ten feet from any structure.



   (C)   No portable fireplace or fire pit shall be used on the
interior of any structure.



   (D)   In addition to all other restrictions, the portable fireplace
or fire pit shall be used only in well-ventilated areas.



   (E)   Only felled and split lots or manufactured logs shall be
burned in the portable fireplace or fire pit. The burning of treated or
dimensional lumber, trash, rubbish, papers, leaves, yard waste and similar
substances are prohibited.



   (F)   Every portable fireplace and fire pit shall be safely,
securely and entirely placed on a fully noncombustible surface i.e.,
concrete, asphalt, stone or rock.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.170)  (Ord. 2326 § 2, passed - -1998)



§ 94.18  NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH REQUIRE PERMITS.



   (A)   The Mayor, the Fire Chief and the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated
in the A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code and the National Fire Codes.



   (B)   The Chief of the Bureau shall post the list in a conspicuous
place in his or her office and shall distribute copies thereof to interested
persons.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.180)



§ 94.19  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention disapproves an
application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code do not apply or that the
true intent and meaning of this Fire Prevention Code have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, the applicant is permitted to appeal from the
decision of the Chief to the Mayor and Council within 30 days from the date
of the decision.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.190)



§ 94.20  VIOLATIONS.



   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this Fire Prevention Code, or violate or fail to comply with any order made
hereunder, or build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications
or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued hereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or fail to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Mayor and Council or by a
court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.200)  Penalty, see § 94.99




INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE




§ 94.35  ADOPTION OF CODE.



   That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk of the City of Oak Forest, being marked and
designated as the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is adopted as the Fire Code of the City of
Oak Forest, in the State of Illinois regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises as provided in this section; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Fire Code on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Oak Forest are referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
§§ 94.36 through 94.37.



(2000 Code, § 8.40.010)  (Ord. 2914 § 1, passed - -2005; Am. Ord.
2012-04-0377O, passed 4-24-2012)



§ 94.36  TITLE.



   These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Oak
Forest, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”



(2000 Code, § 8.40.020)  (Ord. 2914 § 2 (part), passed - -2005)



§ 94.37  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop work order, except the work as that person is directed to perform or
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $50 or more than $250, or unless otherwise noted.



(2000 Code, § 8.40.040)  (Ord. 2914 § 2 (part), passed - -2005; Am. Ord.
2014-01-0482O, passed 1-14-2014)



§ 94.38  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Approved automatic sprinkler systems are required in all new
buildings and structures except detached garages and sheds and except that,
in single-family residential structures, N.F.P.A. 13D requirements for
automatic sprinklers are amended to provide that bathrooms of less than 80
square feet and closets of less than 55 square feet are not required to have
sprinklers.



   (B)   Should an addition of 75% or more of the floor area of the
original single family residential building install automatic sprinklers in
any part of the existing building which shares a common wall or common
floor/ceiling with the addition, the primary resident will qualify for an
incentive of 50% of the total cost of the purchase and installation of the
automatic fire sprinkler system up to a maximum of $3,000. The resident will
need to provide a copy of their tax bill showing principle residency and
proof that three quotes were obtained to the City Administrator in order to
qualify for the incentive.



   (C)   Any single family home that installs automatic sprinkler heads
will qualify for an incentive of $100 per head with a maximum incentive of
$300. Proof of a paid bill and proof of an inspection by the city's Building
Department will need to be provided to qualify for the incentive.



   (D)   Retro-fit of any existing assembly occupancies of Class A-2 of
the lounge, nightclub, restaurants, taverns, bars and banquets halls that
have an occupancy of 200 or more and live entertainment are required to
install automatic sprinklers within two years of passage of this subchapter.
A change in ownership does not relieve the responsibility of this requirement.



   (E)   (1)   All manufactured homes, commonly known as mobile
homes, trailers, installed from the date of passage of these amendments shall
have automatic sprinklers installed.



      (2)   This would include any new or used units.



(2000 Code, § 8.40.050)  (Ord. 2914 § 3 (part), passed - -2005; Ord.
2006-07-0044O, passed 7-11-2006; Am. Ord. 2014-01-0482O, passed 1-14-2014;
Am. Ord. 2015-08-0554O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 94.39  HAZARDOUS INCIDENT PROHIBITION.



   No person shall store, manufacture, produce, dispose of, treat,
transport or cause the use, storage, manufacture, production, treatment or
transportation of any hazardous substance or hazardous material in any manner
which results in a hazardous material incident.



(2000 Code, § 8.40.060)  (Ord. 2914 § 3 (part), passed - -2005)  Penalty,
see § 94.99



§ 94.40  SPILLER PAY REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Any person causing or permitting a hazardous material incident
may be responsible for any and all of the following:



      (1)   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by
the city in connection with the operation, maintenance and staffing required
to respond to such hazardous material incident at the rates indicated in §
32.099(G);



      (2)   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by
the city for equipment and materials used, damaged, lost, spent, destroyed or
rendered irreparable in connection with a hazardous material incident; and/or



      (3)   Assumption of any and all liability and costs of any
cleanup or removal resulting from a hazardous material incident, including
but not limited to any independent clean-up contractor necessitated by the
hazardous material incident.



   (B)   The Fire Department/City Administrator shall prepare and
forward to the person or persons causing or permitting a hazardous material
incident, a bill for the total costs and expenses incurred for which such
person or persons are responsible pursuant to this section; provided,
however, any cost in connection with any independent clean-up contractor
shall be billed directly by the contractor. Payment of the total bill shall
be made within 30 days of receipt. Any bill or portion thereof remaining
unpaid after 30 days of receipt shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance
at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or any fraction of a month.



(2000 Code, § 8.40.070)  (Ord. 2914 § 3 (part), passed - -2005; Am. Ord.
2018-04-06890, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 94.41  PROHIBITIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person or other legal entity to fail, refuse or
otherwise conduct himself or herself or itself contrary to the provisions of
the No Parking Without Consent, Storage Restriction and Hazardous Waste
Prohibition section of this chapter.



   (A)   Within city limits: storage of cryogenic fluids are prohibited
in all residential areas.



   (B)   Flammable and combustible liquids are prohibited in all
residential areas.



   (C)   Liquified petroleum gases are prohibited in all residential
areas.



(2000 Code, § 8.40.080)  (Ord. 2914 § 3 (part), passed - -2005)  Penalty,
see § 94.99




FIREWORKS




§ 94.55  TITLE.



   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Oak
Forest Fireworks Ordinance.”



(2000 Code, § 8.36.010)  (Ord. 2461 § 1, passed - -2000)



§ 94.56  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE DEPARTMENT.  The Chief of the Fire Department or higher designee.



   FIREWORKS.  Includes any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include the
following:



      (1)   Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles,
bombs or other devices of similar construction;



      (2)   Any fireworks containing any explosive compound; or



      (3)   Any tablets or other devices containing any explosive
substance or containing combustible substances producing visual effects.



   FIREWORKS.  Shall not include the following:



      (1)   Auto flares;



      (2)   Snake or glow worm pellets;



      (3)   Smoke devices;



      (4)   Trick noisemakers known as “party poppers,” “booby
traps,” “snappers,” “trick matches,” “cigarette loads” and
“auto burglar alarms;”



      (5)   Sparklers. The term SPARKLERS means a wire or stick
coated with pyrotechnic composition which may not exceed 100 grams per item,
that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. The term SPARKLERS shall not
include other sparking devices including but not limited to items commonly
known as “fountains,” “spinners,” “wheels” or similar devices,
the sale and use of which is expressly prohibited;



      (6)   Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grams or less of
explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; or



      (7)   Toy pistol caps or plastic caps which contain less than
twenty-five hundredths grams of explosive mixture.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Oak Forest.



   POLICE.  Any Oak Forest police officer.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.020)  (Ord. 2461 § 2, passed - -2000)



§ 94.57  FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale,
manufacture, sell at retail, use or explode any fireworks except as provided
in this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.030)  (Ord. 2461 § 3, passed - -2000)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.58  FIREWORKS DISPLAY PERMIT; APPLICATION.



   (A)   The applicant for a fireworks display permit shall submit an
application to the Fire Department at least 15 days in advance of the date of
the proposed fireworks display.



   (B)   Only persons or entities which operate fairs, amusement parks,
outdoor recreational facilities, governmental entities or persons or entities
authorized to use governmental property for a fireworks display may apply for
a fireworks display permit.



   (C)   The application shall state the date or dates of the fireworks
display, the location of the fireworks display and provide information about
the method of explosion, number, type and size of the fireworks to be
displayed as reasonably required by the Fire Department to determine the fire
safety precautions minimally necessary to protect the public and the safety
measures to be used to protect the public. The applicant shall state the name
of the fireworks display operator.



   (D)   Every permittee shall have and maintain adequate liability
insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000 bodily injury and property
damage, combined single limit, naming the city, its officers, employees and
agents as additional insureds. That insurance shall indemnify and defend the
city, its officers, employees and agents against all claims, liability loss,
damages or expenses, whether caused by or contributed to by the negligence of
the city, its officers, employees or agents. The insurance shall provide that
the city receive written notice 30 days prior to any cancellation, nonrenewal
or material change in the policy. Proof of the insurance shall be submitted
to the Fire Department.



   (E)   The Fire Department shall approve and issue a fireworks
display permit to a person or entity if the applicant meets the conditions of
this chapter for a permit and the Fire Department determines that the
location and character of the proposed display is not in violation of any
federal, state or county law or ordinance or rule or regulation and is not a
hazard to property and will not endanger any person and the operator of the
fireworks display is competent to handle the display based upon the
operator’s experience and reputation for safety.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.040)  (Ord. 2461 § 4, passed - -2000)



§ 94.59  SMOKING BY OPERATOR AT FIREWORKS DISPLAY PROHIBITED.



   No person in charge of or working in connection with any public display
of fireworks shall smoke at any time during which the public display is going
on or in the vicinity of materials to be used for the display.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.050)  (Ord. 2461 § 5, passed - -2000)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.60  DISPOSAL OF UNFIRED FIREWORKS.



   Unfired fireworks and trash remaining after a public display of
fireworks for which a permit is issued shall be immediately disposed of in an
approved safe manner.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.060)  (Ord. 2461 § 6, passed - -2000)



§ 94.61  PARENTAL LIABILITY.



   A parent, foster or family-operated group home, parent or legal
guardian of a minor who consents to the use of fireworks by the minor who is
under the age of 18 years of age is liable for damages caused by the
minor’s use of the fireworks, and in addition shall be subject to the
penalty provided below.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.070)  (Ord. 2461 § 7, passed - -2000)



§ 94.62  ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall advertise fireworks within the corporate
limits of the city on any sign or billboard located within the city, or by
handbills or circulars distributed within the city.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit sending solicitations or
advertisements solely to persons possessing a public display permit under §
94.58 above.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.090)  (Ord. 2461 § 9, passed - -2000)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.63  SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.



   The police shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale,
manufactured, stored, possessed or held in violation of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.100)  (Ord. 2461 § 10, passed - -2000)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of
§§ 94.01 through 94.20 shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue. All offenders are required to correct or remedy the violations or
defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed each ten days that prohibited conditions
are maintained.



      (2)   The application of the penalty set forth in § 94.01
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(2000 Code, § 8.16.210)



   (C)   Persons who shall violate a provision of §§ 94.35 through
94.41 or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
violation of fire codes, punishable by a fine of not more than $500. Each day
after that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.



(2000 Code, § 8.40.030)  (Ord. 2914 § 2 (part), passed - -2005)



   (D)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 94.55 through
94.63 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $750. Each day that a
violation of §§ 94.55 through 94.63  continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense.



(2000 Code, § 8.36.080)  (Ord. 2461 § 8, passed - -2000)



CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions; Administration



   95.01   Short title



   95.02   Definitions



   95.03   Animal Control Officer and assistant; positions established;
Commission created



   95.04   Duties of Animal Control Officer



   95.05   Animal control facility



   95.06   Moneys kept by City Treasurer



   95.07   License required; certificate of inoculation



   95.08   Display of tags



   95.09   Removal of tags



   95.10   Inoculation of domestic animals



   95.11   Exhibition of certificates of inoculation upon request



Prohibitions; Rules for Keeping



   95.25   Release of domestic animals



   95.26   Animals at large; impounding



   95.27   Notice of impounding; issuance of citation



   95.28   Redemption of impounded animals



   95.29   Destruction of unredeemed animals



   95.30   Impounding of dogs or animals which have bitten people



   95.31   Certain animals prohibited



   95.32   Number of domestic animals to be kept



   95.33   Animal rescuer



   95.34   Feral cat colony



   95.35   Breeding



   95.36   Housing and sanitation; removal of excrement



   95.37   Proximity of animal houses to residences, churches or
schools; prohibited structures



   95.38   Inspections



   95.39   Diseased animals



   95.40   Dead animals



   95.41   Destruction of animals; responsibility of owners



   95.42   Pet shops and kennels



   95.43   Veterinary hospitals



   95.44   Cruelty to animals



   95.45   Animal fights



   95.46   Hunting



   95.47   Peace disturbance



   95.48   Animals prohibited on streets



   95.49   Dangerous animals running at large



   95.50   Destruction of dangerous animals



   95.51   Disposition of dogs or other animals deemed nuisances



   95.52   Vicious dogs



   95.53   Canine unit exemption



   95.54   Wild animals



 



   95.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION



§ 95.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Oak Forest Animal
Control Code of 2013.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.010)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any living vertebrate, domestic or wild, not including man.



   ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION ("COMMISSION"). An available non-profit or
volunteer corporation, association or group, recognized by the Mayor and
known and operating within the city, able and willing to work in partnership
with Oak Forest Animal Control to advocate for and provide rescue and
re-homing of unclaimed and abandoned local animals.



   ANIMAL RESCUER.  Any person that volunteers for the care and welfare
of abused or neglected animals.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any premises, within or without the city, designated
by Council for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals under
authority of this chapter.



   AT LARGE.  Any domestic animal when it is off the property of its
owner or not restrained by a competent person by a leash or chain when not on
the property of its owner or keeper.



   CAT.  Includes all animals of the feline family (Felis Catus).



   COMPETENT PERSON.  A person who is physically and mentally capable of
managing and controlling a domestic pet which is his or her responsibility
while off the premises of the owner or keeper thereof.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  Any individual animal anywhere other than upon the
property of the owner or custodian and unmuzzled, unleashed or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person
would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal or a dog that,
without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical
injury.



   DOG.  Includes all animals, regardless of sex, of the canine species
(Canis Familiaris).



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal, except a farm or dangerous animal, which
has been domesticated so as to live and/or breed in a tame condition as a
household pet or guardian.  For the purpose of this chapter, ferrets,
pot-bellied pigs and rabbits are determined to be DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   FEED.  The offering, giving or attempting to give food or non-food
items to wild animals.



   INOCULATION.  The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, as approved
by the Department of Agriculture, of canine antirabic vaccine approved by the
Department.



   KENNEL.  Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying,
selling or boarding cats or dogs.



   OWNER.  A person having a right of property of an animal, or who keeps
or harbors an animal, or who has a dog or other animal in his or her care, or
who acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or
about any premises occupied by him or her.



   RESTRAINT.  An animal that is controlled within a closed vehicle being
driven or parked on the streets, or that is within the property limits of the
owner or keeper or contained by a fence, a kennel or a leash or chain of
sufficient strength to control the dog or other animal.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.



   WILD ANIMAL.  Any animal living in a natural, undomesticated state or
that is generally naturally occurring as undomesticated in the city such as
raccoons, skunks, coyotes, squirrels, etc.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.020) (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O, passed
8-9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.03  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND ASSISTANT; POSITIONS ESTABLISHED;
COMMISSION CREATED.



   (A)   There is established the position of Animal Control Officer,
who shall be under the direction of the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   There is established the position of assistant to the Animal
Control Officer, who shall be under the direction of the Animal Control
Officer.



      (1)   The position of assistant to the Animal Control Officer
shall be an unpaid, volunteer position filled as necessary and in such
numbers as needed, as determined by the Animal Control Officer. The assistant
shall be appointed by the Director of Public Works.



      (2)   The assistant to the Animal Control Officer shall
primarily be responsible for assisting in the care of animals in the custody
of the city and for such other associated duties as the Animal Control
Officer shall direct.



      (3)   The assistant shall sign a waiver and release of
liability, acknowledging that the city has no responsibility for any injury,
disease or sickness of any kind that may occur due to the assistant’s
responsibilities.



   (C)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to identify and appoint an
appropriate Animal Control Commission capable of the rescue and care of lost
or abandoned animals and provide such designation to the city's Animal
Control Officer. The function and role of any such designated Commission is
to partner



and collaborate with the Animal Control Officer in the rescue and re-homing
of unclaimed and abandoned local animals, consistent with such
responsibilities as may be further set forth in this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.030)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O,
passed 8-9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.04  DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   (A)   Under the direction of the Director of Public Works, the
Animal Control Officer shall have the full power of enforcement of this
chapter or any part thereof.



   (B)   The Animal Control Officer shall have full authority to issue
a citation or summons, sign formal complaints against violators and appear in
court as an agent on behalf of the city for the purpose of enforcement of
this chapter. The Public Works Department shall notify the Animal Control
Officer of all complaints involving domestic animals running at large.



   (C)   Whenever any domestic animal running at large is apprehended
it shall be taken to the kennel as is, from time to time, designated by the
city and a record shall be made of its description and its license tags, if
any. If it is licensed, a reasonable attempt will be made by the Animal
Control Officer to locate the owner thereof and inform him or her of the
animal’s apprehension.



   (D)   The Animal Control Officer shall remit to the city all moneys
collected by it for dog licenses, impounding fees and boarding fees, and
shall also submit a bill for the boarding of all unclaimed animals which are
brought to the kennel pursuant to this chapter.



   (E)   Any animal so impounded shall not be held more than 96 hours.
The care of any such domestic animal shall continue to be provided by the
city during the entire 96-hour period. At the expiration of such period, the
Animal Control Officer will consult and collaborate with the Animal Control
Commission regarding the assumption of the care, custody and control of the
animal. The Animal Control Officer will cooperate with the designated
Commission at the end of any such 96-hour impoundment period and allow the
Commission to assess and evaluate the animal. The Commission has no
obligation to accept the transfer of the animal and shall notify the Animal
Control Officer in writing if they will not accept the animal. The Animal
Control Officer is then authorized to move forward and make appropriate
decisions under the provisions of this chapter. If the Commission determines
to accept the animal, all responsibilities for the care, custody and control
of the animal will then be transferred to and be assumed by the Commission
with no further obligation, involvement, or responsibility on the part of the
city or the Animal Control Officer. All decision making thereafter regarding
the animal rests with the Commission, including placement and disposition of
the future care or custody of the animal.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.040)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O,
passed 8-9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.05  ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY.



   The city shall provide or contract to provide a suitable place for the
impounding of domestic animals.  The Commission designated to work with the
city and Animal Control Officer shall be allowed the access to and use of
this facility for the care of animals under the custody and control of the
Commission, provided there is available space.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.050)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O,
passed 8-9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.06  MONEYS KEPT BY CITY TREASURER.



   All moneys received and paid out pursuant to this chapter shall be kept
in a separate account by the City Treasurer under the budget of the Public
Works Department.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.060)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.07  LICENSE REQUIRED; CERTIFICATE OF INOCULATION.



   (A)   No person shall own or keep a dog or domestic cat in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (B)   The license shall be obtained from the City Clerk by reporting
to the City Clerk’s office annually, within 30 days after July 1 each year,
the person’s name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of each
and every dog and domestic cat owned or kept by such person.



   (C)   The person shall pay to the City Clerk or his or her duly
authorized representative $5 as an annual license fee for each such dog and
domestic cat, and each such license shall expire on June 30 next following
its issuance.



   (D)   No such license shall be issued unless the owner presents a
certificate of inoculation for rabies from the County Health Department.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.070)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018) Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.08  DISPLAY OF TAGS.



   Every owner or keeper of a dog shall cause the dog to wear a collar or
harness and shall affix thereto a city license tag and a rabies control
inoculation tag.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.080)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-2-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.09  REMOVAL OF TAGS.



   No person, without the consent of the owner or keeper, shall remove a
license tag for which a license has been obtained.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.090)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018) Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.10  INOCULATION OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   The requirements for inoculation of domestic animals is contained
within the Cook County Code of Ordinances Chapter 10 and adopted by this
chapter.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.100)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.11  EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATES OF INOCULATION UPON REQUEST.



   Upon the request of the Public Works Department Animal Control Officer,
at any reasonable time, the owner or keeper of any unmuzzled dog or cat shall
exhibit his or her certificate, issued under § 95.10 above, showing the
inoculation against rabies of any dog or cat owned or controlled by him or
her.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.140)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



PROHIBITIONS; RULES FOR KEEPING



§ 95.25  RELEASE OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   No person, other than a duly authorized employee or agent of the city,
shall untie any domestic animal that is in an enclosure or on the premises of
its owner or keeper or take or release any such domestic animal from the
enclosure or premises.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.150)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.26  ANIMALS AT LARGE; IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   No competent person shall cause, allow, permit or suffer a
domestic animal to be at large in the city. Any domestic animal shall be
deemed to be at large when it is off the property of its owner or keeper or
not restrained by a responsible person by a leash or chain when not on the
property of its owner or keeper.



   (B)   Employees and officers of the city, who are designated for the
purpose by the Director of Public Works, shall notify the Animal Control
Officer of the city as to any domestic animal found running at large or
unlicensed in the city contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or
any other ordinance of the city.



   (C)   When domestic animals are found running at large or
unlicensed, the dogs or other animals may be impounded at the discretion of
the employees, but the employees may cite the owner of the domestic animals
to answer a charge of violating a provision of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.160)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.27  NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING; ISSUANCE OF CITATION.



   In case of impounding, and where the owner or keeper of a domestic
animal is disclosed by any tax or license tag worn by it, or is otherwise
known to the officers impounding the same, the Public Works Department shall
at once give notice by mail or other means to the owner or keeper, informing
him or her of the impounding of his or her domestic animal, and may cite the
owner or keeper to answer a charge of violating a provision of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.170)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.28  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any domestic animal impounded under this chapter, except such
as may have bitten any person as specified in § 95.30 below, shall, unless
sooner redeemed, be held for 72 hours in order to afford an opportunity to
the owner or keeper thereof to redeem the same. However, in cases where there
have been three or more tickets issued to the animal’s owner or keeper in
the preceding 12-month period for animals at large, the Animal Control
Officer or the Director of Public Works’ designee shall have the authority
to immediately transport the animal to an approved animal facility other than
the City of Oak Forest facility.



   (B)   Any such owner or keeper shall be required to pay all fees
associated with the impounding and release of the animal to the impounding
facility.



      (1)   If the owner of the domestic animal reclaims the same,
he or she shall pay the kennel an impounding fee of $20 and a boarding fee of
$20 per day for every day the dog or other animal is so impounded.



      (2)   Additionally, if the dog or cat is not licensed, the
owner shall acquire a license before the dog or cat is released to him or her.



   (C)   No dog or cat shall be released without having been inoculated
for the current calendar year, or in accordance with the requirement of the
Department of Agriculture. Upon payment of the required charges, the dog
shall thereupon be released to the owner or keeper.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.180)  (Ord. 2429, § 1 (part), passed - -1999; Ord.
2568, § 1, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.29  DESTRUCTION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.



   Any impounded domestic animal which is not redeemed within 96 hours,
and is not transferred to a designated Animal Control Commission, may be
humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Animal Control Officer.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.190)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0615O,
passed 8-9-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.30  IMPOUNDING OF DOGS OR ANIMALS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PEOPLE.



   (A)   Whenever any animal bites any person, the owner of the animal
or anyone having knowledge of the bite shall immediately notify the Police
Department or Animal Control Officer.



   (B)   Any animal which has bitten or otherwise injured any person so
as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded and
kept separated from animals for ten days. If the animal has not been
currently inoculated, the animal shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian
for proper examinations and observations.



   (C)   If, during the examinations and observations in division (B)
above, the animal develops symptoms of illness; a veterinarian shall be
called to diagnose its condition. If the symptoms disclosed are such as to
indicate the presence of rabies, such animal shall be destroyed in such a
manner as to preserve intact the head, which shall thereupon be detached and
immediately sent to the diagnostic laboratory of the Department of
Agriculture.



   (D)   If a tranquilizer gun or taser is used to apprehend a stray or
vicious animal, which cannot be captured by normal means, the city and/or its
agents shall not be held responsible if the animal succumbs as a result of
the use of the tranquilizer gun or taser.



   (E)   If, at the expiration of ten days, no symptoms of rabies have
developed in the animal so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the owner
upon payment of the redemption fees and charges specified in § 95.28 above.
After having been notified that his or her dog has bitten or otherwise
injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under any
circumstances, permit the animal to be at large unless securely muzzled.



   (F)   Any expense incurred in the handling of any animal under this
section shall be borne by the owner or keeper. No owner or keeper shall sell
or give away or otherwise dispose of any dog or other animal that is known to
have bitten a person, until it is released as required by law.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.200)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.31  CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep any mule, ass, bovine, goat, sheep, poultry, fowl,
or any other non-domestic animal in the city. Horses and ponies are permitted
if the property is zoned Residential Estate.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.210)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09- 0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.32  NUMBER OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS TO BE KEPT.



   No person shall keep or maintain more than a total of three adult
domestic animals in, on or around a single-family dwelling, apartment, home
or domicile within the city. However, this shall not apply to licensed
kennels, pet shops, animal rescuers or a licensed veterinary hospital or
clinic.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.220)  (Ord. 2599 § 1, passed --2002; Am. Ord.
2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28- 2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed
3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.33  ANIMAL RESCUER.



   (A)   The city will allow up to two additional dogs to be housed
with an animal rescuer.



   (B)   To qualify as an animal rescuer, a person must submit an
application to the City Clerk.



   (C)   This application must include the following:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The applicant and applicant’s address must be
registered with a national agency as an animal rescue facility;



      (3)   Proof that all dogs housed at the address are current
with all shots and vaccinations;



      (4)   Proof that all dogs residing at the address are
registered with the city as well as display current state and county tags; and



      (5)   A written consent to allow the increase in dogs from all
neighbors. For purposes of this section, NEIGHBOR means all properties that
immediately abut the property.



   (D)   Upon receipt of the application, the city shall conduct a
review of it records and make any investigations to determine whether there
have been any past violations of the Animal Control Code and that the
applicant’s location is suitable for housing any additional pets.



   (E)   Violations of the Animal Control Code shall be a sufficient
basis to deny any application.



   (F)   If municipal approval is granted, the applicant shall consent
to and allow unscheduled Animal Control Officer inspections of the location.



   (G)   The failure of any applicant to remain current with all
licenses, shots, vaccinations and registry, as well as to fully comply with
city ordinance shall result in a revocation of the animal rescuer designation.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.220)  (Ord. 2599 § 2, passed - -2002; Am. Ord.
2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed
3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.34  FERAL CAT COLONY.



   (A)   The city may enter into agreements with organizations
designated by the Cook County Animal Control office as participating in a
feral cat colony program in efforts to reduce the feral cat population.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to provide food, water or
shelter to a colony of free-roaming cats, unless:



      (1)   The colony is a managed colony, registered with approved
sponsor; and



      (2)   Feral cat colony caretakers shall be entitled to
maintain and care for feral cats by providing food, water, shelter and other
forms of sustenance, provided that the feral cat colonies are registered with
a Cook County approved sponsor, and that the feral cat colony caretaker takes
all appropriate and available steps to meet the terms and conditions of this
section.



   (C)   Feral cat colonies are exempt from § 95.32.



   (D)   All persons maintaining a feral cat colony shall follow all
rules and regulations as established by the Cook County Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Article IV Managed Care of Feral Cats.



(Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part),
passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.35  BREEDING.



   No person shall keep or maintain any animal for breeding purposes
within the city without the consent, in writing, of all property owners and
persons living within 500 feet each way from the place where it is proposed
to breed the animals.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.230)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.36  HOUSING AND SANITATION; REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.



   (A)   Every owner shall provide domestic animals with adequate space
and housing and shall keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition and
free from filth, offal or other refuse.



   (B)   No competent person shall appear with an animal upon public
ways, within public places or upon the property of another, absent that
person’s consent, without some means for the removal of excrement, nor
shall any person fail to remove any excrement deposited by such animal. This
section shall not apply to a blind person while walking his or her guide dog.



   (C)   No person shall allow his or her animal to run at large and
deposit excrement upon public ways, within public places or upon the property
of another.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.240)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.37  PROXIMITY OF ANIMAL HOUSES TO RESIDENCES, CHURCHES OR SCHOOLS;
PROHIBITED STRUCTURES.



   (A)   No separate structure or enclosure used for the housing of
domestic animals shall be erected or maintained closer than 25 feet from any
residential unit or closer than 100 feet from any church or school. Such a
structure or enclosure shall otherwise comply with applicable building,
zoning, health and sanitation ordinances of the city and the statutes of the
state.



   (B)   No person shall build or erect, or cause to be built or
erected, any stable, barn, shed or other structure to be used for the
keeping, confining or housing of any animal that is not permitted in the
city, as set forth in § 95.31 above.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.250)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.38  INSPECTIONS.



   Separate space and housing used for more than three dogs or animals
shall be subject to inspection at reasonable times and hours by the Health
Commissioner or the Animal Control Officer.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.260)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.39  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall permit, suffer or allow a domestic animal
afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease to run at large or to be
exposed in any public place whereby the health of human or beast may be
affected.



   (B)   No person shall ship or remove a diseased animal from the
premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of competent
authority as designated by the Director of Public Works.



   (C)   It is the duty of the competent authority as designated by the
Director of Public Works to secure the disposition of any diseased animal and
the treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread
of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the State Veterinarian
is authorized to act.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.270)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.40  DEAD ANIMALS.



   No person, being the owner of a dead animal, shall allow the animal to
remain for more than 12 hours within the city limits without being buried.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.280)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.41  DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.



   (A)   It is not the obligation of the city, upon an owner’s
request, to pick up a dog or other animal for the purpose of destroying it.



   (B)   That obligation rests solely with the owner.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.290)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.42  PET SHOPS AND KENNELS.



   In addition to the provisions for housing and sanitation contained in
this chapter, pet shops and kennels shall comply with other ordinances and
state statutes now in full force and effect and any ordinance or statute
amendatory or supplementary thereto pertaining to the licensing and
maintenance of pet shops and kennels.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.300)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.43  VETERINARY HOSPITALS.



   In addition to the provisions for housing and sanitation contained in
this chapter, veterinary hospitals shall comply with other ordinances and
state statutes now in full force and effect and any ordinance or statute
amendatory or supplementary thereto pertaining to the licensing and
maintenance of veterinary hospitals.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.310)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.44  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any
way.



   (B)   Any person who inhumanely beats, tortures, starves, poisons,
overloads or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of
this section.



   (C)   No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle
in a manner that places the animal in a life or health threatening situation
by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold. In order to
protect the life and safety of an animal, an animal control officer, law
enforcement officer, or fire personnel who has reason to believe that this
section is violated shall have the authority to enter such motor vehicle by
any reasonable means under the circumstances, after making reasonable effort
to locate the owner or person.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.320)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018) Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.45  ANIMAL FIGHTS.



   No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, prize fight,
cock fight or any other public or private fighting between animals.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.330)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.46  HUNTING.



   (A)   No person shall kill, take or wound, or attempt to kill, take
or wound, with any shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, air gun or other
firearm, or a bow and arrow, any wild bird, wild game or wild animal in the
city.



   (B)   No person shall hunt, pursue, harass or disturb in any manner
any wild bird, wild game or wild animal in the city with a loaded shotgun,
rifle, pistol, revolver, air gun or other firearm, or a bow and arrow, with
the intent to use the same in the city.



   (C)   This section does not apply to any officer of the law while in
the performance of his or her duty, or to persons lawfully summoned by an
officer to assist him or her while those persons are so engaged in assisting
the officer.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.340)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.47  PEACE DISTURBANCE.



   No person shall keep any dog, whelp, bitch or other animal shut in or
tied up in any yard, house or other place, which animal, by barking, howling
or other noise, disturbs the peace and quiet of any family, individual or
neighborhood.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.350)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.48  ANIMALS PROHIBITED ON STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall ride, lead or drive, or cause to be ridden,
led or driven, on any public thoroughfare, parkway or shoulder of a road in
the city, any horse, pony, cattle, pig, goat or sheep.



   (B)   Animals may be ridden, led or driven along bridle paths and
across animal crossings as so designated and approved by the Mayor and
Council.



   (C)   Animals may be ridden, led or driven along a designated parade
route if they are direct participants in a parade approved by the City
Clerk’s office and if a parade permit has been issued.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.360)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.49  DANGEROUS ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   No person, being the owner thereof, shall knowingly suffer, permit or
allow any dangerous, unruly, fierce or mischievous animal to run at large to
the danger, annoyance or damage of any other person or property.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.370)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.50  DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   Members of the Police Department and the Animal Control Officer are
authorized to destroy any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary
for the protection of any person or property.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.380)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.51  DISPOSITION OF DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS DEEMED NUISANCES.



   Any dog or other animal which, in any manner, continually disturbs the
quiet of any person or neighborhood, or destroys or injures any animal,
plant, shrub or other property that is not on the premises of its owner or
keeper, is declared to be a nuisance, and the dog or other animal shall be
taken up and impounded and may be redeemed or disposed of in the manner
provided for in §§ 95.28 through 95.30 above.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.390)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.52  VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      VICIOUS DOG.  A dog falling within any of the following
categories:



         (a)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise threaten
the safety of human beings or domestic animals;



         (b)   Any dog which, because of its vicious propensity,
is capable of inflicting injury, serious physical harm or death to humans,
and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not
kept in the manner required by this chapter;



         (c)   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or
bites, or has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; or



         (d)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily, or in part,
for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.



   (B)   Declaring a dog “vicious.” If the Animal Control Officer
or a public works supervisor has reason to believe that a dog falls within
any of the categories that would render it vicious, they shall investigate
the circumstances to determine whether the dog falls within the definition of
“vicious dog” as provided in this section. In the event that, following
investigation, the Animal Control Officer or public works supervisor
determines that the dog is a vicious dog, as defined in this section, they
may declare that the dog is vicious in accordance with this section.



   (C)   Notice of vicious dog declaration.



      (1)   Within seven days of a determination by the Animal
Control Officer or public works supervisor that a dog is vicious, the officer
making the determination shall notify the dog’s owner, if known, in
writing, of the declaration.



      (2)   This notice shall identify the requirements and
conditions for maintaining a vicious dog as set forth in this section.



      (3)   If the owner is unknown or cannot be located, the dog
may be immediately impounded.



      (4)   If the owner’s address is known, but the owner cannot
be located, the notice shall be posted on the owner’s property or sent by
certified mail to the owner’s last known address.



   (D)   Hearing on vicious dog declaration. The known owner of a
vicious dog shall have the opportunity to have a hearing on the declaration
in accordance with the following procedures:



      (1)   The owner of a dog that has been declared vicious in
accordance with this section shall have the right to file a written request
for a hearing to contest the declaration. Such a request must be filed with
the Director of Public Works within seven days after the owner received
notice of the vicious dog declaration. In the event that the owner fails to
file a written request for a hearing within the requisite seven-day period,
or fails to appear at a scheduled hearing, the owner will be deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing on the declaration. In that situation, the dog
shall be deemed vicious and the owner shall be required to comply with all of
the requirements and conditions for maintaining a vicious dog as set forth in
this section;



      (2)   Within seven days of the receipt of a written request
for a hearing, or as soon thereafter as is practical, a hearing shall be
scheduled and conducted by the City Administrator or his or her designee. The
hearing will be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The
owner and the city may be represented by counsel, present oral and written
evidence, and cross-examine witnesses;



      (3)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall
issue a written decision within seven business days after the conclusion of
the hearing. The owner shall be mailed a copy of the written decision. The
decision of the City Administrator or his or her designee shall be final; and



      (4)   In the event that the City Administrator or his or her
designee upholds the vicious dog declaration, the owner shall comply with all
of the requirements and conditions for maintaining a vicious dog as set forth
in this chapter.



   (E)   Requirements for keeping a vicious dog. In order to keep or
permit a vicious dog within the corporate limits of Oak Forest, the owner of
a vicious dog shall be required to act in accordance with the following.



      (1)   Confinement.



         (a)   All vicious dogs shall be securely confined
indoors or in an enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of
the owner.



         (b)   The pen or structure must have minimum dimensions
of five feet by ten feet, and must have secure sides and a secure top
attached to the sides.



         (c)   If no bottom is secured to the sides, the sides
must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet.



      (2)   Leash/muzzle. The owner of a vicious dog shall not allow
the dog to go outside its kennel, pen or structure, unless the dog is
muzzled, restrained by a chain or leash not more than four feet long, and
under the physical control of a person.



      (3)   Signs.



         (a)   The owner of a vicious dog shall display a clearly
visible warning sign, in a prominent place on his or her premises, indicating
that there is a vicious dog on the premises.



         (b)   The sign must be legible from the public streets
or thoroughfares upon which the owner’s property adjoins.



         (c)   The owner shall also display a sign with a symbol
warning children of the presence of a vicious dog.



         (d)   Exact or similar signs shall be posted on the
dog’s kennel, pen or enclosed structure.



      (4)   Insurance.



         (a)   The owner of a vicious dog must maintain public
liability insurance providing a minimum amount of $500,000 of coverage,
insuring the owner for any damage or personal injury which may be caused by
his or her vicious dog.



         (b)   Upon a declaration that a dog is vicious, the
owner of a vicious dog must provide proof to the City Clerk that the owner
possesses the required insurance.



         (c)   Upon request of the city, the owner may be
required to present proof of insurance, upon occasion, demonstrating that the
owner is maintaining the insurance.



      (5)   Notice of change of status. The owner of a vicious dog
shall notify the city’s Animal Control Officer or the Public Works
Department immediately upon learning that the vicious dog is unconfined or on
the loose, or if the dog has attacked a human being or domestic animal.



      (6)   Notice of change of ownership.



         (a)   If the owner of a dog declared to be vicious
pursuant to this section sells, gives away or otherwise transfers custody or
ownership of the vicious dog, the owner shall, within three days of the sale
or transfer, provide the city’s Animal Control Officer or Public Works
Department with the name, address and telephone number of the vicious dog’s
new owner or custodian.



         (b)   The owner shall notify the new owner or custodian
of the dog’s designation as a vicious dog.



         (c)   If the new owner or custodian resides or keeps the
dog within the corporate limits of the City of Oak Forest, the owner shall
inform the new owner or custodian of the requirements and conditions for
keeping a vicious dog as established in this chapter.



   (F)   Order for impoundment and destruction. The Animal Control
Officer,  police watch commander, or public works supervisor may order the
impoundment and destruction of a dog upon occurrence of one of the following:



      (1)   The dog has attacked, bitten, injured or killed a human
being or domestic animal;



      (2)   The dog has been declared to be vicious pursuant to this
section and the owner has failed to comply with the requirements and
conditions for keeping a vicious dog in accordance with this section; or



      (3)   The dog poses a threat of serious harm to the public
health or safety.



   (G)   Notice of impoundment or destruction. Within seven days of an
impoundment, the officer ordering the impoundment or destruction of a dog
shall notify the dog’s owner, if known, in writing, of the impoundment or
destruction.



   (H)   Hearing on impoundment or destruction. The known owner of a
vicious dog shall have the opportunity to have a hearing on the impoundment
or recommended destruction in accordance with the following procedures.



      (1)   The owner of a dog that has been impounded pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall have the right to file a written request
for a hearing to contest the impoundment.



         (a)   Such a request must be filed with the Public Works
Director within seven days after the owner received notice of the impoundment.



         (b)   In the event that the owner fails to file a
written request for a hearing within the requisite seven-day period, or fails
to appear at a scheduled hearing, the owner will be deemed to have waived the
right to a hearing on the impoundment.



         (c)   In that situation, the Director of Public Works
may order the destruction of the dog or take any other steps he or she deems
necessary to protect the public health or safety from the potential danger
posed by the dog.



      (2)   Within seven days of the receipt of a written request
for a hearing, or as soon thereafter as is practical for the city
administration, a hearing shall be scheduled by the city. The hearing shall
be conducted by the City Administrator or his or her designee. The hearing
will be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner and
the city may be represented by counsel, present oral and written evidence,
and cross-examine witnesses.



      (3)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall
issue a written decision within seven business days after the conclusion of
the hearing. The owner shall be mailed a copy of the written decision. The
decision of the City Administrator shall be final.



      (4)   After considering all of the relevant evidence presented
at a hearing in accordance with this division, the City Administrator or his
or her designee may order the destruction or continued impoundment of the
dog, or may release the dog to its owner conditional on the owner complying
with the requirements for keeping a vicious dog as established in this
section, and conditional on the owner complying with any other requirements
that the Director of Public Works deems necessary to protect the public
health or safety from the potential danger posed by the dog.



   (I)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Dogs used by the Police Department or a law enforcement
agency;



      (2)   Dogs that have injured a person, or the property of a
person, who was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
of the dog’s owner; and



      (3)   Dogs that have injured a person, or the property of a
person, who was teasing, taunting, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog.



   (J)   Dog fighting prohibited. No person shall possess, harbor or
maintain the care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, nor
shall any person train, torment, badger, bait or otherwise use any dog for
the purpose of fighting or for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog
to attack human beings or domestic animals.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.400)  (Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am.
Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O,
passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.53  CANINE UNIT EXEMPTION.



   Trained police dogs utilized by an official law enforcement agency and
assigned to a sworn peace officer as part of a canine team/unit shall be
exempt from all provisions of this chapter as well as any applicable
provision of any other chapter of this code.



(Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part),
passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.54  WILD ANIMALS.



   (A)   The city provides animal control services for wild animals on
public and private property if the animal is sick or injured or poses a
threat to human safety.



   (B)   Removal of wild animals that do not pose an immediate threat
must be done by a State of Illinois licensed private wildlife removal service.



   (C)   No person on public or private property shall attract or feed
wild and/or stray domestic animals, including but not limited to stray cats,
stray dogs, seagulls, geese, skunks, raccoons, squirrels or deer within the
city limits.  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit persons from feeding
birds on their private property using bird feeders or other receptacles. 
This section shall not apply to an Animal Control Officer in the performance
of his or her official duties or to state and/or federal wildlife officials
in the performance of their official duties.



(Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part),
passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



(2000 Code, § 6.04.410)  (Ord. 2417 (part), passed - -1999; Ord. 2429 § 1
(part), passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 2010-09-0307O, passed 9-28- 2010; Am. Ord.
2013-03-0434O, § 2 (part), passed 3-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-02-0681O, passed
2-27-2018)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         111.   FOOD AND BEVERAGE



         112.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE



         113.   ADVERTISING AND MERCHANDISING



         114.   AMUSEMENTS



         115.   ELDER CARE




         116.   CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS




         117.   LODGING



         118.   COMMERCIAL RETAIL AND SERVICE PROVIDERS



         119.   GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES



CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Business Licenses Generally



   110.001   Applicability of chapter



   110.002   License or permit required



   110.003   Applications



   110.004   Forms



   110.005   Signatures



   110.006   Inspections and investigations



   110.007   Fees



   110.008   Issuance of licenses and permits to persons indebted to
city



   110.009   Assignment and transfer of licenses and permits



   110.010   Revocation and suspension of licenses and permits



   110.011   Posting of licenses and permits



   110.012   Termination of licenses and permits; notice and late fees



   110.013   Change of location of licensed business; notice



   110.014   Businesses as nuisances



   110.015   Right of entry for inspection



   110.016   Identification of trucks



   110.017   Maintenance of premises; comfort facilities



   110.018   Periodic inspections



Weights and Measures



   110.030   Scales required



   110.031   False weights and measures



Contractor Registration



   110.045   Definitions



   110.046   Subcontractors



   110.047   Registration fees



   110.048   Compliance required



   110.049   Bonds



   110.050   Insurance



   110.051   Electrical and plumbing contractors



   110.052   Registration



Foreign Fire Insurance Companies



   110.065   Compliance required; liability



   110.066   Payments to city



   110.067   Annual report to city



   110.068   Administration by Illinois Municipal League; Fire
Insurance Tax Bureau



Grease Trap Sludge Removal and Transportation Licenses



   110.080   Grease trap sludge defined



   110.081   Maintenance of traps required; use of dissolving agents



   110.082   Discharging sludge into sewers prohibited



   110.083   Transportation or acceptance of sludge; manifests and
licenses required



   110.084   Licenses required



   110.085   Application for licenses



   110.086   Sludge manifests



   110.087   Inspection of facilities and equipment



   110.088   Expiration of licenses; renewals



   110.089   Revocation of licenses



   110.090   License to be personal privilege; right to amend or repeal
chapter



House Movers



   110.105   License required; fee



   110.106   Bond



   110.107   Insurance



   110.108   Planking of streets and sidewalks



   110.999   Penalty




BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY




§ 110.001  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.



   This subchapter shall govern the licensing of the various trades,
businesses and professions in this Title XI, except to the extent that the
same is governed by other provisions in this title.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.010)



§ 110.002  LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate any business or establishment, or engage in any
business, activity or occupation, for which a license fee is provided in this
business regulation title, without having first obtained a license or permit
for the business, activity or occupation.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.020)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.003  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Applications for licenses and permits required by this
business regulation title shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, who is
the Business License Commissioner of the city, upon forms provided by him or
her.



   (B)   Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the
license or permit desired, the location to be used, if any, and the square
footage of the premises to be used by the licensee, and each application
shall contain such additional information as may be required by this business
regulation title or requested by city officials.



   (C)   No license or permit shall be issued until the applicant has
furnished all information requested by the City Clerk or other municipal
official and until all other city ordinances are complied with.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.030)



§ 110.004  FORMS.



   Forms for all licenses and permits issued under this business
regulation title and applications therefore shall be prepared and kept on
file by the City Clerk.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.040)



§ 110.005  SIGNATURES.



   Each license or permit issued under this business regulation title
shall bear the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk in the absence of
any provision to the contrary.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.050)



§ 110.006  INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, in those cases
where the ordinances of the municipality necessitate an inspection or
investigation, the City Clerk shall, before the issuance of the permit or
license, refer the application to the proper officer for the investigation or
inspection within 48 hours of the time of the receipt. The officer charged
with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report
thereon, in writing, within ten days after receiving the application. The
Health Commissioner shall make inspections of all premises in regard to
compliance with sanitation regulations; the Fire Chief shall make inspections
in regard to compliance with fire regulations; and the Building Commissioner
shall make or cause to be made inspections in regard to compliance with
ordinances relating to the construction of buildings or other structures. All
investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief
of Police or by some other officer designated by the Mayor.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.060)



§ 110.007  FEES.



   (A)   All fees and charges for licenses and permits shall be paid in
advance to the City Clerk at the time the application therefor is filed.
Business licenses shall be issued annually, and fees shall be based on a full
year rate, which shall cover the whole year or any portion of the license
period for which application is made.



   (B)   Except where otherwise provided in this business regulation
title, the annual license or permit fee for a business, activity, occupation
or profession shall be computed as follows.



      (1)   Base license fee $50; plus



      (2)   Annual occupancy inspection fee:



 




Annual Inspection Fees for Certification of Occupancy
(Includes Costs of Annual Oak Forest Fire Inspection)




Square Footage

 

Annual Fee




0 to 500

 

$5




501 to 1,000

 

$10




1,001 to 1,500

 

$15




1,501 to 2,000

 

$20




2,001 to 3,000

 

$30




3,001 to 4,000

 

$45




4,001 to 5,000

 

$55




5,001 to 6,000

 

$65




6,001 to 7,000

 

$95




7,001 to 8,000

 

$125




8,001 to 9,000

 

$150




9,001 to 10,000

 

$185




10,001 to 15,000

 

$235




15,001 to 20,000

 

$310




20,001 to 30,000

 

$375




30,001 and over

 

$550





 



      (3)   Additional fees detailed in the Municipal Code:



 


Oak Forest Municipal Code Fees

 

Annual Fee

 

Notes





Bowling alley
 

$100

 
City agreement


Carnivals
 

various

 
(negotiated)


Cigarette and tobacco dealer
 

$100

 
plus square footage city agreement


Circuses
 

various

 
(negotiated)


Day care center
 

$100

 


Dry cleaner (plant)
 

$100

 
for each plant


Motel - Class I
 

$50

 
plus $5 each lodging unit


Motel - Class II (extended stay)
 

$500

 
plus $50 each lodging unit


Hotel - Class I
 

$30

 
plus $5 each lodging unit


Hotel - Class II (extended stay)
 

$300

 
plus $50 each lodging unit


House mover
 

$100

 


Limousine
 

$100

 
for first vehicle plus $100 each additional vehicle


Mobile home park
 

$100

 
plus $20/trailer


Nursing home
 

$100

 


Outdoor advertising
 

$100

 
each billboard


Residential rental housing (1 to 24 dwelling units)
 

$100

 


Residential rental housing (25 or more dwelling units)
 

$200

 


Scavenger
 

$200

 
each vehicle


Sludge removal /transportation
 

$200

 


Taxi cabs
 

$100

 
each vehicle plus square footage


Towing operator
 

$100

 
each vehicle


Young adult entertainment occupancy to 100
 

$1,000

 


Young adult entertainment occupancy to 200
 

$5,000

 


Young adult entertainment occupancy to 300
 

$10,000

 


Young adult entertainment occupancy to 600
 

$20,000

 




 



      (4)   Fees for coin operated devices, gasoline stations, and
miscellaneous fees:



 

Coin Operated Devices
 

Annual Fee

 

Notes





Juke box
 

$100

 


Dart/video/all amusements
 

$100

 


Electronic poker, ‘21’ and the like
 

$500

 


Snack and candy
 

$50

 


Pop and coffee
 

$50

 


Tobacco
 

$100

 


Transfer fee
 

$4

 
per machine per transfer


Miscellaneous


Ice cream truck
 

$35

 


Christmas trees sales
 

$35

 


Gas Station


Pumps
 

$100

 
plus $10/ea. nozzle




 



      (5)   Business registration fee: $50.



      (6)   As to any of the businesses housed in a commercial
building where state law has preempted local authority, and are subject to an
annual fire inspection by the Oak Forest Fire Department, the City of Oak
Forest shall require an annual business registration administrative fee of
$50. This charge will be used to reimburse the city for municipal costs
associated with the annual fire inspection and to confirm the business is in
full compliance of state laws.



   (C)   In computing square footage, the entire building floor area
and any adjacent storage or display area shall be included. The license or
permit fee based on square footage entitles the licensee to one building. An
additional license or permit shall be obtained for any other business or
place of business conducted at the same address, under the same roof or on
the same property of the licensee.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.070)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 110.008  ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS TO PERSONS INDEBTED TO CITY.



   No license or permit shall be issued to any person who owes money to
the city in the form of any unpaid assessment or who is in any other way
indebted to the city, until the person discharges his or her indebtedness
then due to the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.080)



§ 110.009  ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   No license or permit granted under this business regulation title shall
be assigned or transferred, unless otherwise expressly authorized.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.090)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.010  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   Any license or permit issued under this business regulation title may
be revoked by the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner at any time for
any violation by the licensee or permittee of any ordinance relating to the
license or permit. The revocation shall be in addition to any fine imposed.
However, no such license or permit shall be revoked or suspended except after
a public hearing by the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner, with
reasonable notice to the licensee served by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least seven days prior to the hearing, at the
last known place of business of the licensee, and after an opportunity to
appear and defend. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing
and the nature of the charges. The finding of the Mayor or the Business
License Commissioner shall be predicated upon competent evidence. However, in
cases involving food establishment violations, or where there is imminent
danger to the safety or health of the public, no public hearing is necessary
in order to revoke or suspend any license or permit.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.100)



§ 110.011  POSTING OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   Every licensee conducting a business in the city shall keep the license
or permit therefor posted in a prominent place on the premises used for the
business.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.110)



§ 110.012  TERMINATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS; NOTICE AND LATE FEES.



   (A)   All annual licenses and permits shall terminate on December
31, where no provision to the contrary is made.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a
statement of the time of expiration of the license or permit held by the
licensee, if it is an annual one, three weeks prior to the date of the
expiration. However, failure to send out the notice, or the failure of the
licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to
obtain a new license or permit, or a renewal, nor shall it be a defense in an
action for operation without a license or permit.



   (C)   If a business license is not renewed before January 1, a $50
late fee shall be added to such license or permit.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.120)  (Am. Ord. 2015-10-0562O, passed 10-27-2015)



§ 110.013  CHANGE OF LOCATION OF LICENSED BUSINESS; NOTICE.



   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any
permitted act, may be changed, provided that ten days’ notice thereof is
given to the City Clerk. The new location must be in compliance with these
codified ordinances and all other ordinances of the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.130)



§ 110.014  BUSINESSES AS NUISANCES.



   No business shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.140)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.015  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.



   (A)   Whenever an inspection of a business or of a premises used for
or in connection with the operation of a business or occupation is provided
for, or is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with any ordinance, the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises shall admit thereto, for the
purpose of making the inspection, any authorized officer or employee of the
municipality.



   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is necessary
to ensure conformity with any ordinance, the licensee shall give, to any
authorized officer or employee of the municipality requesting the same,
sufficient samples of the material or commodity for the analysis.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
Mayor or the Business License Commissioner may revoke any license or permit
if the licensee refuses to permit any officer or employee to make an
inspection or to take an adequate sample of a desired commodity, or
interferes with the officer or employee while in the performance of his or
her duty. However, no license or permit shall be revoked for the cause unless
written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises,
in the name of the municipality, stating that the inspection or sample is
desired.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.150)



§ 110.016  IDENTIFICATION OF TRUCKS.



   Any truck used in the conduct of any business or occupation licensed
under this business regulation title shall bear thereon, in legible
characters, the name and address of the operator of the business.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.160)



§ 110.017  MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES; COMFORT FACILITIES.



   The public portion of the premises of all businesses and occupations
licensed under this business regulation title shall be kept in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition. The Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and the
Health Commissioner are authorized to make inspections to determine that the
premises are maintained in accordance with this section. All licensees shall
provide toilet and lavatory facilities for employees.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.170)



§ 110.018  PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Fire inspections. The premises of all businesses licensed
under this business license title shall be inspected periodically by the Fire
Chief to ensure that the premises are maintained so that fire exits and other
means of ingress and egress to the premises are not blocked so as to hinder
egress from the premises. The Chief shall also determine that fire
extinguishers and the general condition of the premises are maintained in
accordance with the Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   Building inspections. The premises of all licensed businesses
shall be inspected periodically by the Building Commissioner to ensure that
the premises have not become unsafe for the public or employees of the
licensee.



(2000 Code, § 5.02.180)




WEIGHTS AND MEASURES




§ 110.030  SCALES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every person selling or offering for sale any service
commodity, produce or article of merchandise sold by weight shall keep and
maintain, in a conspicuous place on his or her premises, scales suitable for
weighing the commodity, produce or article of merchandise, and shall,
whenever requested by a buyer and in the buyer’s presence, weigh the
commodity, produce or article of merchandise.



   (B)   Whenever meat, poultry or other articles of merchandise sold
by weight and prepared or wrapped in advance of being sold by a retailer are
being offered for sale, an accurate computing scale of adequate capacity
shall be placed or set not more than 30 feet from the prepackaged display
counter or service area. A prominent and conspicuous sign shall be placed on
or adjacent to the computing scale, which sign shall read “for customer
use”, in a type size not less than two inches in height. Where the
prepackaged merchandise is marked with weight expressed in the standard
avoirdupois pound and decimal fractions thereof, a conversion chart showing
the correlation between the decimal fractions and common fractions of the
avoirdupois pound, in a type size not less than 12 point, shall be
prominently and conspicuously displayed.



(2000 Code, § 5.66.010)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.031  FALSE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.



   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose
of sale, any commodity in a quantity or enumeration of less weight or measure
than that represented upon the sale or offer for sale by the vendor or his or
her agent or employer. No person shall sell or offer for sale any commodity
in any receptacle having a smaller capacity than is represented at the time
of the offer or sale. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article of
dry or liquid measurement in other than the legal type of measure required
therefor.



   (B)   No person weighing or measuring any commodity for sale by dry,
liquid, lineal or superficial measurement, by any unit of enumeration used in
determining or measuring quantity or by weight, shall falsify the measure or
weight of the commodity by representing the measure or weight of the same to
be either more or less than the true measure or weight thereof.



   (C)   No person performing services upon any commodity, who
determines the charge for the services according to the measure or weight of
the commodity upon which the services are performed, shall falsify the
measure or weight of the same by representing the measure or weight to be
more than the true measure or weight thereof.



   (D)   No person shall deliver to a purchaser or prospective
purchaser any commodity in a quantity or enumeration of less weight or
measure than that offered for sale.



(2000 Code, § 5.66.020)  Penalty, see § 110.999




CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION




§ 110.045  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR. A person engaging in the business of any of the building or
related trades set forth in this subchapter.



   DEVELOPER.  A person who has ownership or control over a parcel or
tract of land which is or is intended to be the site of two or more buildings
and who will, in accordance with city ordinances, improve or develop the land
with the installation of any one or more of the following: streets, curbs,
sanitary sewers or storm sewers. A DEVELOPER may also be a building
contractor, but he or she shall be required to have only the developer’s
registration.



   GENERAL CONTRACTOR.  A person engaging in the business of contracting
or hiring one or more trade contractors to perform the service of the trade
contractor.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.010)



§ 110.046  SUBCONTRACTORS.



   Any person doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as
being engaged in the business of a building contractor for which a
registration is required by this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.020)



§ 110.047  REGISTRATION FEES.



   (A)   Annual registration fees for contractors, effective January 1,
1990, shall be as follows:



 



1.    Carpenter contractor
 
$100


2.    Concrete or cement contractor
 
$100


3.    Drain layer
 
$100


4.    Excavating contractor
 
$100


5.    Fence contractor
 
$100


6.    Heating and ventilating contractor
 
$100


7.    Lathing contractor
 
$100


8.    Mason (brick or stone) contractor
 
$100


9.    Painting or decorating contractor
 
$100


10.    Plaster contractor
 
$100


11.    Roofing contractor
 
$100


12.    Sewer contractor
 
$100


13.    Tile contractor
 
$100


14.    Landscape contractor
 
$100 plus the bond required by § 110.049


15.    General contractor
 
$350


16.    Developer, commercial and residential
 
$750


17.    Underground sprinkler contractor
 
$100 plus the bond required by § 110.049




 



   (B)   Current registration fees shall remain in full force and
effect prior to January 1, 1990.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.030)



§ 110.048  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   All building contractors shall comply with all ordinances relating to
the construction of buildings or other structures, streets, sidewalks and
pavements, and with all laws or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the
activities engaged in.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.040)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.049  BONDS.



   (A)   All contractors registered under this subchapter, except
plumbing contractors registered by the State of Illinois, shall file with the
City Clerk, and keep in force during the registration period, a letter of
credit or bond in the amount of $10,000, with financial institutions or
sureties to be approved by the corporate authorities, conditioned to
indemnify the city and hold it and its elected and appointed officers,
employees, attorneys, consultants and volunteers harmless from any loss,
damage, claim or liability arising out of or resulting from the conduct or
operation of the business or the doing or failure to do any act in connection
therewith.



   (B)   Subcontractors must be separately bonded.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.050)



§ 110.050  INSURANCE.



   Certificates of insurance that certify that each developer and all
contractors registered under this chapter, including plumbing contractors
registered by the State of Illinois, has liability and workers’
compensation insurance are required. The certificates of insurance shall name
the city and its elected and appointed officers, employees, attorneys,
consultants and volunteers as additional insureds. No registration shall be
permitted under this subchapter for any such person until current
certificates of insurance, in the form prescribed in this section, for both
liability and workers’ compensation are presented to the City Clerk. The
minimum amounts for comprehensive general liability insurance are $1,000,000
for bodily injury or death or combined single limits for bodily injury or
death for $1,000,000 per occurrence and $500,000 for property damage.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.060)



§ 110.051  ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING CONTRACTORS.



   (A)   No electrical or plumbing contractor shall do any work as such
in the city if he or she is not registered as such by another municipality.
Before doing any work as such in the city, the contractors shall furnish
evidence of  registering to the Building Commissioner or his or her
authorized representative.



   (B)   In addition to the registering requirement, each contractor
shall post a bond as provided in § 110.049.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.070)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.052  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Any business activity operated in the City of Oak Forest where
state law has preempted local registering or where the City of Oak Forest is
mandated to accept another municipality’s certification shall be required
to produce all required registering documentation and proof of current bonds
and insurance coverages.



   (B)   As to any of the businesses where state law has preempted
local authority, the City of Oak Forest shall require an annual
administrative fee of $100. This charge shall be used to reimburse the city
for municipal costs to confirm the business is in full compliance of state
law.



(2000 Code, § 5.14.080)




FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES




§ 110.065  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; LIABILITY.



   (A)   No company, corporation or association, not incorporated under
the laws of the state, shall engage in the city in effecting fire insurance,
or transact any fire insurance business in the city, while in default by not
fully complying with any of the requirements of this subchapter, until such
requirements have been fully complied with.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not relieve any such
company, corporation or association from the payment of any risk that may be
undertaken in violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   No insurance agent in the city shall have any insurance
business or dealings with any company, association or corporation, not
incorporated under the laws of the state, which is in default for not
reporting or making payments as provided in this subchapter, until it has
complied with all of the requirements of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.20.010)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.066  PAYMENTS TO CITY.



   (A)   Any fire insurance company, corporation or association, not
incorporated under the laws of the state, which is engaged in the city in
effecting fire insurance, shall pay the City Treasurer, for the maintenance,
use and benefit of the Fire Department, a sum of money equal to 2% per annum
of the gross receipts received as premiums upon fire insurance policies by
any and all agents of the company, corporation or association, during the
year ending on July 1 in each year, for any insurance effected or agreed to
be effected on property located in the city by or with the company,
corporation or association during the year.



   (B)   The sum of money for which the company, corporation or
association is chargeable may be recovered from it or its agent by an action
in the name of and for the use of the city as for money had and received.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be held to exempt any person
from indictment and conviction under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§§ 11-10-1 et seq.



(2000 Code, § 5.20.020)



§ 110.067  ANNUAL REPORT TO CITY.



   (A)   Every person acting in the city as an agent for or on behalf
of any corporation, company or association shall, on or before July 15 of
each and every year, render to the City Clerk a full, true and just account,
verified by his or her oath, of all premiums upon fire insurance policies
which, during the year ending on July 1 preceding the report, have been
received by him or her, or by some other person for him or her, on behalf of
the corporation, company or association, on property located in the city.



   (B)   The agent shall also, at the time of rendering the report, pay
to the City Treasurer the sum of money for which the company, corporation or
association represented by him or her is chargeable under this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.20.030)



§ 110.068  ADMINISTRATION BY ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL LEAGUE; FIRE INSURANCE TAX
BUREAU.



   (A)   The Illinois Municipal League is authorized to receive and
examine the reports and payments of the 2% Fire Department tax tendered the
municipality by foreign fire insurance companies writing business on property
located within the municipality.



   (B)   The Illinois Municipal League shall establish a permanent Fire
Insurance Tax Bureau in which there shall be kept a permanent, accurate and
complete record of all such tax payments received from foreign fire insurance
companies and the distribution of the payments to the municipalities. The
records shall be open to the inspection of any municipal official during
reasonable office hours.



   (C)   The municipality agrees to pay to the Illinois Municipal
League, for the cost of maintaining the services of the Fire Insurance Tax
Bureau, a fee of 7%, based upon the amount of the 2% Fire Department tax
actually collected by the league and received by the municipality. The fee
shall be paid the league not later than 30 days after the receipt of tax
payments by the municipality. The league is further authorized to carry on
necessary correspondence with foreign fire insurance companies owing taxes to
the municipality on behalf of the municipality, for the purpose of increasing
the tax payments of the insurance companies to the municipality.



(2000 Code, § 5.20.040)




GREASE TRAP SLUDGE REMOVAL AND TRANSPORTATION LICENSES




§ 110.080  GREASE TRAP SLUDGE DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GREASE TRAP SLUDGE.  The solid, lighter-than-water fraction of
wastewaters from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking or
consumption of food that are discharged to a pretreatment unit or device
commonly referred to as a grease trap. The principal components of grease
trap sludge are fats, oils and greases.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.010)



§ 110.081  MAINTENANCE OF TRAPS REQUIRED; USE OF DISSOLVING AGENTS.



   (A)   Each person who owns or operates a grease trap in accordance
with Chapter 52 of this code shall cause collected or trapped fats, oils and
grease to be cleaned and removed from the device on a periodic basis and
delivered to a facility authorized to use, treat or dispose of the material.
The clean-out and removal shall be accomplished on a monthly basis, unless
the city, upon receipt of proof from the owner or operator, or on the basis
of its own inspection of the grease trap, determines that a less or more
frequent maintenance schedule is required to achieve the purposes of this
subchapter and to prevent the discharge of fats, oils and grease into the
city’s sewer system.



   (B)   No person shall introduce, nor allow the introduction of,
physical, chemical or biological agents into grease traps for the purpose of
resuspending, dissolving, emulsifying or rendering soluble any fats, oils or
grease removed from wastewater by the grease traps and reintroducing them
into the city’s sewer system.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.020)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.082  DISCHARGING SLUDGE INTO SEWERS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause or allow the discharge, deposit or disposal of
any grease trap sludge into a treatment works or into any sewer owned by the
city.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.030) Penalty, see § 110.999



Cross-reference:



   Food and beverage, see Chapter 111



   Sewer service system, see Chapter 52



§ 110.083  TRANSPORTATION OR ACCEPTANCE OF SLUDGE; MANIFESTS AND LICENSES
REQUIRED.



   No person shall, within the city, cause or allow the transportation or
acceptance of grease trap sludge for rendering, storage, treatment or
disposal away from the site where the sludge was generated, unless the sludge
is accompanied by a manifest as prescribed in § 110.086, and the transporter
of the grease trap sludge has the appropriate licenses, as required by §
110.084.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.040)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.084  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall, within the city, remove, transfer or dispose
of grease trap sludge without first having obtained a grease trap sludge
removal and transportation license and the appropriate individual license for
each vehicle transporting the grease trap sludge as set forth in division (B)
of this section.



   (B)   Each annual grease trap sludge removal and transportation
license shall be issued at a fee of $200 for persons removing and/or
transporting grease trap sludge away from the site where the grease trap
sludge was generated within the city.



   (C)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she
is over 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States.



   (D)   No refund shall be paid at any time to any licensee for fees
paid for any license required under this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.050)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.085  APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.



   (A)   Applications for a grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license shall be in a form supplied or approved by the city
and shall be accompanied by the license fees required pursuant to § 110.084.
Applications for licenses under § 110.084 shall be accepted only from the
owner of record of the vehicle(s) used to transport the grease trap sludge.



   (B)   An application for a grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license hereunder shall be filed, in writing, with the City
Clerk, shall be subscribed to and sworn to under oath and shall specify:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant
and, if a firm, corporation, association or partnership, the principal
officers thereof and their addresses, and, if a corporation, all shareholders
of more than 5%, the corporate purpose, the corporate recording numbers and
the registered agent;



      (2)   A list of each vehicle to be used in the grease trap
sludge removal and transportation operation. The list shall contain, for each
vehicle, the name of the vehicle owner and his or her address and phone
number, the make of the vehicle, the model of the vehicle, the vehicle
identification number for the vehicle, the year of the vehicle, a description
of any tanks or other equipment which will hold the grease trap sludge, and
the location of the facility at which each such vehicle will be garaged;



      (3)   Sufficient proof of insurance and a copy of the
registration for each vehicle to be used in the grease trap sludge removal
and transportation operation;



      (4)   A copy of the driver’s license for each person who
will be driving a vehicle in the grease trap sludge removal and
transportation operation;



      (5)   A statement as to whether or not any of the above
parties has ever been convicted of a felony;



      (6)   A declaration of the facilities to which such grease
trap sludge is to be delivered by use, treatment or disposal; and



      (7)   Such other and further information as the city may
require.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the truthfulness of the
statements made in the application and report to the City Administrator or
his or her results or findings.



   (D)   The City Administrator shall neither recommend for issuance
nor record a grease trap sludge removal and transportation license with the
City Clerk if:



      (1)   Any of the parties requesting the grease trap sludge
removal and transportation license has been convicted of a felony;



      (2)   A false statement has been made on the application for a
license;



      (3)   The applicant is not the owner of record of each of the
vehicles to be used in the grease trap sludge removal and transportation
operation;



      (4)   No other grease trap sludge removal and transportation
licenses are available; and/or



      (5)   There are any items listed on the inspection report that
need to be remediated pursuant to § 110.087.



   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation,
association, institution, commercial establishment or business entity if the
person, firm, corporation, association, institution, commercial establishment
or business entity does not have all the valid waste hauling permits that may
be required by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois
Department of Agriculture.



   (F)   (1)   The denial of a license shall be in writing, and the
City Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant as to the basis of the
denial.



      (2)   No denial shall be made on the basis of the
applicant’s race, creed, color, sex or national origin.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.060)



§ 110.086  SLUDGE MANIFESTS.



   (A)   No licensee shall remove, transport or dispose of grease trap
sludge in the city without the grease trap sludge being accompanied by a
manifest form, which shall be completed as set forth below. The city shall
develop and make available the grease trap sludge manifest. The manifest
shall contain at a minimum the following information:



      (1)   The name of the generator of the sludge;



      (2)   The address of the generator of the sludge;



      (3)   The telephone number of the generator of the sludge;



      (4)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the generator of the sludge;



      (5)   The street address of the grease trap;



      (6)   The volume of sludge removed;



      (7)   The date of the sludge removal;



      (8)   The name of the transporter of the sludge;



      (9)   The street address of the transporter of the sludge;



      (10)   The telephone number of the transporter of the sludge;



      (11)   Acknowledgment of the receipt of the sludge by the
transporter;



      (12)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the transporter;



      (13)   The date of the collection of the sludge;



      (14)   The transporter’s United States Environmental
Protection Agency identification number;



      (15)   The transporter’s annual grease trap sludge removal
and transportation license number;



      (16)   The license number for the individual license issued by
the city for the vehicle being used to transport the sludge;



      (17)   The name of the facility receiving the sludge;



      (18)   The street address of the facility receiving the sludge;



      (19)   The telephone number of the facility receiving the
sludge;



      (20)   An acknowledgment of the receipt of the sludge by the
facility receiving the sludge;



      (21)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the receiving facility;



      (22)   The date of the sludge receipt by the facility
receiving the sludge; and



      (23)   The disposal or receiving facility’s United States
Environmental Protection Agency identification number.



   (B)   The manifest shall be completed by the generator of the grease
trap sludge. The generator must retain one copy of the manifest and deliver
or mail, by certified mail, one copy to the Department of Public Works for
the city within 48 hours of shipment. The other copies of the manifest shall
be given to the transporter. Each transporter shall complete applicable
sections of the manifest, maintain one copy and provide the facility
receiving the sludge with the remainder of the manifest copies. The receiving
and management facility shall maintain one copy of the manifest, send one
copy to the generator and mail one copy to the Superintendent of Public Works
for the city.



   (C)   The grease trap sludge generator, transporter and management
facility operator shall each retain a copy of the manifest for no less than
two years and shall produce such documents to the city upon request by the
city.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.070)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.087  INSPECTION OF FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.



   Any person who files an application for a grease trap sludge removal
and transportation license, or renewal thereof, agrees to allow the city to
inspect the condition of the facility or equipment of any generator,
transporter or receiving facility applying for the license to determine if it
is suitable for the intended grease trap sludge operation or in need of
repair. If the Inspector finds the condition of the facility or equipment to
be unsuitable for the intended grease trap sludge removal and transportation
operation or in need of repair, the Inspector shall issue a written report of
his or her findings and shall send a copy of the report to the applicant. No
grease trap sludge removal or operator’s license shall be issued to any
applicant until all such items listed on the inspection report are remediated.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.080)



§ 110.088  EXPIRATION OF LICENSES; RENEWALS.



   (A)   Each grease trap sludge removal and transportation license
required by this subchapter shall be terminated on January 1 next following
its issuance. No part of a license fee will be refunded if the license is
revoked by the City Clerk.



   (B)   Any licensee may retain his or her grease trap sludge removal
and transportation license at the expiration thereof, provided that he or she
is then qualified to receive a license and the premises and the equipment for
which the renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and
provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor and
City Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its
jurisdiction.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.090)



§ 110.089  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Every grease trap sludge removal and operator’s license
issued under this subchapter is subject to the city’s right, which is
expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee directly or
indirectly permit the removal, transportation, disposal or placement of any
grease trap sludge contrary to the provisions of this subchapter, any other
city code or ordinance or the laws of the state.



   (B)   The license may be revoked by the City Administrator, after
written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or
law violations with which the licensee is charged, if, after a hearing, the
licensee is found to be guilty of the violations.



   (C)   Ten days’ notice of the hearing shall be given to the
licensee.



   (D)   At the hearing, the licensee and his or her attorney may
present and submit evidence and witnesses in his or her defense.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.100)



§ 110.090  LICENSE TO BE PERSONAL PRIVILEGE; RIGHT TO AMEND OR REPEAL
CHAPTER.



   (A)   Any grease trap sludge removal and transportation license
shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after
issuance or on January 1 next following its issuance, whichever is first,
unless sooner revoked as provided in this subchapter, and shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or
execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. The license
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it
shall cease upon the death of the licensee.



   (B)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall create any vested
or property right in any grease trap sludge removal and transportation
license whatsoever, nor shall it limit or restrict the right of the city to,
at any time, amend or repeal this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.110)




HOUSE MOVERS




§ 110.105  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   No person shall engage in the business of moving houses in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor. The annual license fee for a
house mover is $100.



(2000 Code, § 5.28.010)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.106  BOND.



   Every person licensed under this subchapter shall file with the City
Clerk a bond in the amount of $10,000, with sureties to be approved by the
Mayor and Council, conditioned to indemnify the municipality for any loss,
damage or expense occasioned by the person or for any act or failure of the
licensee to comply with the ordinances of the municipality relating to the
business of house moving or moving houses.



(2000 Code, § 5.28.020)



§ 110.107  INSURANCE.



   In addition to the bond provided for in § 110.106, no permit shall be
issued for moving a building until the mover shows evidence of being covered
by a public liability insurance policy in an amount of not less than $300,000
for personal injury or death and $100,000 for property damage.



(2000 Code, § 5.28.030)



§ 110.108  PLANKING OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   The pavement of any street, alley or sidewalk on or along which any
house is to be moved shall be protected by two-inch planks along the route.



(2000 Code, § 5.28.040)



§ 110.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Grease trap sludge removal and transportation
licenses.  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this subchapter shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. In addition to the penalty provided herein, any
violation hereof may result in having the violator’s business license
subject to suspension or revocation.



      (2)   Whoever knowingly makes a false statement or
representation in any writing required to be prepared under this subchapter
shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $750, for each submission.



(2000 Code, § 5.24.120)



CHAPTER 111: FOOD AND BEVERAGE



Section




Food Service Establishments




   111.01   Purpose and intent



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   License required



   111.04   License application; design plans; schedule of events



   111.05   Inspections



   111.06   Certificate of registration required



   111.07   Fees



   111.08   Rules and regulations



   111.09   License suspension or revocation



   111.10   Appeals



   111.11   Toilet or lavatory facilities for seasonal food service
establishments




Vending Machines




   111.25   License required



   111.26   License application



   111.27   License fee



   111.28   Inspections and analyses




Alcoholic Beverage Sales




   111.40   Definitions



   111.41   License required



   111.42   Availability of licenses



   111.43   Applications for license



   111.44   State approved BASSET training



   111.45   Approval, denial of application



   111.46   License application fees



   111.47   Issuance of license



   111.48   Renewals of license



   111.49   Posting license and warning



   111.50   License classifications



   111.51   Number of licenses



   111.52   Fees; term



   111.53   Hours of operation



   111.54   Change of location or in personnel



   111.55   Transfer of license



   111.56   Licensing of premises for which a license has been
previously revoked



   111.57   Cessation of business



   111.58   Local Liquor Control Commissioner



   111.59   Inspection



   111.60   Health and safety requirements



   111.61   Conduct of licenses



   111.62   Acts of agent or employer



   111.63   Limitations on sales in general



   111.64   Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages



   111.65   Purchase or possession of alcoholic liquor by underage
persons



   111.66   Suspension or revocation of licenses



   111.67   Disqualification and suspension of manager—procedures



   111.68   Other ordinances and laws to apply



   111.69   City hearings—testimony required



   111.70   Prohibited sales or promotions



   111.71   Appeals




Restaurants




   111.90   License and compliance required



   111.91   Application for license



   111.92   License fee



 



   111.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Discharging sludge into sewers prohibited, see § 110.082



FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 111.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure that all foods served in
the city are served in a safe and healthful manner. This subchapter and the
regulations set forth in this subchapter promulgated pursuant thereto
represent good food service practices and it is the intent of this subchapter
to require that all food be served accordingly. However, it is expressly
intended that this subchapter shall not be applicable to the service of food
during a religious or organizational ritual or the reenactment thereof.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.010)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY HEALTH COMMISSIONER.  A licensed, registered nurse appointed to
the Health Commission by the Mayor with the consent of Council.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person on the premises of a food service establishment
who engages in management, supervision, food preparation or service or who
comes in contact with any food utensil or preparation or service equipment.



   FOOD.  Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient, including ice, used or intended for use or for sale in whole or
in part for human consumption.



   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place where food that is intended for
individual service and consumption is routinely provided, completed and
prepared. The term includes any such place, regardless of whether or not
consumption is in, on or off the premises and regardless of whether or not
there is a charge for the food. FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT does not include a
private home where food is prepared for individual family consumption, nor
does it include a retail food store that does not cook or combine
ready-to-eat foods for human consumption.



   KITCHEN or FOOD PREPARATION AREA. A room or area which is separate and
distinct from other facilities within a food service establishment and which
contains all equipment for the type and volume of foods being prepared and
served.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT.  Any food service establishment or vehicle from
which food is served without a fixed location and which is capable of being
readily moved from location to location. The term does not include a food
service establishment or mobile vehicle which serves only ice cream or ice
cream products.



   NEW ESTABLISHMENT.  Any new food service establishment applying for a
business license in the city.



   OCCASIONAL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any food service establishment
which is operated with no regularity or for a limited period of time by a
charitable, religious, educational, municipal or other nonprofit organization
for social purposes or organizational fund raising only and in which the food
is prepared and served by voluntary personnel from the membership of, or
affiliated with, the charitable, religious, educational, municipal or other
nonprofit organization.



   RETAIL FOOD STORE.  Any establishment or section of an establishment
where food and food products are offered to the consumer and intended for
off-premises consumption. The term includes delicatessens that offer prepared
food in bulk quantities only. The term does not include establishments which
handle only prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous foods, food service
establishments or food and beverage vending machines.



   SEASONAL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any food service establishment
which is operated by a person for profit and not by a charitable, religious,
educational, municipal or other nonprofit organization; which is licensed to
operate for a period of no greater than six consecutive months and no less
than 15 consecutive days from a fixed location; in which no seating area is
available for the use of patrons; and whose dimensions are no greater than
ten feet by 16 feet.



   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any food service establishment
which is operated by a person for profit and not by a charitable, religious,
educational, municipal or other nonprofit organization, which has no
permanent location and which operates for only a specified period of time at
certain locations (i.e. carnivals, fairs, public displays and the like).



(2000 Code, § 5.18.020)



§ 111.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a food service establishment, retail food
store, temporary food service establishment or occasional food service
establishment without first obtaining a license to do so. A separate license
shall be required for each such establishment or store.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.030)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  LICENSE APPLICATION; DESIGN PLANS; SCHEDULE OF EVENTS.



   (A)   An application for a food service establishment license,
retail food store license, temporary food service establishment license or
occasional food service establishment license shall be made in writing to the
City Clerk, and the appropriate license fee, as provided by ordinance shall
accompany the signed application. The application shall be made on a form
provided for that purpose.



   (B)   (1)   The form shall contain a notice that as part of the
procedure an inspection will be conducted. The form shall also contain a
statement that the applicant grants permission to enter the premises, during
reasonable hours prior to the license being issued, to conduct the license
inspection.



      (2)   The form shall include notice that at least once every
six months, the city’s Health Commission shall make an inspection of the
applicant’s establishment. The applicant’s grant of permission to enter
shall be in accordance with that schedule.



      (3)   In the case of a new establishment or remodeling of an
existing structure, the applicant shall submit final design plans to the
city’s Health Commission for approval. An inspection of the completed
premises will be conducted by, and approval shall be obtained from, the
city’s Health Commission before the issuance of a license.



   (C)   When an occasional food service establishment has a regular
schedule of events, the schedule of events must be attached to the
application. The schedule may be modified or added to, provided that written
notice of the modification or addition is submitted to the city not less than
five days prior to the event.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.040)



§ 111.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a new license or renewal of
an existing license, together with the appropriate fee, the City Clerk shall
notify the city’s Health Commissioner to make an inspection of the
establishment for which a license is sought. When the inspection reveals that
applicable requirements of this subchapter, the rules and regulations
promulgated under § 111.08, and other city ordinances, have been complied
with and the food service operation is approved, a license shall be issued to
the applicant.



   (B)   At least once every six months, the city’s Health Commission
shall make an inspection of each establishment licensed pursuant to this
chapter. The Commission shall make such additional inspections and
re-inspections from time to time as are necessary for the enforcement of this
subchapter.



   (C)   In the case of temporary food service establishments and
occasional food service establishments, the Commission shall make such
inspections and reinspections from time to time as are necessary for the
enforcement of this subchapter.



   (D)   If food is prepared at a place other than on the premises of
the food service establishment, temporary food service establishment or
occasional food service establishment, the name and address of the preparer
must be available on request of the city’s Health Commissioner at the place
of service, on the day of service and for 90 days thereafter.



   (E)   All inspections by the Commissioner must be reported in
writing and signed by the Inspector on a form provided for this purpose. The
operator of the food establishment shall be provided with a copy of the
inspection report.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.050)



§ 111.06  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Each applicant for a food service establishment license shall provide
the city’s Health Commission with evidence of a valid certificate of
registration in food handling and sanitation issued by the State Department
of Public Health to members of his or her supervisory or managerial staff. At
least one such registered member who is employed full-time at the licensed
location shall be responsible for compliance with the Food Service Sanitation
Manual at the licensed location where he or she is employed.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.060)



§ 111.07  FEES.



   (A)   License fee. The amount of the license fee for each license
applicant shall be the prevailing business license fee as provided in §
111.07.



   (B)   Inspection and reinspection fee. All food service
establishments and retail food stores shall be subject to an annual fee of
$130 for two health inspections to be conducted through the calendar year. In
addition, all violations of food service establishments and retailfood stores
as reported on the City Health Commission food service establishment
inspection report, as established by the regulations of the City Health
Commission, must correct any violations as soon as possible, but in any event
within ten days following such inspection. A warrantless reinspection shall
be conducted to confirm the correction. A fee of $65 shall be charged for
required reinspections. Special event health inspections shall be billed at a
rate of $50 per vendor.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.070)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord.
2017-12-0674, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 111.08  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Adopted and applicable to the operation of a food service
establishment, retail food store, temporary food service establishment and
mobile food unit in the city are those rules and regulations set forth in the
Food Service Sanitation Manual, 1983, as amended, and the Retail Food Store
Sanitation Manual, 1983, as amended, both published by the State Department
of Public Health. Three copies of each manual are on file in the office of
the City Clerk for public use, inspection and examination and have been on
file for such purposes for more than 30 days prior to the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this subchapter (Ordinance 1423, passed May 13,
1986). Both manuals are adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth in this subchapter. However, where any
ordinance of the city sets forth a more stringent requirement than the rules
and regulations, the more stringent ordinance shall control.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.080)



§ 111.09  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   Conduct or operation of any food service establishment, retail food
store, temporary food service establishment or occasional food service
establishment which violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or
refusal of the holder of any license under this subchapter to allow
inspection of his or her premises, or to furnish a sample of his or her food
for testing, shall be grounds for the closing of that establishment for a
period not to exceed ten days, the suspension of any license granted pursuant
to this subchapter or the revocation of any license granted pursuant to this
subchapter. The sanctions shall not be imposed on a licensee except pursuant
to written notice of the grounds therefor and a hearing before the city’s
Health Commission at which the licensee shall have the right to cross-examine
witnesses and the right to call witnesses on his or her own behalf. Grounds
for the sanctions provided for in this subchapter must be established by a
preponderance of the evidence. Revocation shall not prejudice an applicant in
applying for another temporary food service establishment license.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.100)



§ 111.10  APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision in regard to the denial of an
application for a license under this subchapter, or in connection with the
suspension or revocation of such a license, shall have the right to appeal to
Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk, within ten
days after notice of the denial, revocation or suspension, a written
statement, under oath, setting forth specifically the grounds for the appeal.
Council shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing of the appeal
and notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee. The
hearing shall be held within 20 days of the City Clerk’s receipt of the
appeal. The decision of Council on the appeal shall be final.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.110)



§ 111.11  TOILET OR LAVATORY FACILITIES FOR SEASONAL FOOD SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   A seasonal food service establishment shall not be required to
have a toilet room or a lavatory on the premises, provided, however, that the
establishment shall make available to its employees a toilet room or a
lavatory located within a reasonable distance from the premises of the
establishment, which toilet room or lavatory shall be available to such
employees during all hours the establishment is open for business.



   (B)   The city’s Health Commissioner shall determine the
availability of a toilet room or lavatory and ensure that no health hazards
exist or might be created by the lack of a toilet room or lavatory on the
premises. The city’s Health Commissioner shall not issue a license to the
seasonal food service establishment if no such facilities are available or if
a health hazard exists. The city’s Health Commissioner may require that the
establishment’s arrangement to make a toilet room or lavatory available be
reduced to writing on a form to be provided by the city’s Health
Commissioner.



(2000 Code, § 5.18.120)




VENDING MACHINES




§ 111.25  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall maintain a vending machine in the city without first
obtaining a license therefor.



(2000 Code, § 5.64.010)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.26  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   An application for a vending machine license shall state the full name
of the applicant and the number of machines for which the applicant desires
licenses. The application shall be accompanied by evidence that the
applicant, if an individual, or the person in charge of a business, if a firm
or corporation, is a responsible person of good character and reputation.



(2000 Code, § 5.64.020)



§ 111.27  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for a vending machine license shall be as listed, per
machine, per establishment:



   (A)   Vending machine - pop: $50;



   (B)   Vending machine - candy/snacks: $50;



   (C)   Vending machine - coffee: $50; and



   (D)   Vending machine - tobacco: $100.



(2000 Code, § 5.64.030)



§ 111.28  INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES.



   The Chief of Police and the Health Commissioner are authorized to
inspect and examine any food or drink being offered for sale by means of an
automatic vending machine for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the
laws of the state and the municipality in relation to sales from such a
vending machine are being complied with and that the food or drink is kept
fresh, clean and wholesome. Any person operating a vending machine, upon the
demand of the Chief or the Health Commissioner, shall furnish to him or her
for his or her inspection a sample of the food or drink, which sample may be
analyzed by or under the direction of the Chief or the Health Commissioner. A
record of the analysis shall be made and kept in the office of the Chief or
the Commissioner for the inspection of the public.



(2000 Code, § 5.64.040)




ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES




§ 111.40  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid,
whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and
includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term ALCOHOL does not include denatured
alcohol or wood alcohol.



      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer,
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. For this
purpose of this chapter, ALCOHOL LIQUOR, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE and LIQUOR shall
have the same meaning.



      BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and
includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the
like.



      CITY. The City of Oak Forest, Illinois.



      CONSUMPTION SALES. The sale or offering for sale, at retail, of
any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold.



      CONVENIENCE BUSINESS. A business whose primary purpose is for the
sale of items other than liquor whose sales of liquor do not exceed 25% of
the gross sales of the business.



      HOTEL. Every building or other structure that is kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is
actually served and consumed and where sleeping accommodations are offered
for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or
residential, in which rooms are used for sleeping accommodations and for
dining conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith.
The building or structure shall be provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.



      LICENSEE. A representative of the liquor license holder to
include every officer, shareholder, associate, member, manager, agent,
representative and employee of the licensee.



      LIQUOR STORE. A business whose primary purpose is for the package
sale of liquor.



      LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The Mayor of the city.



      ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever that is used, corked,
capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of liquor to contain and to
convey any liquor.



      PACKAGED SALES. The sale or offering for sale at retail of liquor
in the original package, which alcoholic liquor is not to be consumed, in
whole or in part, on the premises where sold.



      PERSON. A natural human being, or any applicant or licensee
hereunder even if such applicant or licensee is a group of persons, a
partnership, co-partnership, limited liability company or a corporation
unless the context of its use clearly indicates it is limited to a natural
human being.



      RESTAURANT. Any public place that is kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and
where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping
accommodations, the space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen
and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a
sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable
food for its guests and derives at least 60% of its gross receipts from the
sale of food.



      RETAILER. A person, a group of persons, a partnership or a
corporation who or which sells, or offers for sale, liquor for use of
consumption and not for resale in any form.



      SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any
means whatsoever, including the transfer of liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, for a
consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether a
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and further includes
dispensing, pouring, mixing or otherwise serving liquors.



      SELL OR SALE AT RETAIL, SELL AT RETAIL,and SALE AT RETAIL. A sale
for refer to and mean sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any
form.



      SERVICE OF FOOD. The service of meals, for consumption only on
the premises, in an adequate and sanitary kitchen as defined in any
appropriate health or food service ordinance of the city. The meals must
consist of more than the service or sale of packaged foods, such as potato
chips, pretzels, peanuts, cheese and crackers, or frozen or pre-made foods,
such as pizzas, hamburgers or sandwiches, which can be prepared by being
heated or warmed in an oven. Further, the meals must be actually and
regularly served and eaten at tables and not only at a bar or counter.



      SPECIAL EVENT. An event conducted by an educational, fraternal,
political, civic, religious or non-profit organization.



      SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by
distillation, mixed with water or other substances in solution and includes
brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, vodka or other spirituous liquids, and such
liquors where rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other
substances.



      TAVERN. An establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold do be
consumed on the premises whose sales of liquor exceed 70% of the gross sales
of the business.



      TO SELL. Includes keeping or exposing for sale and to keep with
intent to sell.



      VIDEO GAMING. The installation and operation of any video gaming
terminals or any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash,
is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois
Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the
player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. (ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5). VIDEO GAMING shall only be authorized within the city
based upon the issuance of a valid license hereunder.



      WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such
beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined in
this section.



   (B)   Any term not defined above but defined in ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5,
§§ 1-3 et seq. and used in this chapter shall be deemed to have the same
definition as contained in ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-3 et seq. unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.010) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 111.41  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation,
limited liability company or any other entity shall sell or offer for sale at
retail, draw, pour, mix, dispense or otherwise serve (hereinafter
collectively referred to as “sale,” “sold,” “sell” or “offered
for sale”) any liquors within the city without first having obtained an
liquor license as herein provided. Each separate place of business or
location wherein liquor shall be sold or offered for sale, drawn, poured,
mixed, dispensed or otherwise served, regardless of whether there is any type
of compensation, shall have a separate license. No video gaming terminals.
activities or operations are permitted within the city, except pursuant to
the issuance of a liquor license pursuant to one of the liquor license
categories under this code which specifically authorizes such video gaming
terminals and operations on the premises of the particular business or
establishment involved, provided however that such prohibition shall not
apply to fraternal and veteran establishments a defined in the Illinois Video
Gaming Act (ILCS Ch.230, Act 40, § 5).



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to play or
operate a video gaming terminal.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any licensee, its employees or agents, to
allow any person under 21 years of age to play or use a video gaming terminal.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.040) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.42  AVAILABILITY OF LICENSES.



   A license shall be purely a privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance. No license issued under this code shall constitute property.
The renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested
right which shall in any case prevent the City Council from decreasing the
number of licenses issued within the city. Any license issued under this Code
therefore will remain subject to a change in its terms, as well as the
provisions of all ordinances now in force and that may hereby be passed by
the city.



(Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.43  APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE.



   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, a
duly authorized officer or shareholder of a corporation if the applicant is a
corporation, a duly authorized member if the applicant is a limited liability
company, or by a person entitled to share in the profits of the applicant if
the applicant is a copartnership (provided, however, such person shall also
be a partner thereof). The application must be verified by oath or affidavit,
and shall contain the following information and statements:



   (A)   The applicant’s name, sex, age, date of birth, social
security number, position and percentage of ownership in the business: and
the name, sex, age date of birth and social security number, position and
percentage of ownership in the business of every sole owner, partner,
corporate officer, director, member of any limited liability company, manager
and any person who owns 5% or more of the shares of the applicant business
entity or parent corporation(s) of the applicant business entity.



   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth,
and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.



   (C)   In case of a limited liability company, corporation or a club,
the object for which it was organized, a list of the names, resident address,
and phone numbers of its officers, directors, shareholders, and members, and
a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, certificate of
organization, and/or charter.



   (D)   In case of a co-partnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; in the case of a limited liability company the date of its
organization in Illinois under the Limited Liability Company Act; or in the
case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the
date of its becoming qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to
transact business in the State of Illinois.



   (E)   The name, character and address of the business of the
applicant.



   (F)   The location and a description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under the license, including the number of
bars to be operated thereon.



   (G)   A statement whether the applicant has made any other
application for a similar license on premises other than that which is
described in this application, and the disposition of the application. The
statement shall include any other application in which the applicant was in
any way involved, regardless of the name, structure and the like of the
business entity. If any license was denied the applicant shall include the
reasons therefor.



   (H)   The number the date of issuance and the date of expiration of
the applicant's current local retail liquor license issued in either the city
or issued by any county or other municipality.



   (I)   The name of the city, village, or county that issued the local
retail liquor license (if other than the City of Oak Forest).



   (J)   The name and address of the landlord of any premises that are
leased in any other municipality or county in which the applicant has another
local retail liquor license.



   (K)   The date of the applicant’s first request for a state liquor
license and whether it was granted, denied or withdrawn.



   (L)   The address of the applicant when the first application for a
state liquor license was made.



      (1)   The applicant’s current state liquor license number.



      (2)   The date the applicant began liquor sales at his or her
place of business.



      (3)   The applicant’s Retailer’s Occupation Tax (ROT)
registration number.



   (M)   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the
retailer’s occupational tax (sales tax), and if so, the reasons therefor.



   (N)   Whether the applicant is delinquent under the cash beer law,
and if so, the reasons therefor.



   (O)   In the case of a retailer, whether he or she is delinquent
under the 30-day credit law, and if so, the reasons therefor.



   (P)   Whether the applicant possesses a current federal wagering
stamp, and if so, the reasons therefor.



   (Q)   Whether the applicant, or any other person, directly in his or
her place of business is a public official, and if so, the particulars
thereof.



   (R)   If applicable, the date of the filing of the “assumed
name” of the business with the County Clerk.



   (S)   A statement whether the applicant or any owner, partner,
member or manager of the applicant, has ever been convicted of either a
misdemeanor or a felony and whether any such individual or entity is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained
in this chapter, the laws of the state or other ordinances of the city, and
if so the particulars thereof.



   (T)   Whether a previous license issued by any state or, subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been suspended or revoked, and the
reasons therefor.



   (U)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the
laws of the state, the United States or any ordinances of the city in the
conduct of his or her place of business.



   (V)   The class of license desired by the applicant.



   (W)   Whether the applicant owns the premises for which a license is
sought, and if he does not, the name of his or her landlord and the period of
his or her lease. A complete and correct copy of the lease is to be attached
to the application.



   (X)   Whether or not the applicant intends to manage and conduct the
business in person, and if not, the name of the manager or agent who is to
conduct the business on the premises for which the license is sought.



   (Y)   A statement that the applicant will be required to, and shall
require all officers, agents and employees of the applicant to, testify
(subject to constitutional limitations) at any hearing that may be called by
the city or any of its committees, commissions, boards or agencies, or the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, relating, directly or indirectly, to any
events or occurrences of which they may have knowledge arising out of their
position as licensee or as an officer, agent or employee of the licensee and
that the applicant has informed all officers, agents and employees, and has
made the same a condition of employment for all employees.



   (Z)   Every application for a license, whether for a new license or
for a renewal of an existing license, where the real estate title of the
premises is in a trust, shall be accompanied by the sworn affidavit of the
land trustee or a beneficiary of the trust, disclosing the names, residence
addresses and beneficial interests of each beneficiary of the land trust.



   (AA)    In addition to the foregoing information, the application
shall contain such other information as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
may prescribe.



      (1)   In case the application is made by a partnership, all
partners must sign the application and the information required by this
chapter shall be furnished for each partner.



      (2)   In case the application is made by a corporation, the
application shall be signed by the president and secretary of the corporation
and the corporate seal shall be affixed to the same.



      (3)   In case the application is made by a limited liability
company, the application shall be signed by the manager of the company and,
if the manager is not also a member, then the application must also be signed
by a member.



      (4)   Where the applicant is a business entity, limited
liability company, corporation or partnership, the Liquor Control
Commissioner reserves the right to require, and has the authority to waive,
any of the above requirements, as determined applicable to the actual
management, operation and decision-making of the company, e.g., if ownership
of the licensee is held by a corporation in purely an investment capacity,
with no regular management, operational or decision-making role or function,
the Liquor Control Commissioner can determine that the execution of certain
documents, or the completion of an application, is not required for certain
ownership interests or officials.



      (5)   Every application for a license, whether a new license
or renewal, where the real estate title of the premises is in a trustee,
shall be accompanied by the sworn affidavit of the land trustee or
beneficiary of the trust, disclosing the names, residence addresses, and
beneficial interest of each beneficiary of the land trust.



      (6)   The applicant must also provide a letter of intent
indicating the type and nature of the applicant’s business and the types of
activities to be conducted on the licensed premises. Any basic change in the
activities to be conducted or the type and nature of the premises or business
must be submitted to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for approval.



      (7)   Every application for a license, whether for a new
license or for a renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by a
copy of the applicant’s policy of dram shop insurance, written by a
responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in
Illinois, insuring such applicant against liability as required under ILCS
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq., as amended from time to time. The applicant
shall keep the policy of insurance in full force and effect during the term
of the license (and any renewals) or shall provide a suitable substitute
policy and each such policy shall contain a provision that the policy cannot
be canceled without 30 days’ prior written notice to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner.



      (8)   Every application for a license, whether new or renewal,
shall be accompanied by a supplemental application signed by each manager
employed by the licensee to manage the license premises and all business
operations on the licensed premises. Such supplemental application shall be
in writing, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
information and statements:



         (a)   The manager’s name, sex, age, date of birth and
social security number.



         (b)   The citizenship of the manager, his or her place
of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her
naturalization.



         (c)   A statement whether the manager has made any other
application, either as owner or manager, for a similar license on premises
other than described in the supplemental application, and the disposition of
that application. Such statement shall include any other application which
the manager was in any way involved with regardless of what entity was the
proposed licensee under the application. If any such license was denied, the
manager shall include the reasons therefor.



         (d)   The number, date of issuance and date of
expiration of any current local retail liquor licenses issued to the manager
by any county or other municipality, and the name of such county or other
municipality.



         (e)   If the manager has ever requested a state liquor
license, the date of the first request for such license and whether it was
granted, denied or withdrawn, and the address of the manager when the first
application was made.



         (f)   The manager’s current state liquor license
number, if applicable.



         (g)   Whether the manager possesses a current federal
wagering stamp, and if so, the reasons therefor.



         (h)   Whether the manager is a public official, and if
so, the particulars thereof.



         (i)   A statement whether the manager has ever been
convicted of either a misdemeanor or a felony and whether any such manager is
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained
in this chapter, the laws of this state, or other ordinances of the city, and
if so the particulars thereof.



         (j)   Whether a previous license issued to the manager
by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government, has ever
been suspended or revoked and the reasons therefor.



         (k)   A statement that the manager will not violate any
laws of the state, the United States or any ordinance of the city in the
conduct of the business at the license premises.



         (l)   The name of any other persons employed to manage
the business to be carried on in the premises for which the license is sought.



         (m)   A statement that the manager will be required to
and shall require all agents and employees to testify (subject to
constitutional limitations) at any hearing that may be called by the city or
any of its committees, commissions, boards, or agencies, or the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, relating, directly or indirectly, to any events or
occurrences of which they may have knowledge arising out of their position as
officer, agent or employee. In addition, a statement acknowledging such
requirement and indicating that the manager has informed all agents and
employees, and has made the same a condition of employment for all employees.



         (n)   In addition to the foregoing, the supplementary
application shall contain such further information as the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may prescribe.



      (9)   If during any license year there is any change in the
manager(s) of the licensee, a new supplementary application signed by each
new manager must be filed in writing, verified by oath or affidavit, and
containing the same information as required under division (AA)(7) above.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.050) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.44  STATE APPROVED BASSET TRAINING.



   (A)   All original or renewal applications for a class liquor
licenses shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a State certified
Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) program
for all persons who sell or serve beverages, all management personnel working
on premises, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of
identification for the purchases of beverages, pursuant to that license.



   (B)   A state certified BASSET training program shall be defined as
a BASSET program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission
(ILCC) as required by ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 3-12(11.1) and 6-27 and Title
77 of Illinois Administrative Code, Chapter XVI, Section 3500. All licensed
BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and
certificates to prove current qualifications and provide a certificate of
course completion and a card (a picture type ID is optional), to participants
as proof of completion.



   (C)   After any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring
BASSET training, shall within 90 days from the beginning of their employment
with that licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training
program and shall until completion of the BASSET program work under the
supervision of a person who has completed BASSET training.



   (D)   A photo copy of certificate of completion for all owners,
managers, employees, or agents required by this subchapter to have BASSET
training shall be maintained, by the establishment, in manner that will allow
inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state or local liquor
control authorities.



(Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.45  APPROVAL, DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   All applications for a license under this subchapter shall be
delivered to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. It shall be the duty of
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to investigate and consider all
applications. For this purpose the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
enlist the aid of the Chief of Police and any other city officials or
employees that he or she deems necessary to complete the investigation. The
investigation shall include a background search and credit check. At any time
during the pendency of any such application(s), the Local Liquor Commissioner
shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit to any examination and
to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the Local Liquor
Commissioner, are material to the determination of whether the applicant is
qualified to receive a license or manage the business on the licensed
premises (as the case may be) under the provisions of this code, or whether
the premises sought to be licensed are suitable for such purposes. The Local
Liquor Commissioner shall also have the right to require the applicant to
answer any charges made in any objection to the issuance of the license made
by the Chief of Police, a prosecuting official, or by the sheriff or
prosecuting attorney of the county relative to the same. The failure of any
applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the Local Liquor
Commissioner for his or her examination or to produce books and records when
requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission
that the applicant is not qualified to receive a license and/or not qualified
to be a manager, as the case may be, and, therefore, a basis for denial of
the license or disqualification of the proposed manager, as the case may be.



   (B)   Upon completion of the investigation, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall approve or disapprove the issuance of a license and/or
designation of the manager based on the application(s), provided, in the case
of approval, that there exists an available license as set forth in § 111.48.



   (C)   No license shall be issued to any person ineligible to receive
the same by virtue of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2, as amended.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.080) (Ord. 2007-02-0085O, passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord.
2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.46  LICENSE APPLICATION FEES.



   In connection with the application of any person, group of persons,
partnership or corporation applying for a license or renewal of a license
under this subchapter, the applicant shall pay at the time of the application
a nonrefundable license application fee of $250, which shall be in addition
to the license fee required in this subchapter, both of which shall be due
and paid at the time when the application is completed and filed with the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner and which shall be paid by a certified
cashier’s check. The license application fee shall not be refunded
regardless of whether the applicant is issued a license or not.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.060) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.47  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   All applications for licenses shall be kept on file in the
office of the Liquor Control Commissioner, and fees for all licenses shall be
paid to the City Clerk who shall certify to the Liquor Control Commissioner
the names and addresses of all licenses paying fees to him together with the
class of license for which payment is made and thereupon said Liquor Control
Commissioner shall issue the license provided for in this subchapter to all
applicants who have complied with all the requirements of this subchapter and
other applicable laws. Provided, however, no license shall be issued to any
person ineligible to receive the same under this subchapter or the laws of
the State of Illinois, as amended from time to time.



   (B)   Further provided, however, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may, as a condition to the issuance of any liquor license,
impose such conditions and restrictions upon each license as the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may deem necessary to insure that operation of the
liquor establishment shall not be harmful to the safety, morals and welfare
of the community. The conditions imposed upon each liquor license shall be
enumerated upon said license and shall be displayed at all times in a
prominent place in such establishment and shall reiterate in detail such
conditions.



(Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.48  RENEWALS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license required by this subchapter shall terminate on
April 30 next following its issuance. No part of a license fee will be
refunded if the license is revoked by the Liquor Commissioner.



   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration
thereof, provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; and provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided
for shall not be construed as vested right which shall in any case prevent
the Mayor and City Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be
issued within its jurisdiction.



   (C)   Application for renewal of license shall be filed with the
City Clerk on or before April 1 preceding the expiration thereof. Such
application for renewal shall be made under oath and shall be upon an
application form prepared by the city.



   (D)   The renewal application shall contain a certification that all
information contained in the applicant’s prior or initial application is
still true and correct except as indicated otherwise on the renewal
application form. The applicant’s initial or prior application must be
attached to the renewal application and the applicant must furnish any
additional material in support of the application as deemed necessary by the
city. If the owner or principal type of business has changed in any respect,
a new license will be required.



   (E)   Each application for renewal shall be treated and considered
in the same manner as hereinabove provided for original applications for
license.



   (F)   Each application for renewal shall also include a renewal
supplementary application signed by any manager of the business conducted on
the licensed premises and containing the same information as the original
supplementary application.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.100) (Ord. 2007-02-0085O, passed 2-13-2007; Am. Ord.
2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.49  POSTING LICENSE AND WARNING.



   (A)   Every licensee shall cause his or her license or licenses to
be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises and adjacent to or attached to each separate bar on the licensed
premises, including movable and/or other type of service bars, regardless of
where such bars are located.



   (B)   In every tavern or other place in the city where liquor is
sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place next to each
bar therein a printed warning which shall read substantially as follows:



 

“WARNING - You are subject to a fine of up to Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars
($750.00) under the ordinances of the City of Oak Forest if you purchase
liquor when under the age of 21 years, or misrepresent your age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining liquor.”



 



(2000 Code, § 5.08.140) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 111.50  LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.



   Retail liquor licenses shall be divided into classes as follows: (for
each class of license the terms “retail sale,” “selling,” “sale,”
“sell” and/or “offer to sell” shall include dispensing, pouring,
mixing or otherwise serving any liquor regardless of whether there is any
type of compensation.)



   (A)   Class A “Tavern.” License shall be issued for a period of
one year to any person or persons, organization, association, partnership or
corporation for the sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by the drink
only and for consumption on the premises where sold subject to the other
terms and conditions of this code.



   (B)   Class AVG "Tavern" (with video gaming). License shall be
issued for a period of one year to any person or persons, organization,
association, partnership or corporation for the sale of any and all liquor as
defined herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where
sold subject to the other terms and conditions of this code. Video gaming is
hereby permitted on the premises, provided a proper, current, valid license
has been issued to the holder of the liquor license hereunder, pursuant to
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The
holder of the liquor license shall abide at all times by all requirements of
§ 114.011 of this code, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or
conditions of the license issued under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming
terminals may only be operated during such times as the holder of the liquor
license hereunder is authorized to serve alcohol.



   (C)   Class B "Restaurant." License shall be issued for a period of
one year to any person or persons, organization, association, partnership or
corporation doing business as a restaurant for the sale of any and all liquor
as defined herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where
sold subject to the other terms and conditions of this code.



   (D)   Class BVG "Restaurant" (with video gaming). License shall be
issued for a period of one year to any person or persons, organization,
association, partnership or corporation doing business as a restaurant for
the sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by the drink only and for
consumption on the premises where sold subject to the other terms and
conditions of this code. Video gaming is hereby permitted on the premises,
provided a proper, current. valid license has been issued to the holder of
the liquor license hereunder, pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The holder of the liquor license shall
abide at all times by all requirements of § 114.011 of this code, the
Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or conditions of the license issued
under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming terminals may only be operated
during such time as the holder of the liquor license hereunder is authorized
to serve alcohol.



   (E)   Class C "Beer Garden." License shall be issued for a period of
one year to any person or persons, organization, association, partnership, or
corporation that holds a Class A license and entitles licensee to make sales,
at retail, of liquor for use or consumption outdoors on the premises where
sold.



      (1)   Class C “Beer Garden” licenses shall designate on a
site or patio plan an area immediately adjoining the licensee’s indoor
establishment, which contiguous area shall be used for the purposes of the
license, and which area will hereinafter be referred to as a beer garden. The
beer garden may not exceed 50% of the establishment interior occupancy, and
shall have its boundaries clearly marked with the appropriate enclosure as
determined by the City Administrator or designees. The Liquor Commissioner,
in his or her sole and absolute discretion, shall approve the location of a
beer garden or where the zoning ordinance regulates the use will supersede
the Liquor Commissioner’s discretion.



      (2)   Class C “Beer Garden.” All special events taking
place during inclement weather shall require permission from the Liquor
Commissioner.



      (3)   Such sale and consumption of liquor shall be limited to
the designated beer garden.



      (4)   Licensee must have at least one employee stationed in
the beer garden at all operational times.



      (5)   Adequate area for pedestrian flow through the beer
garden shall be maintained at all times.



      (6)   Emergency ingress and egress and access by and to fire
apparatus in the beer garden shall be subject to review and approval of the
City Fire Chief.



      (7)   The beer garden shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be kept from debris at all times.



      (8)   All trash containers located in the beer garden shall be
lidded at all times and all refuse shall be regularly removed.



      (9)   Licensees shall obtain all licenses, certifications,
permits, and other approvals required for the legal operation of the beer
garden.



      (10)   Licensees shall comply with all other requirements
applicable to the beer garden in the code and other applicable codes,
ordinances, and regulations.



      (11)   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer, give away or
permit to be sold, offered or given away, at retail, in or upon a Class C
licensed beer garden, any liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00
a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 11:00
a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays.



      (12)    Following the closing times and prior to the opening
times set forth in of this section of the city code, every non-licensee
person located in the beer garden area shall relocate indoors or otherwise
leave the outdoor premises, which shall be closed and remain closed.



      (13)   All doors directly opening into or out of such
location, place or premises for ingress thereto or egress therefrom shall be
securely locked during the time that sales in the beer garden are prohibited.



   (F)   Class D “Outdoor Café.” License entitles Class A and B
licensees to make sales, at retail, of liquor for use or consumption outdoors
on the premises where such sales are incidental to and sold in conjunction
with the service of food, as the same is defined in § 111.40 of the city
code. The sale shall be by responsible entities otherwise duly licensed under
the city code and possessing a current, valid license from the city for the
sale of liquor at retail for consumption on the premises (e.g., a Class A and
B license in addition to a Class D license), and any required outdoor dining
permits required by the city code. The sale of liquor at retail for
consumption in connection with the service of food by a restaurant with
outdoor dining shall be allowed for limited periods of time at the hours
specified and subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   Class D “Outdoor Café” licensees shall designate on
a site or patio plan an area immediately adjoining the licensee’s indoor
establishment, which contiguous area shall be used for the purposes of the
license, and which area will hereinafter be referred to as an outdoor café.
The outdoor café may not exceed 50% of the establishment interior occupancy,
and shall have its boundaries clearly marked with the appropriate enclosure
as determined by the City Administrator or designees. The Liquor Commissioner
shall approve, in his or her sole and absolute discretion, the location of an
outdoor café or where the zoning ordinance regulates the use will supersede
the Liquor Commissioner’s discretion.



      (2)   Class D “Outdoor Café.” All special events taking
place during inclement weather shall require permission from the Liquor
Commissioner.



      (3)   The service of liquor shall be restricted solely to
on-premises consumption by customers within the outdoor dining area
designated in the application for a Class D liquor license as the outdoor
café area, which must be immediately adjacent to and abutting the indoor
restaurant which provides it with food and beverage service.



      (4)   The outdoor café must be clearly separated from
pedestrian traffic.



      (5)   The licensee shall post a written notice to customers
that the drinking or carrying of an open container of liquor is prohibited
and unlawful outside the designated outdoor café area.



      (6)   Adequate area for pedestrian flow through the outdoor
café shall be maintained at all times.



      (7)   Emergency ingress and egress and access by and to fire
apparatus in the outdoor café shall be subject to review and approval of the
City Fire Chief.



      (8)   The outdoor café shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be kept from debris at all times.



      (9)   Condiment and other food storage containers shall be
lidded when not in use. Perishable condiments and other food items shall not
be stored in the outdoor café.



      (10)   The tableware utilized in the outdoor café shall be
the same china, napkins, flatware, and other tableware used in the restaurant.



      (11)   All trash containers located in the outdoor café shall
be lidded at all times and all refuse shall be regularly removed. Soiled
linens, tablecloths, and napkins shall not be stored in the outdoor café.



      (12)   Licensees shall obtain all licenses, certifications,
permits, and other approvals required for the legal operation of the outdoor
café.



      (13)   Licensees shall comply with all other requirements
applicable to the outdoor café in the code and other applicable codes,
ordinances, and regulations.



      (14)   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer, give away or
permit to be sold, offered or given away, at retail, in or upon a Class D
licensed outdoor café, any liquor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 11:00
a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00
a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays.



      (15)   Following the closing times and prior to the opening
times set forth in this section, every non-licensee person located in the
outdoor café area shall relocate indoors or otherwise leave the outdoor
premises, which shall be closed and remain closed.



      (16)   All doors directly opening into or out of such
location, place or premises for ingress thereto or egress therefrom shall be
securely locked during the time that sales in the outdoor café are
prohibited.



      (17)   The outdoor café area designated in the application
for a Class D liquor license must be adjacent to and incidental to the
operation of an indoor restaurant and any use of the sidewalk must be
confined to the actual sidewalk and public right-of-way frontage of the
indoor restaurant building. An outdoor café is only permitted where the
sidewalk is wide enough to adequately simultaneously accommodate both the
usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed
activity. The outdoor café shall leave not less than six consecutive feet of
sidewalk width at every point which is clear and unimpeded for pedestrian
traffic. An outdoor café shall not be allowed within ten feet of a fire
hydrant, bus or rail stop, fire escape, bus stop, any doorway posted as an
exit, loading zone or mail boxes.



   (G)   Class E "Liquor Store." License entitles licensee, doing
business as a liquor store, to make package sales, at retail, of liquor for
use or consumption off of the premises where sold. A Class E license shall
also permit the tasting of wine or other liquor, as an ancillary part of the
primary business of selling liquor. The number of such tastings may be
limited by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, in his or her discretion.



   (H)   Class F "Convenience Business." License entitles licensee to
make package sales, at retail, of liquor for use or consumption off of the
premises where sold.



   (I)   Class G "Combined." License entitles licensee to make sales,
at retail, of liquor for use or consumption on the premises where sold and to
make package sales, at retail, of liquor for use or consumption off the
premises.



   (J)   Class GVG "Combined" (with video gaming). License hall be
issued for a period of one year to any person or persons, organization,
association, partnership or corporation doing business as a restaurant for
the sale of any and all liquor as defined herein by the drink only and for
consumption on the premises where sold subject to the other terms and
conditions of this code. Video gaming is hereby permitted on the premises,
provided a proper, current, valid license has been issued to the holder of
the liquor license hereunder, pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The holder of the liquor license shall
abide at all times by all requirements of § 114.011 of this code, the
Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or conditions of the license issued
under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming terminals may only be operated
during such times as the holder of the liquor license hereunder is authorized
to serve alcohol.



   (K)   Class H "Temporary." License shall be issued for a set period
of time and license shall permit the sale of any and all liquor as defined
herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises for those hours
approved and identified in the license.



   (L)   Class I "Video gaming Boutique". License shall be issued for a
period of one year to any person or persons, organization, association,
partnership or corporation, the principal business of which is the operation
of video gaming terminals, for the sale of any and all liquor as defined
herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where sold, in
connection with and secondary to the video gaming operations. Video gaming is
hereby permitted on the premises, provided a proper, current, valid license
has been issued to the holder of the liquor license hereunder, pursuant to
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.). The
holder of the liquor license shall abide at all times by all requirements of
§ 114.011 of this code, the Illinois Video Gaming Act and any terms or
conditions of the license issued under the Video Gaming Act. The video gaming
terminals may only be operated during such times as the holder of the liquor
license hereunder is authorized to serve alcohol. The determination of
whether a business meets the criteria for this license includes the following:



      (1)   No full service kitchen;



      (2)   Seating area for video gaming exceeds the seating for
food/beverages;



      (3)   Estimated net revenue from overall business operation
which is greater than 40% from video gaming;



      (4)   Total square footage of 2,000 feet or less.



The Class I license shall be further conditioned upon the full, continuous
compliance with all city codes, including the building, sign and property
maintenance codes.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.110)  (Ord. 2006-07-0045O, passed 8-8-2006; Am. Ord.
2009-09-0260O, passed 9-22-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-12-0315O, passed 12-14-2010;
Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-27-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-06-0607O, passed
6-28-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.51  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



    Without the need or requirement for any further action by the City
Council, when a license is forfeited or revoked or terminated for any reason,
that license is immediately and automatically eliminated, and the number of
licenses from that class is lowered by one.



   (A)   Class A shall not exceed nine.



   (B)   Class AVG (with video gaming) shall not exceed eight.



   (C)   Class B shall not exceed 14.



   (D)   Class BVG (with video gaming) shall not exceed nine.



   (E)   Class C shall not exceed six.



   (F)   Class D shall not exceed zero.



   (G)   Class E shall not exceed six.



   (H)   Class F shall not exceed 20.



   (I)   Class G shall not exceed two.



   (J)   Class GVG (with videogaming shall not exceed one.



   (K)   Class H shall not be limited.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.130) (Am. Ord. 2018-09-0701O, passed 9-11-2018)



Editor’s Note: Only the most recent ordinance amending § 111.51 is listed.



§ 111.52  FEES; TERM.



   (A)   Fees.



      (1)   The fee of any Class A "Tavern" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $1,500.



      (2)   The fee for any Class AVG "Tavern" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $2,000.



      (3)   The fee for any Class B "Restaurant" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $1,500.



      (4)   The fee for any Class BVG  "Restaurant" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $2,000.



      (5)   The fee for any Class C "Beer Garden" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $350.



      (6)   The fee for any Class D "Outdoor Café" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $200.



      (7)   The fee for any Class E "Liquor Store" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $1,500.



      (8)   The fee for any Class F "Convenience Business" license
granted hereunder shall be in the amount of $1,500.



      (9)   The fee for any Class G "Combined" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $1,800.



      (10)   The fee for any Class GVG "Combined" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of $2,500.



      (11)   There is no fee for a Class H "Temporary" license
granted hereunder.



   (B)   A civic, charitable or fraternal organization may be granted a
temporary permit by the Liquor Control Commissioner to sell or serve liquor
in the city. The temporary license shall be limited in time, and the location
for the use of the license shall be defined. Applications shall be made
directly to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and the licenses, when
granted by the Commissioner, do not require a fee.



   (C)   All license fees shall be paid in advance on or before April
15 April in each year.



   (D)   Every license shall expire on April 30 following its issuance
(except 24-hour licenses).



   (E)   All license fees shall be paid at the office of the City Clerk.



   (F)   In the event a license is not issued, any license fees (except
the initial license expense in § 111.52) which have been prepaid shall be
refunded to an applicant.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.110) (Ord. 2006-07-0045O, passed 8-8-2006; Am. Ord.
2009-09-0260O, passed 9-22-2009; Am. Ord. 2010-12-0315O, passed 12-14-2010;
Am. Ord. 2014-03-0889O, passed 3-20-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed
3-25-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-04-0490O, passed 4-8-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-06-0607O,
passed 6-28-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0616O, passed 9-13-2016; Am. Ord.
2018-03-0682O, passed 3-13-2018)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.53  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in §§ 111.40et seq.
of this code which govern and regulate alcoholic beverage sales in the City
of Oak Forest for any particular license classification, no person licensed
under this subchapter as a retailer of alcoholic liquor shall sell, permit to
be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
Sundays provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of the license
holders of such establishments to require that all persons, other than
employees of said establishments, leave the premises at the stated closing
times.



   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may extend the closing hours
for two hours on December 31 and January 1.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.150) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-06-0607O, passed 6-28-2016)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.54  CHANGE OF LOCATION OR IN PERSONNEL.



   (A)   A retail liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. A
location may be changed upon making written application to make the change to
and receiving approval thereof issued by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed
new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under
the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city.



   (B)   Any change in partnerships, officers, directors or managers of
establishments licensed under this subchapter, or persons holding directly,
beneficially or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership or
control, more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest of any location or
premises for which a license has been issued, shall be reported, in writing,
to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All
new personnel shall meet all the standards of this subchapter and must
otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes in personnel
shall be subject to review by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.170) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.55  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A liquor license shall be purely a personal privilege, good
for a term not to exceed the period for which the same is issued unless
sooner revoked, as provided in this subchapter, and shall not constitute
property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution nor
shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or
subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descent
by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the
death of the licensee, provided that the executors or administrators of the
estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt
licensee, when the estate consists in part of liquor, under order of the
appropriate court, may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent
or bankrupt licensee after the death of such license but not linger more than
six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.



   (B)   When the licensee is a corporation or limited liability
company, the license shall terminate whenever 50% or more of the ownership
interest therein changes from that shown on the original license application.
In such event, the corporation or limited liability company, through its
officers, must make application for the issuance of a new license as provided
herein; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not
apply where the transfer of an ownership interest is made to an owner shown
on the original license application who owned 50% or more of the ownership
interest of such corporation or limited liability company at the time the
original license application was filed with the city.



   (C)   When the licensee is a partnership or corporation or limited
liability company, no change in ownership from that shown on the original
application involving the addition of a new partner of such partnership or a
new shareholder of the corporation, or a new member of the limited liability
company, who will have an ownership interest in the aggregate more than 5%,
shall be effective until such proposed change in ownership has first been
reported in writing to the Local Liquor Commissioner and said Commissioner
finds that the proposed new partner, shareholder or member is not ineligible
under the provisions of this subchapter and so advises the licensee in
writing. Any change in ownership without complying with the terms hereof
shall constitute grounds for revocation of the liquor license issued pursuant
hereto.



   (D)   Any licensee may seek to renew his or her license at the
expiration thereof pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter provided he
or she is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and provided,
further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Board of
Trustees from decreasing or increasing the number of licenses to be issued
within the city, nor shall it limit or restrict the right of the city to at
any time amend or repeal any or all provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, where ownership in
a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company or corporation
is transferred solely to any person or persons found qualified pursuant to
application under this code to hold a liquor license in the city and proven
to be a parent or a son or daughter of the prior owner and where such
transfer of ownership under this code requires the issuance of a new liquor
license, no additional fee for a new liquor license shall be assessed for the
year in which the transfer of ownership is made; instead, the fee for that
year’s liquor license shall be pro-rated between or among the owners as
follows:



      (1)   The first owner shall pay the entire amount; and



      (2)   The subsequent owner shall pay a pro-rated amount based
on the date on which ownership is acquired; and



      (3)   Upon receipt of payment of the pro-rated amount the city
shall return to the first owner that same pro-rated amount.



   (F)   Upon payment of the pro-rated amount a new license in the name
of the new owner or owners shall be issued which shall be effective only for
that portion of the year for which the prorated amount was paid.



(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.56  LICENSING OF PREMISES FOR WHICH A LICENSE HAS BEEN PREVIOUSLY
REVOKED.



   When any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter is
revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person, group of
persons, partnership, firm or corporation for a period of one year thereafter
for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the revoked
license.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.200) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.57  CESSATION OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his or her
place of business for a period of more than 30 successive days shall be
subject to having his or her license declared forfeited and lapsed by order
of the Liquor Control Commissioner.



   (B)   Provided, however, if any licensee wishes to close for repairs
or remodeling, the licensee shall so notify the Liquor Control Commissioner,
and indicate the work to be done and the construction schedule for the work.
The licensee shall also request from the Liquor Control Commissioner approval
to cease doing business for such purpose, and, if approved, the Liquor
Control Commissioner will indicate the period of time for which the temporary
cessation has been approved in the order permitting such temporary cessation
of business.



   (C)   If, due to no fault of the licensee, the remodeling or repairs
continue for a longer period of time than originally approved, the licensee
shall so notify the Liquor Control Commissioner and the order of the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall then be revised accordingly if the Local Liquor
Commissioner agrees to such extension of time. Such revised order shall
indicate a new date for completion of all work.



   (D)   However, no such business shall be allowed to cease doing
business for such remodeling or repairs for a period in excess of one year
unless and until an extension has been granted in writing by the Local Liquor
Commissioner.



   (E)   There shall be no reduction or proration of the license fee
for any period of time during remodeling.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.190) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-27-2014)



§ 111.58  LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   The Mayor shall be the Local Liquor Commissioner of the City and shall
be charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of this code
and other ordinances of the city relating to liquors and shall have the
following powers:



   (A)   To suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke for cause
after notice and hearing has been afforded as provided in § 111.63 hereof,
all licenses issued under this subchapter, and to disqualify or place
conditions upon any person acting as manager or purporting to act as manager
of any licensed premises.



   (B)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under this subchapter in order to
determine whether any of the provisions of state or federal laws or this code
or other ordinances of the city or any rules or regulations adopted by him or
her or the State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time
to examine said premises in connection therewith.



   (C)   To receive complaints from any citizens within the city that
any of the provisions of state or federal laws or this code or other
ordinances of the city or any rules or regulations adopted in connection with
the control of the sale of liquors have been or are being violated and to act
upon such complaints in the manner provided by law.



   (D)   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe
that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he or she may, upon
issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and
without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more
than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that
period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of
another business or businesses on the licensed premises such order shall not
be applicable to such other business or businesses.



   (E)   To appeal to the Circuit Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction any decision of the State Liquor Control Commission which
reverses or modifies any order issued or penalty imposed by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner.



(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.59  INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or his or
her authorized agent, and is hereby authorized and empowered from time to
time to inspect and examine the premises wherein retail liquor business is
carried on, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not all health
ordinances of the city and provisions of this code relative to the carrying
on of such business are being complied with at such premises. It shall be the
duty of every such person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions
of this subchapter to permit such inspection to be made and to exhibit the
premises to such persons making such inspection and a record of such
inspection shall be kept on file in the office of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner or the City Police Department. A failure to permit such
inspection shall be sufficient cause to revoke or suspend a license for the
premises.



(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.60  HEALTH AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation
licensed to carry on a business under the provisions of this subchapter to at
all times keep the premises where such business is conducted clean and in
proper sanitary condition. All persons employed or working in any such
premises shall be kept clean and cleanly clothed. All utensils, appliances,
vessels, receptacles, refrigerators, closets, rooms or other places or things
whatsoever which are used for the purpose of selling or offering for sale,
such liquors or of the storing or dispensing of the same, must at all times
be kept in a clean, wholesome and sanitary condition.



   (B)   Every person in charge of such premises shall keep himself or
herself and his or her employees in a clean condition and cleanly clothed and
no person who has tuberculosis or venereal or communicable skin disease or
who has any infectious or contagious disease shall engage in or be employed
in and about such business or such premises, or engaged in any way in the
handling, preparation or distribution of liquor. Every person in charge of
such premises and his employees shall obtain and keep in effect all necessary
health certificates as may be required by the Illinois Department of Public
Health and/or any other government agencies, including any certificates
required because the liquor establishment serves food as well as liquor.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.240) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.61  CONDUCT OF LICENSEES.



   Every licensee and every officer, shareholder, associate, member,
agent, representative and employee of every licensee under this subchapter
shall be subject to the following regulations, and all persons shall likewise
be subject to the applicable regulations set forth below.



   (A)   Every licensee shall conduct his or her place of business in a
quiet, decent and respectable manner and shall eject therefrom or refuse
admittance thereto all persons rendering themselves objectionable or
undesirable by reason of undue noise or other acts disturbing the peace.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor or intoxicating beverages to a person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor. Soliciting of drinks or prostitution is prohibited.



   (C)   Every licensee shall immediately report to the Police
Department any act by a person or patron which renders the person or patron
objectionable, causes undue noise or disturbance, breaches the peace or is
otherwise unlawful.



   (D)   Every license shall publicly display items offered for sale.
If an item cannot be displayed, a public sign within the business must
identify items offered for sale.



   (E)   No person licensed under the provisions hereof shall make or
allow any loud or boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language,
quarreling, singing, fighting or other disturbance of persons passing along
any street or public way in the vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the
peace and quiet of persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood
thereof.



   (F)   All licensees dispensing or serving food or liquor shall be
decently clothed. Topless or similar attire is prohibited.



   (G)   It is unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter,
waitress, bartender, entertainer or any other position, to:



      (1)   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair regions;



      (2)   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of, or simulates, the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair regions; or



      (3)   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof. It is also unlawful to allow any customer or any other person
to perform any of the foregoing acts.



      (4)   It shall also be unlawful to allow any customer or any
other person to perform any of the foregoing acts.



   (H)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any waiter,
waitress, bartender, entertainer or other employee or person to commit any of
the acts declared to be unlawful in this section. A person shall be deemed to
be a waiter, waitress, bartender or entertainer if the person acts in that
capacity without regard to whether or not the person is paid any compensation
by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed.



   (I)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any act or
form of entertainment which, when considered as whole, would be considered
obscene (for example, entertainment which predominantly appeals to prurient
interests), as the term is defined by state law.



   (J)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any of the
following: male or female striptease (regardless of whether the participants
strip off all their clothes); modeling and/or advertising for the sale of
swimsuits, undergarments, brassieres and other garments where the individuals
modeling and/or advertising solicit and/or receive any money from a customer
of the licensee during the course of such modeling or advertising; wet
T-shirt contests; or any contact sport, including, but not limited to,
wrestling in mud, jello or any substance other than air, and any similar
contest or performance.



   (K)   It is unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease.



   (L)   It is unlawful for a license holder to employ any person under
the age of 21 in any capacity where the principal duty is the sale of
alcoholic liquor. In situations where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the
principal activity but a secondary consideration, no person under the age of
21 may be involved. No person under the age of 21 may be directly involved in
the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. In addition when an alcoholic
beverage is being served by an employee under the age of 21, an employee over
the age of 21 must be present and responsible for verifying the age of any
patron being served an alcoholic beverage as being 21 years of age or older.



   (M)   Each licensee shall comply with all ordinances of the City of
Oak Forest, whether or not they related to the sale of alcohol. In addition,
all licensees will be current on all payments, fees, and fines with the City
of Oak Forest. Any violation of the City Code of Ordinances or in payments
made to the city, may be subject to penalties within this subchapter up to
and including revocation of a liquor license.



   (N)   Prohibited entertainment. It shall be unlawful to permit the
following conduct on licensed premises:



      (1)   Performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation,
or other sexual act.



      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling
of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus or genitals.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.180) (Am. Ord. 2012-06-0386O, passed 6-26-2012; Am. Ord.
2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.62  ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYER.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter by any officer, director,
shareholder, manager, associate, member, representative, or other agent or
employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be an act of such
employer or licensee and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the
same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him or her
personally.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.020) Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.63  LIMITATIONS ON SALES IN GENERAL.



   (A)   No licensee, or any officer, shareholder, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of the licensee, shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor, beer or wine to any person under the age of 21
years, to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her to be a
habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of
mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining
alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver the alcoholic liquor to another
person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service.



   (B)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of
such alcoholic liquor, nor shall he or she have the alcoholic liquor in his
or her possession.



   (C)   If a licensee or his or her agent or employee believes or has
reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall,
before making the delivery, demand the presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by any county, state or
federal agency.



   (D)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface any identification
card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification
card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No
person shall purchase, accept delivery of or have possession of alcoholic
liquor by using an identification card in violation of this section. The
possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of
age is forbidden.



   (E)   The possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor, or the
dispensing of alcoholic liquor to a minor, or the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by a minor, in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, is
not prohibited by this section.



   (F)   The prices established for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
must remain the same from opening to closing of the licensed establishment.



   (G)   The prices charged for retail sales of alcoholic liquor must
remain the same for all customers.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.210) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014) 
Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.64  MISREPRESENTATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, pour, or mix any
liquor which is represented to be of a certain quantity or kind, a given
brand name, or to be of certain ingredients when it is in fact different from
such representation. It shall be unlawful to add to or water down any liquor
while it is in its original package, or otherwise, except when a customer
orders a drink with water as a mix.



(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.65  PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY UNDERAGE PERSONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of any person
under the age of 21 to allow that person to purchase, receive, consume or
possess alcoholic liquor in violation of this subchapter upon either public
or private property within the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises
located within the city to allow any person under the age of 21 to remain on
the premises while in possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming
alcoholic liquor in violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed to be in any
establishment whose primary business is the sale of alcohol liquor, unless
that person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.230) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014) 
Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.66 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to
proceed by complaint and notice of hearing to require any licensee or manager
under this Chapter to appear at a time and place specified in said notice to
show cause why the license issued under this subchapter to said licensee by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner should not be suspended or revoked for
violations of the provisions of this subchapter, rules or regulations adopted
pursuant thereto or other applicable law.



   (B)   All such original proceedings shall be instituted by complaint
in writing, shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation alleged
to be violated and a general statement of the facts upon which such
allegation is based and shall be signed by the Liquor Control Commissioner.



   (C)   The licensee against whom complaint has been filed shall be
entitled to be served with a copy of the complaint and shall be given notice
of the time and place set for the hearing of said complaint.



   (D)   Said complaint and notice of hearing shall be served on the
licensee named therein, not less than three days prior to the date specified
in said notice of hearing unless a different time limit is required under
existing law, and if such is so required, notice shall be served in
compliance with said time period. The licensee shall be given the opportunity
to appear and defend.



   (E)   Said licensee named in said complaint and notice of hearing
shall appear at the time and place designated in said notice of hearing and
at such hearing shall have all protections and rights allowed under law from
time to time; provided, however, the failure of the licensee to appear and/or
defend shall not impair the power of the Local Liquor Commissioner to either
suspend, revoke, or not renew the license for cause.



   (F)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five days
after such hearing, if he or she  determines after such hearing that the
license should be revoked, suspended or non-renewed, state the reason or
reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation, suspension,
or non-renewal, and shall serve a copy of the order within said five days
upon the licensee.



   (G)   The licensee, after the receipt of the order of suspension or
revocation shall have the privilege, within a period of 20 days after the
receipt of such order of suspension or revocation, of appealing the order to
the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. If and only if such right exists
under Illinois law, the



licensee shall have the similar right to appeal any decision of non-renewal
within said 20-day period to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.



   (H)   The notice of hearing required hereunder shall be served on
the licensee either personally or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested. If served by certified or registered mail, the licensee
shall be conclusively deemed to be served three calendar days after such
notice was deposited in the United States mail.



   (I)   Different or additional procedures from those provided by this
subchapter may be established from time to time governing complaints and
hearings provided for herein upon being instituted by the Liquor Control
Commissioner and approved by the Mayor and City Council.



   (J)   At such hearings regarding suspension or revocation, a
verbatim record of the proceedings shall be made by a certified court
reporter or certified shorthand reporter.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.220) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.67  DISQUALIFICATION AND SUSPENSION OF MANAGER—PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to
proceed by complaint and notice of hearing to require any manager managing a
business in a licensed premise under this subchapter to appear at a time and
place specified in said notice to show cause why the manager should not be
suspended or disqualified to act as manager for violations of the provisions
of this subchapter, rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto or other
applicable law.



   (B)   All such original proceedings shall be instituted by complaint
in writing, shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation alleged
to be violated and a general statement of the facts upon which such
allegation is based and shall be signed by the Liquor Control Commissioner.



   (C)   The manager against whom complaint has been filed shall be
entitled to be served with a copy of the complaint and shall be given notice
of the time and place set for the hearing of said complaint.



   (D)   Said complaint and notice of hearing shall be served on the
manager named therein, not less than three days prior to the date specified
in said notice of hearing unless a different time limit is required under
existing law, and if such is so required, notice shall be served in
compliance with said time period. The manager shall be given the opportunity
to appear and defend.



   (E)   Said manager named in said complaint and notice of hearing
shall appear at the time and place designated in said notice of hearing and
at such hearing shall have all protections and rights allowed under law from
time to time; provided, however, the failure of the manager to appear and/or
defend shall not impair the power of the Local Liquor Commissioner to either
suspend or disqualify said manager, or place conditions on the continued
functioning of said manager if not disqualified.



   (F)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five days
after such hearing, if he or she determines after such hearing that the
manager should be disqualified, suspended or conditions placed on his or her
continued operation as manager, state the reason or reasons for such
determination in a written order of disqualification, suspension and/or
conditions, and shall serve a copy of the order within said five days upon
the manager. The decision of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be
final.



   (G)   The notice of hearing required hereunder shall be served on
the manager either personally or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested. If served by certified or registered mail, the manager
shall be conclusively deemed to be served three calendar days after such
notice was deposited in the United States mail.



   (H)   Different or additional procedures from those provided by this
subchapter may be established from time to time governing complaints and
hearings provided for herein upon being instituted by the Liquor Control
Commissioner and approved by the Mayor and City Council.



   (I)   At such hearings regarding suspension or revocation, a
verbatim record of the proceedings shall be made by a certified court
reporter or certified shorthand reporter.



(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.68  OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS TO APPLY.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner,
proprietor, and/or other person in charge of any place within the city where
liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other chapters
of this code, other ordinances of the city, and/or of the statutes of the
State of Illinois or of the United States of America. The failure of any
licensee, owner, proprietor, and/or other person in charge of any such
establishment to obey and/or comply with said code, ordinances, and/or
statutes shall be a violation hereof and shall also constitute cause for the
suspension, revocation, and/or termination of any liquor license issued by
the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.030) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.69  CITY HEARINGS—TESTIMONY REQUIRED.



   (A)   As a condition attached to the issuance of, or renewal of, an
liquor license hereunder, it shall be the duty of each licensee to require
all owners, officers, agents, and employees of licensee to testify (subject
to any constitutional restrictions) at any hearing that may be conducted by
the city, or any of its committees, commissions, boards or agencies, or the
Local Liquor Commissioner, regardless of whether they would otherwise be
subject to subpoena power, when such hearings may relate directly or
indirectly to any events or occurrences of which they may have knowledge
arising out of their position as owner, officer, agent or employee of the
licensee.



   (B)   It shall further be the duty of licensee to inform all such
owners, officers, agents, and employees of their duty to testify hereunder
and licensee shall make the same a condition of employment for all
licensee’s employees.



   (C)   If any such officer, agent, or employee fails or refuses to
testify to the full extent of their knowledge at any such hearing when
requested so to do by the city, such failure shall be deemed to constitute a
violation of this section by licensee, unless such failure to refusal is
based upon a constitutional right to not so testify.



   (D)   The violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute due cause for the nonrenewal, suspension and/or revocation of the
license of the licensee. Any such non-renewal, suspension or revocation shall
be effective only after compliance with the procedures and provisions set
forth in § 111.69 hereof or otherwise in conformity with law. The
suspension, revocation or non-renewal of such licensee shall be an additional
remedy and shall not prevent or exclude a prosecutorial action(s) for a fine
under § 111.72 hereof.



(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



§ 111.70  PROHIBITED SALES OR PROMOTIONS.



   (A)   All licensees selling alcoholic liquor to be served and
consumed on the licensed premises are prohibited from engaging in any of the
following practices:



      (1)   Selling, offering or delivering to any person or persons
any drinks sold on the basis of two or more drinks for the price of one drink;



      (2)   Selling, offering or delivering to any person an
unlimited number of drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the public or full meal (banquet) and
hors d’oeuvres packages which are open to the public;



      (3)   Increasing the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a
drink without increasing proportionately the price charged for the drink
during the same calendar week;



      (4)   Encouraging or permitting any game or contest which
involves drinking, or the awarding of drinks as prizes on the licensed
premises; and/or



      (5)   Advertising or promoting in any way, whether within or
without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section.



   (B)   The prohibitions provided in division (A) of this section
shall not prohibit liquor licensees from:



      (1)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;



      (2)   Including a drink as part of a meal package;



      (3)   Offering free liquor (spirits, wine and beer) tastings;
or



      (4)   Offering room service to registered guests in hotels
licensed for such services.



   (C)   Licensees shall make nonalcoholic beverages and coffee
available for purchase by any person during the licensee’s hours of
operation.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.250) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2015-08-0515O, passed 8-26-2014)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.71  APPEALS.



   Pursuant to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9, any appeal
authorized thereunder from an order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and it is hereby resolved that such review
shall be solely on the record.



   (A)   A certified official record of any proceeding that is subject
to appeal under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9, before the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be taken and prepared by a certified
court reporter or certified shorthand reporter and shall be filed by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner with the State Liquor Commission within
five days after notice is received by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
of the filing of an appeal from an order of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.



   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power and right
to appeal to the Circuit Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction
any decision of the State Liquor Control Commission which reverses or
modifies any order issued or penalty imposed by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.



(Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)




RESTAURANTS




§ 111.90  LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a restaurant in the city without first
having obtained a license therefor or without full compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.91  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for licenses under this subchapter shall be made in writing
to the City Clerk on a form to be furnished by him or her and shall comply
with the general provisions of this code and ordinances relating to licenses.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 111.92  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for licenses under this subchapter shall be established
by the City Council.



(Ord. 2006-04-0021O, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 111.40
through 111.71 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   Revocation of licenses. In addition to the penalty
provided in division (B)(1) above, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall have the power to revoke, to refuse to renew or to suspend licenses
granted under §§ 111.40 through 111.71.



(2000 Code, § 5.08.280) (Am. Ord. 2014-03-0488O, passed 3-25-2014)



CHAPTER 112: VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



Limousine Services



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Issuance of licenses; fees; inventory of vehicles



   112.03   Vehicle identification



   112.04   Insurance



   112.05   Nontransferability of licenses



   112.06   Revocation of licenses



   112.07   Vehicle inspections



   112.08   Inspection stations



   112.09   Drivers to be licensed



   112.10   Daily manifests



   112.11   Solicitation of passengers



   112.12   Use for criminal purposes



   112.13   Payment for services rendered



Taxicabs



   112.25   Licenses required



   112.26   License application



   112.27   License fee



   112.28   Use of stands



   112.29   Age of licensee



   112.30   Records



   112.31   Suspension and revocation of licenses; inspections by
Police Chief



   112.32   Display of owner’s name on vehicle



   112.33   Hours of operation



   112.34   Drivers



   112.35   Insurance



   112.36   Condition of taxicabs; repairs



   112.37   Meters; receipts



   112.38   Rates of fare



   112.39   Refusal to pay fare



   112.40   Overcharging



   112.41   Advance payment of fares



   112.42   Refusal to convey passengers



   112.43   Parking on streets



   112.44   Soliciting business at railroad stations and on streets



   112.45   Exceptions to subchapter



Towing Services



   112.60   Definitions



   112.61   Application for contract



   112.62   Investigation of application; approval



   112.63   Insurance



   112.64   Heavy-duty towing list; liability of owner



   112.65   Costs, records and inspections



   112.66   Towing vehicles called on rotation basis; exception



   112.67   Termination of licenses; establishment of maximum fees



   112.68   Rules and regulation



   112.69   Soliciting business



   112.70   Services not under contract with city



   112.71   Towing or repair of city vehicles/seized vehicles



 



   112.99   Penalty




LIMOUSINE SERVICES




§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LICENSEE.  A person to whom a limousine license has been issued.



   LIMOUSINE SERVICE.  A service providing or offering to provide
transportation in a chauffeur-driven motor vehicle designed to carry eight or
fewer passengers, but not including the carrying of passengers over fixed
routes, service to or from an airport where regular commercial air passenger
service is provided and service in connection with funerals.



   LIMOUSINE SERVICE LICENSE or LICENSE.  A license issued by city for
the operation of a limousine service.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.010)



§ 112.02  ISSUANCE OF LICENSES; FEES; INVENTORY OF VEHICLES.



   Limousine service licenses shall be issued by the Business License
Commissioner after the applicant has filed an application for the license and
has shown that the operation of the limousine service will comply with this
subchapter and with all applicable laws and ordinances. Each vehicle shall be
submitted to an inspection as provided in § 112.07 prior to the issuance of
the initial license. The annual fee for the license shall be payable in
advance and shall be $100, plus $100 for each vehicle used in the business,
plus the appropriate square footage fees as set forth in § 110.007. The
licensee shall provide to the city a complete list of each vehicle used for
limousine service and shall promptly notify the city of any vehicles added or
removed from service.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.020)



§ 112.03  VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.



   The City Clerk shall issue a card or decal for each vehicle covered by
a limousine service license, and the card or decal shall be displayed by
fastening it inside the vehicle.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.030)



§ 112.04  INSURANCE.



   Before a licensee operates a limousine service within the city, he or
she shall secure and maintain in force at all times a liability insurance
policy issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, covering
each vehicle to be used for limousine service, with limits of not less than
$100,000 for bodily injury to any one person, not less than $300,000 for
bodily injuries to more than one person that are sustained in the same
accident, and not less than $50,000 for property damage resulting from any
one accident. A current copy of the insurance policy or a certificate of the
insurance shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.040)



§ 112.05  NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.



   No limousine service license, nor any rights or privileges thereunder,
shall be sold, transferred, leased or assigned.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.050)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   The Business License Commissioner shall revoke a limousine service
license from a limousine service for repeated violations of this subchapter
and for failure to keep in effect the insurance required by this chapter. No
license shall be revoked without 30 days’ written notice specifying the
reasons for the revocation. Within the 30-day period, the license holder may
request a public hearing before the Business License Commissioner to review
the basis of the revocation.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.060)



§ 112.07  VEHICLE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Each vehicle operated under authority of a limousine service
license shall be inspected from time to time, and at least annually, by the
Police Department, to ensure continued maintenance of safe operating
conditions. The Chief of Police shall send notice to all license holders to
submit their vehicles for inspection.



   (B)   After receiving notice from the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, the licensee shall be allowed seven days to take the licensed
vehicle or vehicles to an inspection station for inspection. The license of
all licensed vehicles not inspected within that period will be suspended by
direction of the Business Licensing Commissioner.



   (C)   The inspection will include, but not be limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Vehicle make, year and identification number;



      (2)   State license number and year;



      (3)   City vehicle license number and year;



      (4)   Vehicle color;



      (5)   Vehicle number;



      (6)   Company name;



      (7)   Service brakes;



      (8)   Emergency brakes;



      (9)   Horn;



      (10)   Rear view mirror;



      (11)   Windshield wipers and washers;



      (12)   Headlights;



      (13)   Tail lights;



      (14)   Stop lights;



      (15)   Turn signals;



      (16)   Speedometer;



      (17)   Taximeter;



      (18)   Rates displayed;



      (19)   Steering;



      (20)   Interior condition;



      (21)   Exterior condition;



      (22)   Windows;



      (23)   Tires; and



      (24)   Current bond sticker.



   (D)   Any vehicle failing to pass the inspection will be given a
period of five working days to allow for repairs. The vehicle cannot be used
as a vehicle for hire until repairs have been completed and it passes
inspection. If the vehicle does not pass reinspection within the
five-working-day period, the license will be suspended by direction of the
Business License Commissioner.



   (E)   The Chief of Police shall prescribe reasonable standards which
vehicles must satisfy to pass the inspections required prior to licensing and
periodically thereafter, which standards shall be designed to assure that
vehicles licensed by the city are mechanically dependable, safe and clean and
that they satisfy the requirements of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.070)



§ 112.08  INSPECTION STATIONS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall designate those facilities which may
serve as inspection stations to conduct the vehicle inspections required by
this subchapter, which stations may be within or without the city. He or she
shall establish procedures for conducting the inspections and minimum
standards for vehicle approval. He or she shall supply inspection stations
with certified inspection forms, numbered certified vehicle inspection
stickers and such other supplies as may be required to perform the duties
required by this subchapter and the regulations established hereunder.



   (B)   A list of authorized inspection stations shall be kept by the
Chief of Police and shall be given to each vehicle owner, together with the
notice that vehicles must be inspected. An owner may use the authorized
inspection station of his or her choice.



   (C)   Inspection stations shall charge an inspection fee authorized
by the Chief of Police for all vehicle inspections required under this
subchapter. There shall be no charge for a reinspection within the five
working days allowed for repairs to a vehicle that fails the inspection. The
authorized inspection fee shall be charged for reinspections made after the
five-working-day grace period.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.080)



§ 112.09  DRIVERS TO BE LICENSED.



   Each driver shall be licensed as required by state law.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.090)



§ 112.10  DAILY MANIFESTS.



   Each driver of a limousine shall maintain a daily manifest in which
shall be recorded, in connection with each trip, the time and place of
origin, the destination, the time and place of termination, the amount of the
fare, the name of the driver and the identity of the limousine. The manifest
form shall be furnished to the driver by the licensee. The licensee shall
preserve each daily manifest for a period of four years and shall submit any
information contained in the manifest forms at the request of the Police
Department or the Director of Public Safety.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.100)



§ 112.11  SOLICITATION OF PASSENGERS.



   No person shall solicit passengers for limousine service at a taxicab
stand.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.110)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.12  USE FOR CRIMINAL PURPOSES.



   It is unlawful for a limousine service driver to permit any person to
occupy or use a limousine for the purpose of sale and/or transportation of
drugs, prostitution, lewdness, indecent conduct or other criminal activity.
It is unlawful for a driver to direct, or to offer or agree to direct, any
person to any place or person for the purpose of sale of drugs, prostitution,
lewdness, indecent conduct or other criminal activity.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.120)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.13  PAYMENT FOR SERVICES RENDERED.



   It is unlawful for a person hiring a limousine service to refuse to pay
the fare for such service, and no person shall hire a limousine with intent
to defraud the licensee or driver of the value of the service.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.130)  Penalty, see § 112.99




TAXICABS




§ 112.25  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the
business of operating a taxicab service in the city without first obtaining a
license therefor.



   (B)   In addition to the license required by division (A) of this
section, each taxicab used in the business shall bear the license required by
§§ 70.20 through 70.24.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.010)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.26  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Each application for a license to engage in, conduct, manage
or carry on the business of operating a taxicab service shall be made in
writing to Council and shall set forth:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The number of taxicabs to be used in the business and a
complete description of each taxicab;



      (3)   A statement that each taxicab used in the business will
be operated by a person who is 21 years of age or older, who is of sound
physical condition and who is the holder of a valid and unrevoked state
driver’s license and chauffeur’s license;



      (4)   A statement that each taxicab used in the business will
be covered by public liability and property damage insurance in amounts
required by this subchapter; and



      (5)   A statement that public convenience and necessity
require the taxicab service.



   (B)   Upon receipt of any such application by Council, the Mayor
shall appoint a committee to investigate the same, which committee shall
report the results of its investigation, together with its recommendations,
at the next regular meeting of Council. Council shall thereupon consider the
application, together with the report and recommendations of the committee.
If Council finds that the public convenience and necessity require the
operation of the taxicab service in the city and that each taxicab proposed
to be used and sought to be licensed complies with the requirements of this
subchapter, it shall, by resolution, direct the Business License Commissioner
to issue the license upon payment of the required fee; otherwise, it shall
deny the application and notify the applicant thereof.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.020)



§ 112.27  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for the license required by § 112.25(A) is $100 per
vehicle, plus the appropriate square footage fee as set forth in § 110.007.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.030)



§ 112.28  USE OF STANDS.



   No person shall park or stand a vehicle of any kind in a public taxicab
or hack stand in the municipality, or otherwise make use of such a stand,
unless the owner of the vehicle has obtained a license for that purpose as
provided in this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.040)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.29  AGE OF LICENSEE.



   No taxicab license shall be issued to any person who is under 21 years
of age.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.050)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.30  RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall keep a register of the names of persons to whom a
taxicab license is granted, the date of issuance, the number of the license
and the description of the vehicle licensed.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.060)



§ 112.31  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES; INSPECTIONS BY POLICE
CHIEF.



   (A)   The Mayor or the Business License Commissioner may revoke any
license issued under this subchapter for a violation of or a failure to
comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter, any applicable
provision of this business regulation title or any state or city traffic
ordinance. In such an event, the fee paid for the unexpired term of the
license shall not be refunded.



   (B)   If any taxicab licensed under this subchapter becomes unsafe
for the transportation of passengers or unsightly in appearance, the license
for the taxicab may be suspended by the Mayor or the Business License
Commissioner until the vehicle is put in fit condition for public use. The
Chief of Police shall inspect every vehicle licensed under this subchapter a
sufficient number of times each year to ensure compliance with this
subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.070)



§ 112.32  DISPLAY OF OWNER’S NAME ON VEHICLE.



   Every vehicle licensed under this subchapter shall bear, on the outside
thereof, in a conspicuous place, the name of the owner thereof, in letters
not less than two inches high, which letters shall be of a color in contrast
to the color of the vehicle and shall be properly proportioned and legible.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.080)



§ 112.33  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Each licensee under this subchapter shall maintain 24-hour service each
day of the year and shall meet all trains where reasonably possible. If any
such licensee discontinues operation for a period of five days, the Mayor may
revoke the license of the licensee.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.090)



§ 112.34  DRIVERS.



   No taxicab shall be driven by or operated by any person who is not of
sound physical condition, by any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs, or by any person who is not a holder of a valid
and unprovoked state driver’s license and chauffeur’s license. Any
violation of this section, in addition to the penalty provided in § 112.99,
shall be grounds for revocation of the license for the vehicle by the Mayor.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.35  INSURANCE.



   Each licensee under this subchapter shall carry public liability and
property damage insurance covering each vehicle operated by it for the sum of
at least $50,000 for property damage, $100,000 for injury or death of any one
person and $300,000 for injury or death of more than one person in any one
accident. The policy shall be deposited with the City Clerk before the
issuance of the license required by this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.110)



§ 112.36  CONDITION OF TAXICABS; REPAIRS.



   Every taxicab shall be kept, at all times, in good mechanical condition
and shall be equipped with all equipment, in good working order, required for
motor vehicles by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. The
Mayor may, at all reasonable times, examine or cause to be examined any
vehicle licensed under this subchapter. If the same is found to be in an
unsafe condition, the Mayor may require that any defect be remedied. If the
defect is not remedied, the Mayor may suspend or revoke the license for the
vehicle.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.120)



§ 112.37  METERS; RECEIPTS.



   (A)   No taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with a
meter in good condition to record the amount to be charged on each metered
trip, which amount shall be shown in figures visible to the passenger.



   (B)   Upon paying his or her fare, each passenger shall be given a
receipt showing the amount so paid and the name of the company or person
operating the taxicab, together with the number of the taxicab if the company
or person operates more than one taxicab in the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.130)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.38  RATES OF FARE.



   (A)   The price or rate of fare to be asked or demanded by an
operator or owner of a taxicab shall not exceed the maximum set by ordinance
or other regulation.



   (B)   The distance to which the rate set forth in division (A) of
this section applies shall be determined by the nearest traveled route from
the point where the passenger enters the vehicle to the point where the
passenger alights therefrom.



   (C)   There shall be affixed on the inside of each vehicle, in a
conspicuous place, and in such manner that the name may be easily read by any
person riding in the vehicle, a card upon which shall be printed in plain,
legible type the rate of fare provided for in this section.



   (D)   Any passenger shall be allowed to have conveyed upon any such
vehicle, without charge, his or her ordinary traveling baggage, provided that
ordinary hand baggage shall not be construed to mean trunks or sample cases.



   (E)   Upon the request of any passenger, the driver of the vehicle
shall give the person requesting the same a receipt for the amount of the
fare demanded and paid.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.140)



§ 112.39  REFUSAL TO PAY FARE.



   No passenger shall fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the
termination of a taxicab trip. All disputes as to fare shall be determined by
the officer in charge of the Police Department. Failure to comply with the
determination shall subject the offending party to a charge of disorderly
conduct.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.150) Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.40  OVERCHARGING.



   The owner, driver or operator of any vehicle licensed under this
subchapter, who demands and receives a fare in excess of that which is
provided for in this subchapter, shall return the excess received and, in
addition, shall be subject to the penalty provided in § 112.99 and may have
his or her license revoked.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.160)



§ 112.41  ADVANCE PAYMENT OF FARES.



   Every owner, driver or operator of a taxicab may demand, in advance,
his or her fare of the person employing him or her or entering his or her
vehicle and may refuse to convey any person who does not comply with the
demand.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.170)



§ 112.42  REFUSAL TO CONVEY PASSENGERS.



   Except as provided in § 112.41, no owner, driver or operator of a
vehicle licensed under this subchapter shall refuse to convey in the
municipality any person with or without hand baggage when applied to for that
purpose, or, having undertaken to convey the person, shall omit or neglect to
do so.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.180)



§ 112.43  PARKING ON STREETS.



   No person in charge of any public taxicab or vehicle carrying
passengers for hire shall permit the same, except when receiving or
discharging passengers or when instructed by the passenger to do so, to stand
on any street, avenue or alley in the municipality for any period longer than
five minutes, except as otherwise provided by Council.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.190)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.44  SOLICITING BUSINESS AT RAILROAD STATIONS AND ON STREETS.



   No owner, driver or operator of any vehicle licensed under this
subchapter shall solicit, by word, gesture or otherwise, the patronage of any
person at any railroad station or upon any public street in the municipality.
No such owner, driver or operator shall stand or be upon the platform of any
railroad until the expiration of three minutes after the departure of a
train, except to assist persons who have indicated a desire to patronize the
vehicle in his or her charge.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.200)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.45  EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter shall not apply to ambulances, passenger buses or
vehicles designed for carrying more than seven passengers.



(2000 Code, § 5.56.210)




TOWING SERVICES




§ 112.60  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF OF POLICE. The executive head of the Police Department of the
city or his or her designated representative.



   TOWING LIST.  A list maintained by the Police Department containing
the names of vehicle towing services licensed by the city and approved
pursuant to §§ 112.61 through 112.69 to respond to a request for the towing
of a vehicle made by the Department. A vehicle towing service on the list
must be within ten miles of the corporate boundaries of the city.



   VEHICLE TOWING SERVICE.  A person engaged in the business of, or
offering the services of, a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby motor
vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise moved from one place to another by
use of a motor vehicle adapted to and designed for that purpose.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.010) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.61  APPLICATION FOR CONTRACT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to perform towing work at police request
shall, in addition to meeting the requirements of Chapter 110, submit an
application for vehicle towing service list to the Business License
Commissioner. This application shall include the name of the owner, his or
her home and business address, his or her home and business phone; the name
under which the person does or will trade; the location, size and security
features of the storage lot on which towed vehicles will be stored; the
location to which the public must come to claim stored vehicles; a statement
of willingness to provide vehicle towing service on a continuous 24-hour a
day basis each day of the year; a list of the towing equipment, its size and
capacity; a complete listing of insurance policies, carriers and agents the
owner would place into effect upon approval; a statement that the vehicle
towing service owner will accept responsibility for any and all personal
property left in towed and stored vehicles, along with a description of the
place he or she would use to adequately protect the property left in towed or
stored vehicles; and a description of the two-way mobile communications and
base station to be used on each towing vehicle and at the office where calls
are received.



   (B)   No vehicle towing service may be put on this list until the
applicant has furnished all information requested by the Business License
Commissioner or any other municipal official and until all other applicable
provisions of these codified ordinances have been complied with.



   (C)   Any vehicle towing service shall become eligible to be listed
on the towing list and participate in the assignment of service calls by the
police department if it has maintained its principal place of business in the
city for a period of at least six months prior to the date of application, or
the primary owner’s permanent residence is in the city, and meets the
requirements set forth in this subchapter.



   (D)   The fee to be paid to the city in order to be placed on the
towing list is $500. The initial fee is due and payable upon approval of the
application provided for in this subchapter.  The renewal fee shall be paid
on each anniversary date.



   (E)   Application forms shall be prepared and kept on file by the
Business License Commissioner.



   (F)   The Chief of Police and the Business License Commissioner,
shall determine the appropriate number of towing services to be placed on the
towing list. Factors to consider in determining the appropriate number of
towing services include:



      (1)   The number of tows performed on a regular basis;



      (2)   The level and quality of services provided to the public
by the approved towing services; and



      (3)   Emergency needs for the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.020)  (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010; Am.
Ord. 2015-09-0556O, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 112.62  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; APPROVAL.



   Within 30 days after receiving an application for vehicle towing
service list, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to determine
the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application. Upon
completion of his or her investigation, the Chief shall forward a copy of the
application to the Business License Commissioner along with a recommendation
for approval or disapproval and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. Upon
receiving the application, the Business License Commissioner, on behalf of
the city, shall determine whether or not the applicant has complied with
necessary standards and criteria. If he or she finds that the applicant is
qualified, the applicant’s name shall be placed at the end of the towing
list.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.030)(Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.63  INSURANCE.



   (A)   No vehicle towing service shall be placed on the list until
the applicant has deposited with the Business License Commissioner the
following insurance policies:



      (1)   Garagekeeper’s policy. A garagekeeper’s legal
liability policy covering fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion in
the amount of $10,000, with each vehicle suffering damage being deemed a
separate claim; and



      (2)   Liability policy. A liability policy covering the
operation of the owner’s business, equipment or other vehicles or any
bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the minimum amount
of $300,000 for more than one person killed or injured in any accident and an
additional $100,000 for property damage.



   (B)   Each policy required by this section must contain an
endorsement by the carrier providing 90 days’ notice to both the city and
the insured in the event of any change in coverage under the policy.



   (C)   A certificate of the policy or a copy of the policy shall be
carried in the cab of each tow truck.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.040)  (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010) 
Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.64  HEAVY-DUTY TOWING LIST; LIABILITY OF OWNER.



   (A)   A vehicle towing service owner shall provide towing vehicles
of sufficient size and weight to remove and tow vehicles other than
tractor-trailer rigs. Owners with towing vehicles that can haul
tractor-trailer rigs shall be placed on the regular list and on a special
heavy-duty towing list. The heavy-duty towing list may be used any time
heavy-duty towing is required.



   (B)   All towing vehicles shall conform with all sections of the
Illinois Vehicle Code regulating towing vehicles, as well as with all other
applicable state statutes and city ordinances.



   (C)   The vehicle towing service owner shall assume all liability,
shall indemnify and save the city harmless from liability for damage
sustained by vehicles while being towed or stored and for all personal
injuries occurring to any of the firm’s employees or other persons and
shall maintain the required insurance policies. The owner shall not release
any vehicle directly impounded by the city without written authorization from
the Police Department.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.050) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.65  COSTS, RECORDS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All costs incident to towing and storage shall be paid by the
vehicle owner to the vehicle towing service and a receipt for payment shall
be issued to the owner. The city shall assume no liability or responsibility
for any vehicle removed from any place without the authority of the Chief of
Police. The vehicle towing service owner shall maintain approved records and
claim check systems to ensure release of a vehicle to the rightful owner or
authorized person. The records shall be open to the Police Department for
investigation of specific complaints and for compiling surveys under §§
112.61 through 112.69. The owner of any vehicle towing service shall permit
any person appointed by the Chief to inspect his or her towing vehicles,
vault, security room or storage area at such times as the Chief deems
appropriate.



   (B)   In addition to towing and storage fees to be collected,
vehicle towing service shall collect a $25 administrative fee from each tow
to be paid to the city.  The vehicle towing service shall maintain records
of such administrative fees and after the first of each month remit to the
City Clerk by business check these administrative fees collected in the
previous month.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.060) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.66  TOWING VEHICLES CALLED ON ROTATION BASIS; EXCEPTION.



   The Chief of Police may ensure that towing vehicles are called to the
scene of an accident or to impound vehicles on a rotation basis, distributing
the calls on an equitable basis from the towing list. The Chief shall not
call or cause to be called any towing vehicle not licensed with the city
unless all licensed towing vehicles are unavailable. The Chief may call a
towing vehicle out of sequence where proximity to the wreck and estimated
response time make it more practical to do so. The heavy-duty vehicle towing
list may be used pursuant to § 112.64 when heavy-duty towing is required. 
However, the Chief of Police at his or her discretion may include on the
towing list, contingency vehicle towing services that do not meet eligibility
requirements in emergency cases tow services exceed capacity of registered
firms.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.070)  (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.67  TERMINATION OF LICENSES; ESTABLISHMENT OF MAXIMUM FEES.



   (A)   The Business License Commissioner may terminate the license of
any owner on the towing list when he or she finds:



      (1)   The listing was secured by fraud or by the concealment
of a material fact by the towing vehicle service owner and such fact, if
known, would have caused the Commissioner to refuse to put the service on the
list;



      (2)   The towing vehicle service owner has violated any of the
requirements or regulations established by the Chief of Police under §
112.68;



      (3)   The city is not satisfied with the general services of
the owner and/or his or her employees or with the cooperation it has received
while rendering service; and/or



      (4)   Any other cause constitutes justification for the
termination.



   (B)   The Chief, after consultation with towing vehicle service
owners licensed under §§ 112.61 through 112.69, shall establish a table of
maximum fees that may be charged by the owners.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.080) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.68  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police shall establish and cause the enforcement of such
reasonable rules and regulations for towing vehicles as, from time to time,
he or she deems appropriate for the safety, well-being and protection of
residents within his or her jurisdiction and their property.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.090) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.69  SOLICITING BUSINESS.



   No owner or operator of a towing vehicle shall respond to the scene of
an accident or emergency for the purpose of towing vehicles unless
specifically called there by the police or by a person involved in the
accident or emergency. This section is intended to prohibit towing vehicle
service owners from soliciting business at the scene of an accident or
emergency and shall not be construed to prohibit any towing vehicle from
contracting with any person, provided that the towing vehicle service owner
or his or her agent or employee does not solicit towing contracts at the
scene of an accident or emergency.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.100) (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010) 
Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.70  SERVICES NOT UNDER CONTRACT WITH CITY.



   (A)   License required; application and fee.



      (1)   No person shall maintain or operate a vehicle towing
service in the city without first obtaining a license therefor.



      (2)   An application for a license required by division (A)(1)
of this section shall specify the number of vehicles owned and operated by
the applicant.



   (B)   Parking of towing vehicles. No person shall stand or park a
towing vehicle upon any service station, garage or private or public property
unless the owner thereof has obtained a license as provided in division (A)
of this section.



   (C)   Age of applicant. No license required by division (A) of this
section shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age.



   (D)   Registration. The Business License Commissioner shall keep a
register of the names of persons to whom the license required by division (A)
of this section is granted, the date of issuance, the number of the license
and a description of the vehicle or vehicles licensed.



   (E)   License revocation or suspension; inspection of vehicles.



      (1)   The Mayor or the Business License Commissioner may
revoke any license issued under this section for a violation of or failure to
comply with any of the provisions of the section or for a violation of any
state or city traffic regulation. In such event, the fee paid for the
unexpired term of the license shall not be refunded.



      (2)   If any towing vehicle licensed under this section
becomes unsafe for towing or unsightly in appearance, the license for the
vehicle may be suspended by the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner
until the vehicle is put in safe condition for towing service. Every vehicle
licensed under §§ 112.60 through 112.70 shall be subject to inspection by
the chief twice each year to ensure compliance with the provisions of the
section.



   (F)   Towing vehicles for storage in city. No person shall tow or
allow to be towed any motor vehicle into the city for the purpose of storage.



(2000 Code, § 5.62.110)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord.
2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.71  TOWING OR REPAIR OF CITY VEHICLES/SEIZED VEHICLES.



   Vehicle towing services on the towing list shall tow city vehicles or
complete minor roadside repairs (change flat tire, etc.) at no cost to the
city.  In addition, no cost shall be charged for vehicles to be seized by
the city and waiting judgment from the court or State of Illinois to become
the possession of the city.



(Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any
provision of §§ 112.01 through 112.13 shall be fined not less than $100 or
more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to
any fee, deposit, charge, surcharge, interest, insurance or bond requirement
or equitable remedy, including, but not limited, to injunctive relief, that
may be assessed or imposed under authority of any provision of §§ 112.01
through 112.13 or any other provision of these codified ordinances.



(2000 Code, § 5.34.140)  (Am. Ord. 2010-02-0277O, passed 2-23-2010)



CHAPTER 113: ADVERTISING AND MERCHANDISING



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Deceptive advertisements and sales



   113.03   Misrepresenting new merchandise



   113.04   Standards and style of merchandise



   113.05   Time limit for deliveries



   113.06   Pricing



   113.07   Brand or identity



   113.08   Sponsorship, affiliation or certification



   113.09   Statements of material facts



   113.10   Sufficient quantities



   113.11   Sales tax



   113.12   Revocation of licenses and permits



Handbills



   113.25   Definitions



   113.26   Depositing or distributing in public places



   113.27   Placing on vehicles



   113.28   Distribution on vacant premises



   113.29   Distribution prohibited where requested



   113.30   Distribution on inhabited private premises



   113.31   Exceptions



Outdoor Advertisers



   113.45   Outdoor advertiser defined



   113.46   License required; application



   113.47   License fee



   113.48   Consent of owner required



   113.49   Disposal of refuse



   113.50   Weeds and grass at base of billboards



   113.51   Obscene and unlawful advertisements



   113.52   Damaging signs or advertisements



   113.53   Posting of name of advertiser



   113.54   Compliance with state and city regulations



   113.55   Exceptions to subchapter




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVERTISEMENT.  An attempt, by publication, dissemination,
solicitation or circulation, to induce any person, directly or indirectly, to
enter into any obligation or acquire any title or interest in any
merchandise, including every word or device used to disguise any form of
business solicitation, such as the terms “renewal,” “invoice,”
“bill,” “statement” or “reminder,” to create an impression of
existing obligation when there is none, or other language to mislead any
person in relation to any sought after commercial transaction.



   MERCHANDISE.  Objects, wares, goods, commodities, intangibles, real
estate and services.



   SALE.  Any sale, offer for sale or attempt to sell any merchandise for
cash or on credit.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.010)



§ 113.02  DECEPTIVE ADVERTISEMENTS AND SALES.



   No person shall use any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise
or misrepresentations or conceal, suppress or omit any material fact with
intent that others rely upon the concealment, suppression or omission, in
connection with the sale for cash or on credit or advertisement of any
merchandise, whether or not any person has in fact been misled. However,
nothing in this subchapter shall apply to the owner or publisher of a
newspaper, magazine, publication or printed matter wherein such an
advertisement appears, or to the owner or operator of a radio or television
station which disseminates such an advertisement, when the owner, publisher
or operator has no knowledge of the intent, design or purpose of the
advertiser. Further, nothing in this subchapter shall apply to any
advertisement which is subject to and complies with the rules and regulations
of, and the statutes administered by, the Federal Trade Commission.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.03  MISREPRESENTING NEW MERCHANDISE.



   No person shall represent that merchandise is new if it is
deteriorated, altered, reconditioned, reclaimed, used or secondhand.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  STANDARDS AND STYLE OF MERCHANDISE.



   No person shall represent that merchandise or services are of a
particular standard, grade or quality, or that merchandise is of a particular
style or model, if it is not.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.040) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.05  TIME LIMIT FOR DELIVERIES.



   No person shall fail to deliver ordered merchandise within 60 days from
the date of order or contract, unless otherwise provided in the order or
contract, or unless the customer is notified in writing of the reason for the
delay and the merchandise is delivered in less than a total of 90 days or a
refund is offered within 90 days of the date of the order or contract.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.06  PRICING.



   No person shall make false or misleading statements of fact concerning
the reasons for or the existence or amounts of price reductions, or engage in
any other pricing conduct that causes confusion or misunderstanding.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.060) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.07  BRAND OR IDENTITY.



   No person shall represent that merchandise or services are those of
another when, in fact, they are not.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.08  SPONSORSHIP, AFFILIATION OR CERTIFICATION.



   (A)   No person shall cause confusion or misunderstanding concerning
the course, sponsorship, approval or certification of merchandise or services.



   (B)   No person shall cause confusion, misunderstanding or false or
deceptive representation concerning affiliation, connection or association
with, or certification by another.



   (C)   No person shall represent that merchandise or services have
sponsorship or approval concerning the source of or certification of
merchandise or services when, in fact, they do not have such approval or
sponsorship.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.09  STATEMENTS OF MATERIAL FACTS.



   No person shall fail to state a material fact, if that failure tends to
deceive or mislead.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.10  SUFFICIENT QUANTITIES.



   No person shall advertise for sale at a stated price any item when a
sufficient quantity of the advertised item is not readily available to be
sold to purchasers at the advertised price during the effective period of the
advertisement. As used in this section, “readily available” means
available to the customer in an area of the store normally used to display
the type of merchandise in question, except in a case where the space
available for the item is limited, in which case a sample of the item may be
placed in a prominent location, accompanied by a prominent, written notice
clearly stating that the item is in stock and may be obtained upon request.
“Sufficient quantities” means available in quantities sufficient to meet
reasonably expected customer demand through medium response.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.100) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.11  SALES TAX.



   No person shall charge a higher amount of tax than the legal rate set
forth by law and regulation existing at the time of sale.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.110)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.12  REVOCATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   In addition to the penalty provided in § 10.99, any violation of this
subchapter may be grounds for revocation of any license or permit issued by
the city to the violator. However, nothing in this section shall be construed
to preclude the revocation of any license or permit for a violation of any
other provision of these codified ordinances.



(2000 Code, § 5.06.120)




HANDBILLS




§ 113.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any printed or written matter or any sample,
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed
or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter or literature which:



      (1)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity
or other thing;



      (2)   Directs attention to a business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;



      (3)   Directs attention to or advertises a meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or other event for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit, but this division shall not apply
where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose
of defraying the expenses incident to the event. Nothing contained in this
division shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of
any such event without a license, where the license is or may be required by
any law of this state or under any ordinance or regulation of the city; and/or



      (4)   While containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as an advertiser or distributor.



   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any printed or written matter or any sample,
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any
matter or literature not included in the definition of “commercial
handbill.”



   POLITICAL PAMPHLETS.



      (1)   Any printed or written matter or any sample, device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter or literature which:



         (a)   Advertises the credentials, positions, advantages
or accomplishments of an individual seeking elective office or of a
registered political party or an issue coming before the electorate; or



         (b)   Advertises an opposing position to an individual
seeking elective office or to a registered political party or an issue coming
before the electorate.



      (2)   In all cases, the POLITICAL PAMPHLET must contain an
inscription which is clearly visible, readable and comprehensible,
establishing the individual or group responsible for the preparation,
printing and distribution of the document and the opinions enumerated therein.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  A dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
includes a yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, step, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to the structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, avenue, lane or other public way and any
public park, space, plaza, ground or building.



(2000 Code, § 5.26.010)



§ 113.26  DEPOSITING OR DISTRIBUTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a commercial
handbill in or upon any public place within the city. No person shall hand
out, distribute or sell a commercial handbill in any public place. However, a
person may hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof,
any noncommercial handbill in a public place to any person willing to accept
the noncommercial handbill.



(2000 Code, § 5.26.020) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.27  PLACING ON VEHICLES.



   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon an automobile or other
vehicle. However, this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling,
transmitting or distributing of a noncommercial handbill to the owner or
other occupant of an automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the
same.



(2000 Code, § 5.26.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.28  DISTRIBUTION ON VACANT PREMISES.



   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which
are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.



(2000 Code, § 5.26.040)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.29  DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED WHERE REQUESTED.



   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial handbill upon any premises, if he or she is requested by the
owner, tenant or occupant thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the
premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing
the words “No Trespassing”, “No Peddlers or Agents” or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupant of the premises does not
desire to be molested, to have his or her privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbill left upon the premises.



(2000 Code, § 5.26.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.30  DISTRIBUTION ON INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.



   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast a
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which
are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting the handbill directly to the
owner, occupant or any other person present in or upon the premises. However,
in the case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in
§ 113.29, a person, unless requested by the owner, tenant or occupant of the
premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon the
premises, if the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent
it from being blown or drifted about the premises or elsewhere, except that
mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or
regulations.



(2000 Code, § 5.26.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.31  EXCEPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of
mail by the United States, or of newspapers or political pamphlets.



(2000 Code, § 5.26.070)




OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS




§ 113.45  OUTDOOR ADVERTISER DEFINED.



   As used in this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OUTDOOR ADVERTISER.  Any person engaged in the business of placing,
posting or painting any sign, advertisement, notice or display in one or more
places for the purpose of outdoor advertising so that the resulting display
is visible from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.010)



§ 113.46  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of outdoor advertising
in the city without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (B)   An application for a license required by division (A) of this
section shall be accompanied by a list of all places, including billboards or
natural structures, on which it is intended to place signs or advertisements.
This list shall be added to from time to time by the licensee as a right to
post or place advertisements or signs on additional places as required.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.47  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for the license required by § 113.46 shall be as set
forth in § 110.007(B).



(2000 Code, § 5.42.030)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 113.48  CONSENT OF OWNER REQUIRED.



   No person shall post any advertisement on any premises in the city
without the consent of the owner of the premises. The consent must be in
writing and must be filed with the City Clerk.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.040)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.49  DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   No person engaged in outdoor advertising shall permit any refuse
resulting from the work to accumulate anywhere in the city, except by placing
it in properly established refuse receptacles. No person shall permit any
loose or flapping combustible material to hang from or be attached to any
billboard, signboard or other place used for display or advertising purposes.
All refuse resulting from the operation of the business shall be carefully
gathered up and properly disposed of.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.50  WEEDS AND GRASS AT BASE OF BILLBOARDS.



   Every outdoor advertiser shall keep all grass, weeds and other growths,
except trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut down so that the same do not grow
to a height greater than eight inches within six feet of any billboard or
signboard used by him or her, provided that this obligation shall extend only
to property controlled by the advertiser.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.060)



§ 113.51  OBSCENE AND UNLAWFUL ADVERTISEMENTS.



   No person shall post or display any advertisement of an obscene or
immoral character, of an unlawful gathering or of an unlawful sale.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.52  DAMAGING SIGNS OR ADVERTISEMENTS.



   No person shall mutilate or disfigure in any way any lawful sign or
advertisement in the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.53  POSTING OF NAME OF ADVERTISER.



   No outdoor advertiser shall carry on his or her business unless the
name of the advertiser is attached to, or displayed or printed on, all
billboards or signboards used by him or her, or on any notice, placard or
advertisement posted by him or her, in such lettering as to be visible from a
distance of at least five feet from the notice or advertisement.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.54  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND CITY REGULATIONS.



   Anyone engaged in the business of outdoor advertising shall comply
fully with all state laws and city ordinances, rules or regulations
concerning the location, construction and the like of signs, advertisements,
notices or displays.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.100)



§ 113.55  EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to apply to the posting of signs
or notices by order of any court or by any public officer in the performance
of his or her duties.



(2000 Code, § 5.42.110)



CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   114.001   Disturbances and crowds



   114.002   Inspections



   114.003   Riots



   114.004   Smoking in assembly halls prohibited



   114.005   Lighted exit signs



   114.006   Mini-theaters prohibited



   114.007   Billiard and pool halls



   114.008   Bowling alleys



   114.009   Carnivals, parks, menageries and exhibitions



   114.010   Circuses



   114.011   Coin-operated amusement devices and video gaming terminals



   114.012   Movie houses and theaters



   114.013   Shooting galleries



Special Events



   114.050   Definitions



   114.051   Exemptions



   114.052   Major or minor special event determination



   114.053   Major special events



   114.054   City services for major special events



   114.055   Minor special events



   114.056   Special event conditions



   114.057   Inspections



Young Adult Entertainment Facilities



   114.070   Definitions



   114.071   Young adult entertainment facility license required



   114.072   License application procedures



   114.073   Procedures for issuance or denial of license



   114.074   Operating rules and regulations



   114.075   Access by police officers



   114.076   Suspension or revocation of licenses



   114.077   License; nontransferable



   114.078   Nuisances; injunction



Parades and Public Assemblies



   114.090   Title



   114.091   Definitions



   114.092   Permit required



   114.093   Application for permit



   114.094   Contents of application



   114.095   Late applicants



   114.096   Standards for issuance



   114.097   Approval or denial of permit



   114.098   Alternative permit



   114.099   Notice to officials



   114.100   Contents of permit



   114.101   Duties of permittee



   114.102   Public conduct during parades, public assemblies or
similar activities



   114.103   Revocation of permit



   114.104   Waiver of provisions



 



   114.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 114.001  DISTURBANCES AND CROWDS.



   (A)   The audience at any amusement, show or theatrical exhibition
shall be orderly and quiet at all times. No person attending such an
amusement, show or exhibition shall create a disturbance in the audience.



   (B)   No person shall suffer, permit or allow a crowd to witness an
amusement, show or exhibition in such a manner or under such conditions as to
create a fire hazard or other hazard or risk.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.080)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.002  INSPECTIONS.



   The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief shall see that every amusement,
show and exhibition is inspected by a member of the Police Department and a
member of the Fire Department to ensure conformity with city and state laws
concerning the amusements.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.090)



§ 114.003  RIOTS.



   No person shall present any public amusement or show of any kind which
tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.100)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.004  SMOKING IN ASSEMBLY HALLS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or
pipe on or beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any building used as an
assembly hall, with seating accommodations for 100 persons or more, in which
exhibitions, shows, amusements, lectures or other entertainment is offered,
presented, operated or given.



   (B)   The owner of the premises or the occupant in charge thereof
shall provide and place printed signs on which the words “No Smoking”
appear in letters at least four inches high, in conspicuous places on the
premises. At least two signs shall be upon the stage or in the wings thereof
and one shall be in each dressing room.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.110)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.005  LIGHTED EXIT SIGNS.



   The owner or occupant in charge of any building used as an assembly
hall, with accommodations for 100 persons or more, in which exhibitions,
shows, amusements, lectures and other entertainment is offered, presented,
operated or given, shall provide a sign on which the word “EXIT” appears
in letters at least six inches high and place the same over every door or
other opening from the hall to every means of egress therefrom. He or she
shall also provide a light with a red globe and place the same over the sign,
which light shall be kept burning during the entire period that the hall is
open to the public and until the audience has left the hall.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.120)



§ 114.006  MINI-THEATERS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      MINI-THEATERS.  Any place, building or portion of a building to
which the public is admitted where one or more coin-operated, paper
currency-operated, slug-operated or token-operated (or otherwise operated by
any means of payment) electrically, electronically or mechanically controlled
still or motion picture machines, projectors or video display devices are
maintained to show still or motion pictures or other video display materials
to five or fewer persons per machine or projector at any one time and are
located in a booth, cubicle or stall.



   (B)   No person shall own, operate or maintain a mini-theater in the
city.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.130)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.007  BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS.



   (A)   Fee. The annual license fee for a billiard and pool hall shall
be as set forth in § 110.007.



   (B)   Minors. Minors under the age of 16 years shall, under no
circumstances, frequent, loiter about or remain in any hall licensed
hereunder at any time, unless they are upon some lawful errand at the
direction of, or with the consent and knowledge of, the parent, guardian or
other person having lawful custody of the minor. No proprietor of any hall so
licensed shall allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter about or
remain in the hall in violation of this section.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.010)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.008  BOWLING ALLEYS.



   (A)   Fee. The annual license fee for a bowling alley shall be as
set forth in § 110.007(B).



   (B)   Minors. Minors under the age of 16 years shall, under no
circumstances, frequent, loiter about or remain in any establishment licensed
hereunder at any time, unless they are upon some lawful errand at the
direction of the person having lawful custody of such minor. No proprietor of
any establishment so licensed shall allow or permit any such minor to
frequent, loiter about or remain in the hall in violation of this section.
However, minors belonging to bowling leagues or attending special bowling
parties are permitted in such establishments if they are accompanied by a
parent or guardian, and minors over the age of 16 years may be employed in
the establishments if the person operating or conducting the same has first
obtained the written consent of the parent, guardian or other person having
lawful custody of the minor.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.020)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty,
see § 114.999



§ 114.009  CARNIVALS, PARKS, MENAGERIES AND EXHIBITIONS.



   The annual license fees for carnivals, parks, menageries and
exhibitions shall be as follows:



   (A)   Parks where amusement rides are operated during the summer
season: $15 per season for the first ride and $5 for each additional ride;



   (B)   Carnivals: $15 per day, plus $5 per day for each side show and
concession connected therewith;



   (C)   Menageries: $15 per day;



   (D)   Exhibitions: $15 per day; and



   (E)   Other amusements not specifically licensed: $15 per day.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.030)



§ 114.010  CIRCUSES.



   (A)   Fees. The fee for a circus license shall be $200 for each day
during which the circus is conducted or open to the public. There shall be an
additional license fee for each side show and concession operated in
connection with a circus in the amount of $15 per day.



   (B)   Inspections. The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief shall see
that inspections are made of all circus performances and of the premises used.



   (C)   Parades. No person shall conduct or exhibit any parade
connected with a circus in or on any public street, alley or other public way
or place in the municipality, unless a permit therefor is first obtained from
the Chief of Police. The permit shall specify the route to be followed and
shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $10,000, conditioned to
indemnify the municipality for any loss, damage or liability incurred or
caused by the conduct or exhibition of the parade.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.040)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.011  COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token or disk, may be operated by the public as a
game, entertainment or amusement. It includes, but is not limited to, such
devices as pinball machines, skill ball machines and electronic games using a
video screen and electrical impulses. It includes any other type of
mechanical game the object of which is to secure a particular score or high
score by the use of balls, spheres, springs, trigger devices or electrical
impulses.



      VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL.  Any electronic video game machine that,
upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video
game, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that
can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly
dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only (ILCS Ch.
230, Act 40, § 5).



   (B)   Number of devices. There shall not be a prohibition as to the
maximum number of coin-operated amusement devices that business
establishments may operate, permit to be operated, keep or maintain. The
maximum number of video gaming terminals which may be operated by an
establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board is five (ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 40, § 25(e)).



   (C)   Licensing generally.



      (1)   No business establishment which is authorized by this
section to do so shall operate, permit to be operated, keep or maintain any
coin-operated amusement device or video gaming terminal device in the city
without first having obtained the appropriate device license and liquor
license authorizing the service of liquor and video gaming under Chapter 111
of this code.



      (2)   Any person may apply for a coin-operated amusement
device license with the City Clerk or his or her designated representative. A
device license for video gaming terminals must be applied for by the owner of
the establishment so designated and licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board
allowing such establishment to operate video gaming terminals.



      (3)   Applications shall be made on forms provided by the
city, which shall require:



         (a)   The name and address of the person making the
application;



         (b)   The names and addresses of all directors, officers
and shareholders of the applicant, if applicable;



         (c)   The name and address of the business establishment
where the device is to be used;



         (d)   A general description of the proposed device;



         (e)   A list of all felony and misdemeanor arrests of
and charges against the applicant and its directors, officers, shareholders
or administrators in the last five years, and the nature of the arrest or
charge;



         (f)   The number of other coin-operated amusement
devices and/or video gaming terminals proposed for the same address;



         (g)   The name and address of the owner of the
coin-operated amusement devices and/or video gaming terminals; and



         (h)   Any other information the City Clerk deems
necessary to process the application.



      (4)   The City Clerk shall evaluate each application for an
amusement device license and/or video gaming terminal license within 30 days
of the date the application is filed. At the end of that time, the Clerk
shall either issue the appropriate device license or give a brief written
statement of the reasons for rejecting the application for non-compliance
with the provisions of this code, this chapter or the Illinois Gaming Act. An
application shall be denied only for good cause.



      (5)   Each coin-operated amusement device and video gaming
terminal license shall be effective for a period of one year (from January 1
to December 31), at which time the license shall expire. A new application
must be filed prior to the expiration of the license, pursuant to the
provisions of this section.



      (6)   The appropriate device license must be issued prior to
the date the applicant installs any device for use. If the device is already
on the premises and is already licensed under this title, the appropriate
device license shall be obtained pursuant to this section prior to the time
the existing license expires. If the device is already on the premises and is
unlicensed, a license must be obtained within 60 days of the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this section (Ordinance 1402, passed July 23,
1985).



      (7)   The license can be suspended for a ten day period for
violations of the restrictions set forth in division (E) of this section. Any
licensee hereunder who is found to be unqualified to hold a license due to a
failure to comply with any of the restrictions, or who continually violates
any of the provisions of this section, or whose license has been suspended
for cause, as provided above, two or more times, shall be subjected to having
his or her license revoked by the City Clerk. Upon the occurrence of any of
the above, the clerk or his or her designated agent shall cause a notice to
be sent to the licensee for a hearing to determine cause as to whether the
license should be revoked. The hearing shall be held within ten days, but no
sooner than three days, from the receipt of the notice. The notice shall set
forth the nature of the hearing and shall contain such information as is
necessary to reasonably inform the licensee of those violations for which he
or she is charged, and shall further set forth the time, date and location of
the hearing. The licensee will be given an opportunity to present testimony
and evidence in his or her own behalf as he or she deems necessary. Upon the
completion of the hearing, the Clerk shall determine whether sufficient cause
has been shown which would require the revocation of the license and shall,
within five days from the date of the hearing, inform the licensee, in
writing, if the determination results in a revocation.



      (8)   The license shall be affixed to a prominent place on the
device.



      (9)   A coin-operated amusement device and/or video gaming
terminal device may only be used at the address set forth in the license.
Licenses are not transferable.



      (10)   Each coin-operated amusement device shall have affixed
to it a current City of Oak Forest municipal coin-operated amusement device
decal with an assigned number. Each video gaming terminal device shall have
affixed to it a current City of Oak Forest video gaming terminal license
decal with an assigned number.



   (D)   Fee schedule.



      (1)   The annual fee shall be as listed, per amusement device,
per year:



         (a)   Jukebox: $100;



         (b)   Dart/video: $100; and



         (c)   Electronic poker, “21,” dice or other games of
chance: $500;



         (d)   Video gaming terminal as defined in ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 40, § 5: $500 (video gaming terminal license fees shall be prorated on a
quarterly basis when applicable.)



      (2)   The transfer fee shall be $4 per machine, per transfer.



   (E)   Operating restrictions. The following operating restrictions
shall apply to all coin-operated amusement and/or video gaming terminals
devices located within the city.



      (1)   Awards for skill or for obtaining a particular score
must be posted on the device.



      (2)   Any person under the age of 14 years who is operating
any coin-operated amusement device must be accompanied by an adult. Any
person under the age of 21 years may not operate a video gaming terminal
device.



      (3)   Video gaming terminals must be located in an area
restricted to persons over 21 years of age, the entrance to which is within
the view of one employee, who is over 21 years of age, of the establishment
in which they are located (ILCS  Ch. 230, Act 40, § 58).



      (4)   Devices are not to be placed or operated outside the
business premises, including, but not limited to, malls, hallways, parking
areas or in any required exit path.



   (F)   Video gaming. Operation of video gaming terminals is pursuant
to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40) and Chapter 111 of
this code.



(Ord. 2012-10-0405O, passed 10-23-2012; Am. Ord. 2016-08-0616O, passed
9-13-2016)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.012  MOVIE HOUSES AND THEATERS.



   The annual license fee for movie houses and theaters shall be as set
forth in § 110.007.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.060)



§ 114.013  SHOOTING GALLERIES.



   (A)   Fee. The annual license fee for a shooting gallery shall be as
set forth in § 110.007.



   (B)   Safety. Targets shall be placed before a backstop of steel,
sufficiently thick to prevent any bullet from piercing it and so arranged
that there will be no danger from ricocheting bullets or deflected pieces of
a bullet.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.070)




SPECIAL EVENTS




§ 114.050  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any natural person, syndicate, association, partnership,
firm, club, company, corporation, limited liability company, institution,
agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or other
political subdivision, or any officers, agents, employees or other
representative, acting either for himself or herself or for any other person
in any capacity; or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties other than the City of Oak Forest who submits an
application pursuant to this chapter.



   CARNIVAL.  Any aggregation of shows or riding devices, games of skill
or chance, or any combination of shows and riding devices, or any combination
of several enterprises, such as Ferris wheels, tilt-a-whirls, carousels,
roller coasters, giant swings, or other riding devices, whether carried on or
engaged in or conducted in any field, park or in a building or enclosure, and
whether carried on, engaged in or conducted as one enterprise or by several
concessionaires, and whether one admission fee is charged for admission to
all such shows or entertainments, or separate fee for admission is charged
for each amusement.



   CARNIVAL RIDES.  Riding devices including, but not limited to, Ferris
Wheels, tilt-a-whirls, carousels, roller coasters, and giant swings.



   CIRCUS.  A show consisting of acrobats, trained animals, clowns, or
similar forms of entertainment that is held in an arena, which may be open
air or enclosed in a tent or building.



   CITY.  The City of Oak Forest and all of its government entities.



   CITY PROPERTY.  Public streets, sidewalks, right-of-way, or other
property owned or controlled by the city.



   CITY SERVICES.  Services provided by city departments including, but
not limited to public safety, crowd control, traffic control, management of
the event site, road closures, demarcation of no-parking tow zones,
inspection services, garbage removal, and production of event materials and
city website information.



   MAJOR SPECIAL EVENT.  A special event including, but not limited to,
parades, festivals, and athletic events which meet some or all of the
following criteria:



      (1)   Anticipated attendance by a large number of people;



      (2)   Closure of roads, streets or city blocks;



      (3)   Demarcation of “No Parking, Tow Zones”;



      (4)   Issuance of multiple permits or licenses;



      (5)   Provision of city services as defined herein.



   MINOR SPECIAL EVENT.  Special events which do not require provision of
city services as defined herein.



   PRIVATE EVENT.  An event located entirely on private property provided
for an exclusive or invited group of attendees, held on suitable premises,
which does not exceed occupancy permits.



   SPECIAL EVENT.  Any temporary occurrence conducted or sponsored by an
applicant involving a display, demonstration, performance, exhibition, or
amusement which includes, but is not limited to, festivals, concerts,
carnivals, art and craft shows, firework displays, sporting events, parades,
rallies and the like.



   SPECIAL EVENTS COORDINATOR.  An individual appointed by the Mayor to
coordinate applications for major and minor special events.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.051  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following are exempt from obtaining a major or minor
special event permit:



      (1)   The City of Oak Forest.



      (2)   Educational institutions approved or authorized by the
State of Illinois.



      (3)   Regularly scheduled and coordinated sporting events
conducted by not-for-profit organizations designed for youth activities.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in this chapter,
issuance of other permits or licenses may be required depending on the nature
of the event, including but not limited to: amplifier permits, tent permits,
carnival/carnival ride permits, firework permits, bonfire permits, generator
permits, and liquor licenses.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.052  MAJOR OR MINOR SPECIAL EVENT DETERMINATION.



   In advance of filing an application for a major or minor special event
permit, an applicant shall submit a detailed narrative description of the
proposed special event to the Special Events Coordinator and request
direction as to whether the event should be designated a major or minor
special event. Upon receipt of sufficient information regarding the proposed
event, the Special Events Coordinator shall, in a timely manner, advise the
applicant whether the event will be treated as a major or minor special event.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.053  MAJOR SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   A major special event permit application shall be available on
the city’s website and at the City Clerk’s office. The application shall
include requirements for issuance of a major special event permit, including
but not limited to those listed in herein. In addition to the requirements
set forth in this code and as set in the major special event permit
application, events may be subject to additional conditions or restrictions
deemed necessary and appropriate by the city. The major special event
application shall consolidate applications for licenses and permits that may
be needed for such event, except that applications for a liquor license shall
be applied for separately as provided by this code. The requirements and fees
for issuance of each such permit or license shall remain as otherwise
provided for in the code.



      (1)   The application shall be accurately and completely
filled out prior to submission and shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:



         (a)   A complete and accurate description of the event
for which the permit is applied and an estimate of anticipated attendees
and/or participants.



         (b)   Information regarding whether admission fees or
charges are to be assessed to attendees or participants.



         (c)   Information regarding whether alcohol consumption
is planned, and if so, the hours, location and type of alcohol planned to be
served.



         (d)   A description of provision for refuse needs for
the event which shall be in compliance with city policies and code provisions
and state law.



         (e)   A description of restroom availability and
maintenance for the event.



         (f)   A description of the type and nature of any
entertainment, including but not limited to music acts, carnival rides, and
games of chance.



         (g)   A certificate of general liability insurance,
naming the City of Oak Forest and its officers, employees, agents and
representatives as additional insureds, in a form and amount determined by
the Special Events Coordinator, or his or her designee, may be required.
Whenever a certificate of insurance is required, an additional insured
endorsement shall also be provided.



         (h)   Information describing in detail the accessibility
plans for the event.



         (i)   Information pertaining to the use of city
amenities for the event as described in § 114.054 of this subchapter.



         (j)   Information regarding requests for city services
associated with the event.



         (k)   A list of all vendors participating in the event.



      (2)   Submission of major event permit application.



         (a)   An application for a major event permit shall be
submitted to the city’s Special Events Coordinator a minimum of 60 days
prior to the proposed event.



         (b)   An application may be considered within the 60-day
time period and approved by the City Administrator without City Council
approval. Applications submitted late may be considered on a case by case
basis, but may be rejected for untimeliness.



         (c)   An applicant for a major special event must be
vested with the legal authority to bind the applicant and may be requested to
supply evidence to that effect. Said individual or representative shall
certify and swear to the accuracy of all statements and information contained
in the application and that the applicant is qualified in all respects to
receive the permits applied for.



   (B)   Notification of major special event.  An applicant for a
major special event permit shall, at its cost, provide written notification
of the proposed event, including a narrative summary of the event, to
residents and businesses which may be affected by such event. The Special
Events Coordinator shall review and approve the narrative and the scope of
notice proposed by the applicant and shall inform the applicant of the date
the application shall be considered by the City Council so that such date may
be included in the notification. Such notice shall be provided not less than
two weeks, and not more than four weeks, prior to City Council consideration
of the application.



   (C)   Promotion of city amenities.  Recognizing the importance of
incorporating and promoting positive local economic impact as part of major
special events within the city, the applicant shall contact and work with the
city’s Community Development Department in a good faith manner in order to
encourage and facilitate overnight accommodations and use of other community
amenities within the city for the event.



   (D)   City Council consideration.  A request for a major special
event permit shall be submitted to the City Council by the Special Events
Coordinator for review and consideration. The City Council, taking into
consideration whether the event is to be held for a lawful purpose, whether
there is a reasonable basis to believe that it will tend to cause a breach of
the peace or unduly interfere with the public use of public right-of-way or
other public property, or whether it will unduly interfere with the peace and
quiet of the residents of the city, may approve the permit, deny the permit,
or approve the permit subject to such conditions or restrictions as it deems
appropriate.



   (E)   Issuance of major special event permit.  A major special
event permit shall be issued after it has been approved as set forth herein
and after the Special Events Coordinator is in timely receipt of the
following items, as applicable: (a) a completed major special event permit
application, signed and notarized; (b) all required fees; (c) a certificate
of insurance and additional insured endorsements in a form and in amounts
approved by the city, naming the city and its officers, agents, employees and
representatives as additional insureds; (d) a copy of a temporary liquor
license issued by the city’s Liquor Commissioner, if applicable; and (e)
any other information or documentation deemed necessary or appropriate. All
permits or licenses needed for the major special event, other than a liquor
license if applicable, shall be included in the issuance of the major special
event permit if the applicant has paid the required fees and otherwise
complied with the requirements for each such permit or license. Such permits
and licenses include, but may not be limited to licenses and permits for
amplifiers, tents, temporary signage, raffles, right-of-way, carnivals,
carnival rides or circuses.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.054  CITY SERVICES FOR MAJOR SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   The applicant may request city services be provided for the
major special event and may be billed accordingly. The city, through
recommendations of the city’s various departments, may impose required city
services and personnel for public safety, public works or inspections as
necessary.



   (B)   After a major special event is over, the city may issue the
applicant a bill for applicable costs incurred by the city, including but not
limited to reasonable personnel costs attributable to the major special event
and for any damage caused to public property. The applicant shall be
responsible for payment of said bill in full within the timeframe specified
on the bill. In the event that such payment is not made in full in a timely
manner, the City Attorney may be requested by the City Administrator to take
or direct the necessary legal action to obtain such payment. The reasonable
costs and attorney’s fees resulting from such action shall be added to the
amount due and owed by the applicant. Failure to timely pay bills for charge
back services may result in denial of future permits to the applicant or the
applicant’s organization.



   (C)   The applicant may request that city services be provided at no
cost. Such request must be made prior to the major special event being
considered by the City Council.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.055  MINOR SPECIAL EVENTS.



   (A)   Minor special event permit application.  A minor special
event permit application shall be available on the city’s website and at
the City Clerk’s office. In addition to the requirements set forth in this
code and as set in the minor special event permit application, events may be
subject to additional conditions or restrictions deemed necessary and
appropriate by the city.



   (B)   Submission of minor event permit application.



      (1)   An application for a minor special event permit shall be
submitted to the city’s Special Events Coordinator a minimum of 21 days
prior to the proposed event. Applications submitted late may be considered on
a case by case basis, but may be rejected for untimeliness.



      (2)   An application for a minor special event must be vested
with the legal authority to bind the applicant and may be requested to supply
evidence to that effect. Said individual or representative shall certify and
swear to the accuracy of all statements and information contained in the
application and that the applicant is qualified in all respects to receive
the permits applied for.



      (3)   An application fee and hold harmless, defense and
indemnification agreement may be required by the city.



   (C)   Other permits or licenses may be necessary in addition to the
minor special event permit, depending on the event, including but not limited
to raffle licenses, or tent permit.



   (D)   The Special Events Coordinator shall review applications for
proposed minor special events and submit a report to the City Administrator
regarding such events and any requirements or conditions therefore. In the
event the City Administrator denies the permit, written notification of the
denial and the reasons for a denial shall be provided to the applicant.



   (E)   Issuance of minor special event permit.  Upon approval of the
application, as set forth herein, and after payment of any required fees, the
City Clerk shall issue the minor special event permit.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.056  SPECIAL EVENT CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Fire and life safety.  Special events must comply with state
law and with the city code, ordinances, rules, regulations, and policies.



   (B)   Access to event.  There shall be in every permitted premises
for major special events not less than two exits leading to the outside, each
not less than three feet in width and, if doors are present, they are
required to open outward.



   (C)   Occupancy at a special event shall be in compliance with city
and state law.



   (D)   The nature and intensity of the event must be planned so that
the event will be compatible with the existing development in the area of the
event. The event shall not significantly or materially be detrimental to the
public health, safety, and welfare, or injurious to property or improvements
in the surrounding area, including, but not limited to, excess traffic,
parking, noise, pedestrian safety, and adverse effects on neighboring areas.



   (E)   Parking areas, both on and off street, for a particular event,
are to be of adequate size, properly located, and the entrance and exit
drives shall be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances. For
major special events the applicant shall coordinate with the Special Events
Coordinator for major events to provide easily maps and information relative
to parking and accessible parking.



   (F)   An applicant shall allow free and unobstructed access to the
premises during the pre-inspection and permitting phases of event approval by
authorized city personnel while acting on city business.



   (G)   Any activity occupying or using any street, public place, or
public right-of-way in the city may be allowed only in accordance with the
provisions of this code where applicable.



   (H)   A review will be conducted by the Chief of Police for security
for each event and the Chief of Police shall determine the number of Oak
Forest police officers required. If Oak Forest police officers are used for
an event, the applicant shall be responsible for their costs, which will be
assessed as part of the charge back provided for in § 114.054 of this
subchapter.



   (I)   Smoking on event premises shall be in compliance with state
law.



   (J)   Special events including fundraising activities shall comply
with city and state laws.



   (K)   Carnivals, carnival rides, and circuses shall comply in all
respects with city ordinances, code requirements, and state law.



   (L)   If consumption of alcohol is proposed, said use must comply
with city and state law.



   (M)   If animal use or exhibition is proposed, it must comply with
city rules, regulations, ordinances, and state law.



   (N)   In addition to the specific regulations, standards, and time
limitations set forth in the code, events shall be subject to such conditions
and restrictions on their location and operation as deemed necessary from
time to time by the City Administrator or his or her designee.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)



§ 114.057  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The city’s Fire, Police, Emergency Management, Building, and
Public Works Departments shall be advised of proposed major special events
and also minor special events as deemed appropriate by the Special Events
Coordinator. Prior to the issuance of a permit, they shall conduct such
inspections and investigations as they deem necessary to verify information
provided by the applicant and to evaluate and ensure compliance with city
code requirements and state law in order to promote the public health, safety
and welfare. Individual vendors may only participate if it is determined that
they are in compliance with applicable state law and city code provisions.



   (B)   The city may inspect the event premises and participating
vendors at any time during the event to ensure continued compliance with city
code, state law and specific permit conditions, if applicable.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 4 (part), passed 3-12-2013)




YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES




§ 114.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Oak Forest.



   LIGHT FOOD SERVICE.  The ability to store, prepare, sell, and service
hot and cold sandwiches, snacks, and similar food items and is separately
licensed by the city as a food service establishment.



   PERSON.  One or more natural PERSONS, corporations, partnerships,
associations or other entities capable of having an action of law brought
against the entity.



   PREMISES.  Any place where a young adult entertainment facility is
operated or maintained, including, but not limited to, all hallways,
bathrooms, parking areas and any other portions of the area which is
accessible to the public during operating hours.



   SPECIAL EVENT.  An activity at a young adult entertainment facility
which is marketed to patrons or prospective patrons as being of a temporary
or non-routine nature.



   YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. 



      (1)   Commercial facilities which are open to the public, the
primary function of which is to offer, provide, procure, make available,
allow, suffer or permit entertainment to patrons between the ages of 18 and
30 years an opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, or
the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment
provided by dancers or other performers. A YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY
shall provide light food service and beverages (excluding alcoholic
beverages) to its patrons from the time of opening until 11:00 p.m.



      (2)   The term YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY does not
include the following: premises which serve alcoholic beverages as defined by
state and local laws; theaters which the patrons sit in parallel rows of
fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists
of background music which is incidental to the primary function of serving
food; outdoor performances, a banquet party or celebration conducted for
invited guests which is not open to the public; dances or events sponsored
and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or a
nonprofit or charitable group duly licensed with the state and having a
five-year operational history in the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.010)



§ 114.071 YOUNG ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage, or
maintain a young adult entertainment facility in the city without first
obtaining a young adult entertainment facility license from the city. The
license fee shall be based on the permitted occupancy of the young adult
entertainment facility as follows:



      (1)   For occupancy up to 100: $1,000;



      (2)   For occupancy from 101 to 200: $5,000;



      (3)    For occupancy from 201 to 300: $10,000; and



      (4)   For occupancy from 301 to 600: $20,000.



   (B)   Those establishments holding a license for occupancy to 600
may after operating for a minimum of three months apply for an increased
occupancy of up to 200 patrons without the payment of any additional
licensing fee. The additional occupancy shall be permitted if the
establishment otherwise complies with other ordinances and codes of the city
and there has been no previous revocation or suspension of the licensee’s
license within the preceding three months.



   (C)   Those establishments holding a license for occupancy of up to
600 people who have received an increase of occupancy of up to 200 patrons
may, following a period of three months after the licensee who had occupancy
for up to 800 patrons has operated at such level, receive an additional
increase of occupancy by applying for an increase of occupancy of up to 200
more patrons without paying any additional fee. The additional occupancy
shall be permitted if the establishment otherwise complies with other
ordinances and codes of the city and there has been no previous revocation or
suspension of the licensee’s license within the preceding six months. No
further occupancy increases shall be permitted.



   (D)   All young adult entertainment facilities shall have an
occupancy limit established by the applicable fire or city codes. For the
purpose of this division, licensed premises shall not include kitchen area,
storage areas, hallways, or any area used by the licensee and/or his or her
employees and not open to the licensee’s patrons.



   (E)   A license shall be effective from the date of its issue until
December 31 of each year.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.020)



§ 114.072  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   An application for a license shall be made in writing to the
City Clerk upon forms provided, and shall include the following:



      (1)   The name, birth date, and address of the applicant in
the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled
to share in the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation, the date
of incorporation (in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it
was incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act to transact business in the state of Illinois), and
the objects for which it was organized. The names, dates of birth and
addresses of any partner, any officer and any director, and if a majority in
interest of the stock of a corporation is owned by one person or his or her
nominees, the name, date of birth and address of the person;



      (2)   The location of the young adult entertainment facility;



      (3)   A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant
as provided in this section. If the applicant is a corporation, the statement
shall include applicant’s officers and directors thereof, and any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the
stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the statement
shall include all general partners, and any limited partner owning more than
20% of the aggregate limited partner interest in the partnership. The listing
shall include the following:



         (a)    Any offense involving sexual misconduct with
children or other sex offenses as defined in Article 11 of the Illinois
Criminal Code Sex Offenses (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.) and as
amended;



         (b)   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in the
business or activity or related or similar business or activity, within the
past ten years;



         (c)   A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in
the business or activity or related or similar business or activity, but
which felony involved the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs,
or violence against another person, including rape, within the past five
years; or



         (d)   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation,
based upon conduct or involvement in the business or activity or related or
similar business or activity, within the past two years.



      (4)   A description of the proposed young adult entertainment
facility, including the anticipated age and number of patrons, hours of
operation and all activities and business conducted at the same location, and
the physical facilities to be used;



      (5)   A written statement setting forth all measures proposed
to ensure that adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both
inside and outside the licensed premises, will be maintained, and that the
ages of the patrons admitted to the young adult entertainment facility will
be monitored;



      (6)   A statement of whether the business will be conducted by
a manager. In such case the manager’s name, address, telephone number and
age shall be provided, along with a statement of any convictions as set forth
under division (A)(3) of this section;



      (7)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar
application for a similar other license at a location other than described in
this application and the disposition of the application;



      (8)   The license fee as provided in § 114.071;



      (9)   A site plan for the licensed premises, including a floor
plan showing all entrances, exists and public areas;



      (10)   The operation and training manuals to be used for the
establishment, setting forth procedures for complying with this subchapter,
including, but not limited to security and age verification; and



      (11)   A certificate of insurance evidencing that the
applicant has secured commercial general liability insurance issued by one or
more companies authorized to do business in the state of Illinois providing
the following minimum coverage:



         (a)   $1,000,000 per person, per occurrence; and



         (b)   $1,000,000 annual aggregate.



   (B)   In the event the applicant is made aware that any information
or document submitted as part of this application process is inaccurate or
incomplete, the applicant shall immediately notify the city and provide
appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide, or as
necessary update, required information may delay the processing of the
application or result in its denial.



   (C)   In addition to the requirements of divisions (A) and (B) of
this section, the applicant and, if applicable, the manager, shall submit
their fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Applicants are
required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the Police
Department as provided by the Chief of Police. If the applicant is a
corporation, fingerprints shall be required of applicant’s officers,
directors, and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more
than 20% of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership,
fingerprints shall be required of all general partners, and any limited
partner owning more than 20% of the aggregate limited partner interest in the
partnership. The applicant shall pay the fingerprint fee for each person
required to submit fingerprints. Provided, in the case of a renewal
application, fingerprints and the fingerprint fee shall not be required from
a renewal applicant whose fingerprints are on file, unless the Chief of
Police determines that there may be reason to believe that the renewal
applicant may have unreported convictions.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.030)



§ 114.073  PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   After receiving a complete application for a young adult entertainment
facility license, the city shall initiate the following procedures.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall forward copies of the application to
appropriate city officials for their comments regarding compliance with
regulations under their jurisdiction. The City Clerk shall consider all
materials and comments submitted and issue or deny the license within 30
working days after the date on which a completed application was filed unless
the applicant agrees to an extension of the time period in writing. In the
event that the City Clerk fails to act upon any application within the time
period set forth herein, the inaction shall be deemed a denial of the
application.



   (B)   The issuance or renewal of a young adult entertainment
facility license shall be denied by the City Clerk for any one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of one or more of the
following offenses:



         (a)   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with
children or other sex offenses as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-6 et
seq. “Sex Offenses” Code of 1961, as amended;



         (b)   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in the
business or activity or related or similar business or activity, within the
past ten years;



         (c)   A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in
the business or activity or related or similar business or activity, but
which felony involved the use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs,
or violence against another person, including rape, within the past five
years; or



         (d)   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation,
based upon conduct or involvement in the business or activity or related or
similar business or activity, within the past two years.



      (2)   The applicant whose license issued under this subchapter
has been revoked for cause;



      (3)   The applicant who at the time of application for renewal
of any license issued under this subchapter would not be eligible for the
license upon a first application;



      (4)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



      (5)   Where grounds for revocation of the license exists;



      (6)   If the applicant is a partnership and any general
partner, or any limited partner of owning more than 20% of the aggregate
limited partner interest in the partnership, would not be eligible to receive
a license under this chapter;



      (7)   If the applicant is a corporation and any officer or
director, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more
than 20% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a
license under this chapter;



      (8)   If the applicant is a corporation unless it is
incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in
Illinois;



      (9)   If the business of the young adult entertainment
facility is to be conducted by a manager unless the manager possesses the
same qualifications required by the licensee;



      (10)   If the applicant is not a beneficial owner of the
business to be operated by the licensee;



      (11)   If the premises do not comply with all applicable city
ordinances and state laws;



      (12)   If the application is incomplete or if it contains any
material misrepresentation; and



      (13)   If the application does not show adequate measures for
the protection of persons or property, security, both inside and outside the
premises, and the monitoring of the ages of patrons admitted to the young
adult entertainment facility.



   (C)   If the City Clerk denies a license, written notice of the
denial stating the reasons why shall be sent to the applicant within five
working days after the denial. The applicant shall have a period of ten
working days after the date of license denial to appeal to the City Council.
The appeal shall be in writing and shall be scheduled for hearing within 14
days of the receipt of the appeal for a regular meeting occurring not more
than 30 days after receipt of the notice and after at least five days
notification of the hearing date to the appellant.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.040)



§ 114.074  OPERATING RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
enter or remain on the premises of a young adult entertainment facility
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person 30 years of age or older to
enter or remain on the premises of a young adult entertainment facility
except for bona fide employees or independent contractors hired by the
licensee to work in the young adult entertainment facility, a parent or
guardian of a person under 21 years of age present in the young adult
entertainment facility or a governmental employee in the performance of his
or her duties.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to falsely represent their age
for the purpose of gaining admission to a young adult entertainment facility.



   (D)   The licensee shall require each person admitted or seeking to
be admitted to display to a supervisory security person of the young adult
entertainment facility an identification card showing the photo and age of
the person seeking admission. In addition all patrons shall be required to
pass through a metal detection device or pass a scanning by a metal detection
wand.



   (E)   It is unlawful to knowingly permit a person to enter or remain
in a young adult entertainment facility who is under the age of 18 years, or
30 years of age or older unless the person is a bona fide employee or
independent contractor hired by the licensee to work in the young adult
entertainment facility or a governmental employee in the performance of his
or her duties.



   (F)   A patron once admitted to the young adult entertainment
facility on the premises shall not be permitted to exit and re-enter the
premises sooner than the following business day.



   (G)   In the event of an emergency, health or safety condition
occurring anywhere on the licensed premises, including the parking lot, the
licensee and its employees and/or agents shall immediately contact the Fire
Department or Police Department, as appropriate to the incident, and request
assistance.



   (H)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ two
off-duty Oak Forest police officers who shall be present on the premises
during all operating hours to maintain peace and order and to ensure
compliance with all applicable laws of the state and of the city. The
licensee shall pay to the city the wages and benefit costs associated with
providing to the licensee the two police officers. The licensee shall also
employ qualified security personnel who shall have been trained in crowd
control, drug awareness, and gang awareness. The names, addresses and birth
dates of all the security personnel must be on file with the Chief of Police
at least 48 hours before their employment.



   (I)   Each licensee shall provide at least one supervising security
person to monitor and verify ages of those persons seeking to gain admittance
to the licensed premises.



   (J)   The licensee and its agents shall not permit or allow
alcoholic beverages or controlled substances to be consumed or be present on
any young adult entertainment facility premises and shall not allow or permit
tobacco to be used or sold in any young adult entertainment facility. The
presence of any prohibited item upon the licensed premises shall be deemed a
violation of this provision.



   (K)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to refuse
admittance and to remove from the young adult entertainment facility any
person who is, or appears to be, under the influence of, or affected by the
use of, alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical danger to the
safety of others present. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to
refuse admittance and to remove from a young adult entertainment facility any
person under the age of 18 years who possesses tobacco.



   (L)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper
and adequate illumination of all portions of the premises which are available
for public use. The illumination shall be not less than 1.3 footcandle at
floor level at all times when the premises are open to the public or when any
member of the public is permitted to enter and remain on the premises. All
off-street parking areas within 100 feet of any entrance shall be illuminated
during all hours of operation after sunset with a lighting system designed to
provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one
footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway.



   (M)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent
loitering, the creation of public nuisances or disturbances of the peace by
any patrons of the young adult entertainment facility on the premises or in
the immediate vicinity. “Loitering” shall not include walking between the
premises and a patron’s vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in
line to gain admission to the premises.



   (N)   It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all
litter resulting from its operations. The cleanup shall occur within two
hours after the end of each day’s operation.



   (O)   (1)   It is unlawful for a licensee to permit:



         (a)   A greater number of patrons into the premises at
any time than the permitted occupancy; or



         (b)   Any greater number of patrons to remain upon the
premises than the permitted occupancy.



      (2)   All young adult entertainment facilities shall provide
seating for not less than 30% of the maximum permitted occupancy.



   (P)   No licensee, his or her agent or employee shall allow or
permit any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate:



      (1)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality,
oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;



      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling
of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;



      (3)   The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair,
anus, vulva or genitals;



      (4)   The actual or simulated displaying of the breast so as
to expose the nipple of the female breast; or



      (5)   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a
live performance of which is prohibited by this division.



   (Q)   No licensee, his or her agent or employee shall allow or
permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes in
public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus.



   (R)   Each licensee shall provide at least one public telephone for
outgoing calls only for each 125 patrons (based upon the maximum occupancy of
the premises). No licensee shall permit sound or vibration exceeding 90
decibels measured with a standard meter “A” scale within two feet of any
public telephone receiver or audible at such level on the outside of any
exterior wall of the premises located more than ten feet from a doorway of
the licensed premises. No public telephone shall be provided on the premises
for incoming calls.



   (S)   The licensee shall deliver to the Chief of Police, no later
than 72 hours before any scheduled special event occurring at a licensed
premises, true and accurate copies of any and all advertisements of whatever
nature therefor used to advertise or promote the event. The licensee shall
also include prior to any such advertised event:



      (1)   The number of employees and/or performers to be used for
the event;



      (2)   Designation of the individual who will be available
prior to and during the event and who shall have authority to accept
complaints, notice of violations, or take corrective action as required by
proper officials of the city;



      (3)   A security plan with an acknowledgment that any changes
to the security plan must be submitted to the Chief of Police in writing one
business day before the event, and the security plan must be followed without
any changes unless the change has been submitted to the Chief of Police in
writing and he or she has approved it prior to the event being opened;



      (4)   Security personnel shall be required for the maximum
capacity of the event as determined by the maximum occupancy of the premises
under the city’s ordinance unless attendance is limited to a lesser number;



      (5)   Inspections may be conducted by the city to ensure
compliance with its codes and ordinances;



      (6)   No members of the general public shall be allowed
admittance prior to the opening of the event;



      (7)   Only one such event per evening shall be allowed;



      (8)   Automatic counters are required to be used prior to
entry into the licensed premises to determine occupancy of the premises; and



      (9)   Tickets may be sold before the event with the number of
tickets sold limited to the occupancy limit of the premises for patrons, and
after all the tickets have been sold, the licensee shall post a sign stating
that the event is “Sold Out”.



   (T)   The hours of operation of a young adult entertainment facility
are as follows:



      (1)   Sunday through Thursday, 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m.;



      (2)   Friday and Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.; and



      (3)   New Year’s Eve, 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following
day.



   (U)   All employees and independent contractors hired by the
licensee to work in the young adult entertainment facility who will be
present on the premises during hours of operation shall submit to criminal
background checks. No person shall be permitted to be employed who has been
convicted of a felony violation of any section of the following sections of
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, Title III:



      (1)   Article 8 Solicitation, Conspiracy and Attempt;



      (2)   Article 9 Homicide;



      (3)   Article 10 Kidnapping and Related Offenses;



      (4)   Article 11 Sex Offenses;



      (5)   Article 12 Bodily Harm;



      (6)   Article 18 Robbery;



      (7)   Article 19 Burglary;



      (8)   Article 33A Armed Violence; and



      (9)   Article 33D Contributing to the Criminal Delinquency of
a Juvenile of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended; or any section
of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as amended.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.050)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.075  ACCESS BY POLICE OFFICERS.



   All police officers of the city shall be permitted access to all young
adult entertainment facilities for the purpose of inspection and to enforce
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter at all times that the
premises are open to the patrons.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.060)



§ 114.076  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   The Mayor may, at any time, suspend a young adult
entertainment facility license whenever the licensee, or any manager,
officer, director, agent or employee of the licensee has caused, permitted or
knowingly done any of the following:



      (1)   Failed to keep the building structure or equipment of
the licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health, building,
fire or safety laws, regulations or ordinances in a way which relates to or
affects public health or safety on the young adult entertainment facility
premises; and/or



      (2)   Failed to comply with the provisions of young adult
entertainment facilities specified in this chapter.



   (B)   The  suspension shall remain in effect until the conditions
causing the suspension are cured and reasonable measures are taken to ensure
that the same will not reoccur as determined by the Mayor.



   (C)   The Mayor may, at any time, revoke or suspend a young adult
entertainment facility license on any one or more of the following grounds:



      (1)   Whenever the city learns that the licensees made a
material false statement or representation or failed to disclose any material
information to the city, in connection with any application for the young
adult entertainment facility license or any license renewal;



      (2)   Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director,
agent or employee of the licensee fails within a reasonable time to cure a
condition that cause a license suspension;



      (3)   Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director,
agent or employee of the licensee knowingly permits conduct on the licensed
premises that violates any federal, state or village criminal or penal
statute, law or ordinance;



      (4)   Whenever the operation of the young adult entertainment
facility becomes the proximate cause of a significant increase in criminal
activity on the premises or in the immediate vicinity in such a way as to
endanger persons or property; and/or



      (5)   Upon the cessation of business for a period in excess of
60 days.



   (D)   The suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed to
the City Council within five days of the suspension or revocation. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Mayor a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Mayor shall transmit a report and the entire record upon
which the appeal was taken. From and after five business days after the
appeal is filed, any suspension or revocation shall be stayed unless the
Mayor from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the City Council that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event the
suspension or revocation shall not be stayed otherwise than by the City
Council.



   (E)   (1)   The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide
the appeal within a reasonable time.



      (2)   Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney.



      (3)   The City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the suspension or revocation as in its opinion ought to
be made.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.070)



§ 114.077  LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABLE.



   (A)   A license granted under the provisions of this subchapter is
nontransferable.



   (B)   The sale, lease or transfer of substantially all of the assets
of a business holding a young adult entertainment facility license or a sale
or transfer of a controlling interest in a corporation or partnership holding
a young adult entertainment facility license shall result in the termination
of the license granted herein.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.080)



§ 114.078  NUISANCES; INJUNCTION.



   (A)   Any violation of this subchapter is declared to be a nuisance.



   (B)   In addition to any other relief provided by this subchapter,
the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   The application for relief may include seeking a temporary
restraining order, temporary injunction or permanent injunction.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.090)




PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES




§ 114.090  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Parade and
Public Assemblies Ordinance of the City of Oak Forest.”



(2000 Code, § 5.70.010)



§ 114.091  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE.  Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind or similar display, in or upon any street or other public
property in the City of Oak Forest.



   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.  Any congregation or gathering of persons held
outdoors and upon any public property for the purpose of hearing or observing
individuals or demonstrating views on a topic, either verbally or nonverbally.



      (1)   Private functions defined as those by invitation only
shall be prohibited on city property.



      (2)   PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES shall be prohibited in public
buildings or on city properties where it will substantially interfere with
the normal course of business.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.020)



§ 114.092  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No parade, public assembly or similar activity where the number of
participants or spectators are expected or may reasonably be expected to
exceed 50 or more persons and/or vehicles, is permitted on any street or area
of the city unless a permit allowing the activity has been obtained from the
city; provided, however that this subchapter shall not apply to students
going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities
under the immediate direction and supervision of school authorities or a
governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions, nor shall a
permit be required for normal or scheduled activities of the city. Only one
permit shall be issued during any 12-month period to the same applicant, or
an affiliate organization of the applicant.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.030)



§ 114.093  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person, partnership, voluntary association, corporation or
other organization seeking to obtain a parade or public assembly permit shall
file an application with the City Clerk not more than 90 days and not less
than 21 days before the date for which the parade, public assembly or similar
activity is proposed. The City Clerk is authorized to establish rules,
regulations and procedures for the processing of parade and public assembly
permit applications.



   (B)   In order for any application to be reviewed by the City Clerk,
it must contain any and all information and requested materials listed in §
114.094 of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.040)



§ 114.094  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   Any application for a parade or public assembly permit filed with the
City Clerk must contain the following information:



   (A)   The name, address and phone number of the person signing the
application;



   (B)   If the parade, public assembly or similar activity is proposed
to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address
and phone number of the authorized and responsible leaders of the
organization conducting the parade or public assembly, and the name, address
and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of any state, regional and national
organizations with which the applicant organization is affiliated;



   (C)   The date of the proposed parade or public assembly and the
hours that it will commence and terminate;



   (D)   The location of the assembly area and the time when the
participants will begin to assemble;



   (E)   The route to be traveled, starting point and the termination
point;



   (F)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles to
participate in the parade, public assembly or similar activity;



   (G)   A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will
occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be
traversed;



   (H)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade, public assembly or similar activity;



   (I)   If the parade, public assembly or similar activity is designed
to be held by and on behalf of, or for any person, partnership, voluntary
association, corporation or other organization other than the applicant, the
applicant for the permit shall file with the City of Oak Forest a
communication in writing from the person or from an authorized and
responsible leader of the organization authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on behalf of the person or organization; and



   (J)   Any additional information which the City Clerk or City
Council shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether
a permit should be issued.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.050)



§ 114.095  LATE APPLICANTS.



   The City Council, when good and compelling cause is shown therefor, may
consider an application hereunder which is filed less than 21 days before the
date the parade, public assembly or similar activity is proposed to be
conducted.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.060)



§ 114.096  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The City Council shall direct the City Clerk to issue a permit as
provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from
such other information as may otherwise be obtain it is found that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interfere
with the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the area contiguous to the
route.



   (B)   The activity will not present an unreasonable danger to the
health or safety of the applicant, city employees, or members of the public,
which is to be determined upon the basis of past events that have occurred
within the corporate limits of the City of Oak Forest.



   (C)   There are available at the time of the parade, public assembly
or similar activity a sufficient number of peace officers to police and
protect lawful participants in the activity and maintain adequate police
protection in the rest of the City of Oak Forest.



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the
assembly points of the parade, public assembly or similar activity will not
unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance
service to areas contiguous to the assembly areas.



   (E)   The activity will not interfere with scheduled city functions
or the normal pursuit of activities of the residents of the City of Oak
Forest.



   (F)   The conduct of the parade, public assembly or similar activity
will not interfere with the movement of the fire fighting equipment en route
to a fire.



   (G)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route.



   (H)   The parade, public assembly, or similar activity is not being
conducted for an unlawful purpose or for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.



   (I)   (1)   Before the issuance of a permit the City Clerk shall
require the organization to furnish evidence of insurance naming the city as
an additional insured in a form as may be determined by the City of Oak
Forest to provide for the payment of any claims for personal injuries
(including death and any injuries to city employees, agents or contractors),
property damage or other suits arising out of or connected with the public
assemblies or parades. If an organization’s most reasonable efforts are
unsuccessful, the required insurance can be waived by the City Clerk, subject
to the conditions stated in this section. In such a situation the
organization must provide written proof of their inability to obtain
insurance. If prior events of the applicant in the city have resulted in
damage or injury for which the applicant did not have insurance or did not
compensate the damaged or injured parties, the City Clerk shall require
either:



         (a)   The insurance policy as stated in this section; or



         (b)   A cash security deposit in an amount based upon
damage incurred in any prior event of the applicant in the city, as
determined by the City Clerk.



      (2)   Any funds not expended shall be returned to the
applicant within 30 days after the determination of the damage or injury.



   (J)   A hold harmless agreement shall be signed with the City of Oak
Forest holding the city harmless from any and all claims that may arise from
the use of designated public property, right of way, equipment or any injury
to a city employee, agent or contractor in conjunction with the permitted use.



   (K)   Prior to the issuance of any permit, all parade or public
assembly applicants must pay for the estimated cost of clean-up and
restoration of the area of the event and traffic control costs of any Police
Department, or other city personnel utilized in conjunction with the function
at a reasonable rate to be determined by the City Clerk. The estimated costs
shall be specifically set out in writing to the applicant prior to the
issuance of the permit, showing the basis of the estimated costs. These
estimated costs shall not include any use of city personnel to protect the
public safety in an emergency situation in conjunction with the event. In the
event that the estimated costs paid are in excess of the actual costs, the
overage shall be refunded to the applicant within 30 days after such a
determination has been made. In addition, applicants must agree to and must
pay for any damage created as a result of the public assembly or parade.



   (L)   If the City Clerk receives more than one application for a
parade or public assembly to be held at the same time and at the same place,
the applications filed first in time shall take precedence. An event shall be
considered to be “at the same time” if the event is scheduled to commence
within two hours before or after the holding of another event. If the City
Clerk receives an application for more than one parade or public assembly in
a single day, he or she may set a time for the duration of each parade or
public assembly which shall not, without the consent of the group seeking the
permit, be less than three hours.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.070)



§ 114.097  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   Following the receipt of the application and applicant’s submittal of
all required information the Clerk shall refer the application to the City
Council for its consideration at the next scheduled City Council meeting. In
the event the application is denied, the City Council shall state the reasons
for the denial of the permit. The actions of the City Council shall be
subject to judicial review.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.080)



§ 114.098  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The City Council in denying a permit application pursuant to §
114.096(A) through (F) and (J) shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
a parade, public assembly or similar activity on a date, at a time, at a
location or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall within two days after
notice of the action by the City Council file a written notice of acceptance
with the City Clerk. An alternative permit shall conform to the requirements
of and shall have the effect of a parade or public assembly permit.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.090)



§ 114.099  NOTICE TO OFFICIALS.



   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit,
the City Clerk shall send a copy thereof to the Police Chief, the Fire Chief
and the Corporation Counsel.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.100)



§ 114.100  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following
information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units
of the parade of public assembly;



   (E)   The portions of the streets to be transversed that may be
occupied by the parade or public assembly;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade or public assembly in miles
or fractions thereof; and



   (G)   Such other information as the City Clerk and City Council
shall find necessary to insure the enforcement of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.110)



§ 114.101  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. One of the authorized
and responsible leaders of the organization conducting the parade, public
assembly or similar activity, shall carry the parade or public assembly
permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.120)



§ 114.102  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES, PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES OR SIMILAR
ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede or interfere with any parade, public assembly or similar activity, or
with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in such activity.



   (B)   Driving through parades, public assemblies or similar
activities. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or
persons comprising a parade, public assembly, or similar activity when such
vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a
parade, public assembly, or similar activity; provided, however, that fire
and police vehicles and ambulances may interrupt a parade, public assembly or
similar activity in an emergency situation.



   (C)   Parking on parade or public assembly route. The City Clerk or
City Council shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of
a parade, public assembly or similar activity. The City Clerk or City Council
shall order the posting of signs to such effect and it shall be unlawful for
any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No
person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this
subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.130)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.103  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The City Clerk or City Council shall have the authority to revoke a
parade or public assembly permit issued hereunder if at any time, facts are
brought to the attention of the City Clerk or City Council which show that
the parade, public assembly, or similar activity does not, or will not,
comply with the standards for issuance as herein set forth.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.140)



§ 114.104  WAIVER OF PROVISIONS.



   The City Council may, with the consent of all members of the Council
present at any meeting thereof, waive any provision of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.70.150)



 



§ 114.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of §§ 114.001 through 114.013 shall be fined not less than $1,000 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.



(2000 Code, § 5.10.140)



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 114.070 through 114.078, young adult entertainment facilities, shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(2000 Code, § 5.68.100)



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 114.050 through 114.057 shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500. Each day a violation continues or occurs shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit such
other legal remedies as may be available to the city under the provisions of
the building code or as otherwise provided by law.



(Ord. 2013-03-0435O, § 5, passed 3-12-2013)



CHAPTER 115: ELDER CARE



Section



Adult Day Care Centers



   115.01   License required



   115.02   License fee



Nursing Homes



   115.15   Definitions



   115.16   License required



   115.17   License application



   115.18   License fee



   115.19   Fee exemptions



   115.20   Display and transfer of licenses; responsibility of
licensees



   115.21   Investigation; issuance and effective period of licenses



   115.22   Denial of licenses; petition for review



   115.23   Hearing Board



   115.24   Revocation or nonrenewal of licenses



   115.25   Hearings



   115.26   Minimum standards for buildings



   115.27   Accommodations; ventilation, sanitation and safety
requirements



   115.28   Isolation rooms



   115.29   Removal of dead persons



   115.30   Records



   115.31   Rules and regulations



   115.32   Reports of diseases



   115.33   Inspections



   115.34   Treatment by spiritual means



   115.35   Conflict of laws



   115.36   State Department of Public Health standards, rules and
regulations



   115.37   Conditions for closing homes



   115.99   Penalty




ADULT DAY CARE CENTERS




§ 115.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating an
adult day care center without first obtaining a license to engage in the
business in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.04.010)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.02  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee is stated in § 110.007(B).



(2000 Code, § 5.04.030)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)




NURSING HOMES




§ 115.15  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person making application for a license required by §
115.16.



   HOME FOR THE AGED.  Any home operated not for profit under the
auspices of a religious, fraternal, charitable or other organization, or
operated not for profit under an endowment, which, through its ownership or
management, and as its principal objective, provides maintenance, personal
care, nursing or sheltered care to not less than three persons over 60 years
of age.



   MAINTENANCE.  Food, shelter and laundry.



   NURSING.  Professional nursing or practical nursing, as defined in
ILCS Ch. 225, Act 70, § 4, as amended, for sick or infirm persons who are
under the care and supervision of licensed medical practitioners.



   NURSING HOME.  A private home, institution, building, residence or
other place, whether or not operated for profit, which, through its ownership
or management, provides maintenance, personal care or nursing for three or
more persons, not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage,
who, by reason of illness or physical infirmity, require personal care or
nursing.



   OWNER.  In the case of a licensee who is an individual, means the
licensee, and in the case of a firm, partnership or association, means each
member thereof.



   PERSONAL CARE. Assistance with meals, dressing, movement, bathing or
other personal needs, or general supervision and oversight of the physical
and mental wellbeing of an individual, exclusive of nursing, which
individual, because of age, physical or mental disability, emotional or
behavioral disorder or mental retardation, is incapable of maintaining a
private, independent residence, or is incapable of managing his or her
person, whether or not a conservator has been appointed for the individual.



   RESIDENT.  Any person admitted, for care, to a nursing home, sheltered
care home or home for the aged.



   SHELTERED CARE.  Maintenance and personal care.



   SHELTERED CARE HOME.



      (1)   A private boarding home, institution, building,
residence or other place, whether or not operated for profit, which, through
its ownership or management, provides sheltered care to three or more persons
who are not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage, or any
similar facility in which maintenance is provided to three or more persons
who, by reason of physical infirmity, require personal care.



      (2)   “Nursing home,” “sheltered care home” and
“home for the aged” do not include the following:



         (a)   A home, institution or other place operated by the
federal government or an agency thereof, the state, the county or the city;



         (b)   A hospital, sanitarium or other institution whose
principal activity or business is the diagnosis, care and treatment of human
illness through the maintenance and operation of an organized facility
therefor, which is required to be licensed under the Hospital Licensing Act,
approved July 1, 1953, as amended; and/or



         (c)   Any facility for child care, as defined in the
Child Care Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq..



(2000 Code, § 5.40.010)



§ 115.16  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, other than the regularly constituted authorities of the
United States, the state, the county or the city, shall conduct or operate
any nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.020)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.17  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a license to conduct and operate a nursing
home, sheltered care home or home for the aged shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of Chapter 110 relating to applications for
licenses. The application shall be under oath and shall contain:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant if an individual,
and, if a firm, partnership or association, the name and address of every
member thereof, and, if a corporation, the name and address thereof and of
its officers;



      (2)   The location of the home for which a license is sought;



      (3)   The name of the person under whose management or
supervision the home will be conducted;



      (4)   The number and type of residents for which maintenance,
personal care or nursing is to be provided; and



      (5)   Such information relating to the number, experience and
training of the employees of the home, and of the moral character of the
applicant and of the employees, as the Health Department may deem necessary.



   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a statement relative
to the financial status of the applicant.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.030)



§ 115.18  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for a license to operate a nursing home, sheltered care
home or home for the aged shall be as set forth in § 110.007(B).



(Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 115.19  FEE EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Homes which are operated without a charge being made for the
care of residents shall be exempt from payment of the license fee required by
§ 115.18. An application for a license for such a home shall be accompanied
by an affidavit stating that no charge is made for the care of residents.



   (B)   After investigation by the Health Department and upon the
recommendation of the Department, any home that is not operated for gain, but
where a charge is made for the care of residents, shall be exempt from
payment of the license fee by a specific ordinance of Council. The period of
the exemption shall be set forth in the exempting ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.050)



§ 115.20  DISPLAY AND TRANSFER OF LICENSES; RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.



   The license required by this subchapter shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the hall or near the main entrance inside the home. A
license shall be valid only in the hands of the person to whom it is issued
and it shall not be the subject of a sale, assignment or other transfer,
voluntary or involuntary, nor shall a license be valid for premises other
than those for which it was originally issued. The licensee shall conform to
all standards, rules and regulations of the Health Department relating to the
operation of the types of homes covered by this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.21  INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE AND EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF LICENSES.



   The City Clerk, upon the receipt of an application for a license under
this subchapter, shall cause the Health Department, the Fire Department and
the Building Department to make a thorough investigation of the premises
proposed to be licensed and of the applicant. If the minimum standards
prescribed in § 115.26 are met, and if the applicant is otherwise qualified,
the City Clerk shall, pursuant to a favorable report from the Departments of
their findings, in writing, issue a license to the applicant to conduct a
home of the class designated at the location specified, which license shall
state the maximum number of residents that may be accommodated at any one
time. Any license issued under this subchapter shall expire December 31 of
the year in which it is issued.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.070)



§ 115.22  DENIAL OF LICENSES; PETITION FOR REVIEW.



   If the application for a license required by this subchapter is denied,
the applicant may, within 30 days thereafter, file a petition for review of
the action denying the application, which petition shall be under oath and
shall be filed with the Hearing Board as provided in this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.080)



§ 115.23  HEARING BOARD.



   The Mayor shall appoint a Hearing Board consisting of the Health
Commissioner, the Fire Chief, the Building Commissioner, the City Attorney
and the City Clerk or a duly qualified employee designated by the head of the
department in which such person is employed. The Board shall pass on
applications for licenses for nursing homes, shelter care homes and homes for
the aged which have been denied for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   Failure to meet the minimum standards prescribed in this
subchapter;



   (B)   Conviction of the applicant, or if the applicant is a firm,
partnership or association, of any of its members, or if the applicant is a
corporation, of any of its officers or directors, or of the person designated
to manage or supervise the home, of a felony, or of two or more misdemeanors
involving moral turpitude, as shown by a certified copy of the record of the
court of conviction, or, in the case of a conviction of a misdemeanor by a
court not of record, as shown by other evidence, or other satisfactory
evidence that the moral character of the applicant, manager or supervisor of
the home is not reputable;



   (C)   Personnel insufficient in number or unqualified by training or
experience to provide proper and adequate care for the proposed number and
type of residents; or



   (D)   Insufficient financial or other resources to operate and
conduct the home in accordance with this subchapter and the minimum
standards, rules and regulations promulgated under this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.090)



§ 115.24  REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   A license may be revoked, or a renewal thereof denied, for any of the
following reasons:



   (A)   Cruelty or indifference to the welfare of a resident;



   (B)   Misappropriation of the property of a resident;



   (C)   Conversion of the property of a resident;



   (D)   A violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or of
the minimum standards, rules and regulations promulgated under this
subchapter; or



   (E)   Any ground upon which an application for a license may be
denied as prescribed in § 115.23.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.100)



§ 115.25  HEARINGS.



   (A)   The Hearing Board may, upon the petition of an applicant whose
petition for a license required by this subchapter has been denied, upon its
own motion or upon the verified complaint, in writing, of any person setting
forth facts which, if proven, would constitute grounds for the denial of an
application for a license, the refusal of renewal of a license and the
revocation of a license, investigate the applicant or licensee. Before
denying an application, refusing to renew a license or revoking a license,
the Board shall notify the applicant or licensee, in writing, of a hearing to
be held thereon. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of the
hearing, which hearing shall not be held less than ten days after the notice
is mailed or delivered in person. The notice shall also state the nature of
the charges or reasons for the Board’s contemplated actions, denial,
refusal to renew or revocation of the license.



   (B)   The hearing shall be conducted by the board or the majority
thereof. The applicant or licensee may appear in person and be represented by
counsel at the hearing, at which time the applicant or licensee shall be
afforded an opportunity to present all relevant matters in support of his or
her application for a license or renewal of a license or in resisting the
revocation thereof. The hearing may be continued to another date if any
witness whose testimony is relevant to the issues of the hearing is unable to
be present on the initial hearing date.



   (C)   The Board shall not be bound by common law or statutory rules
of evidence or by technical or formal rules of procedure, but shall conduct
the hearing in such a manner as seems best calculated to result in
substantial justice.



   (D)   The Board shall make findings of fact and render a decision
which shall be entered upon the record of the Board. The applicant may review
the decision as provided in this subchapter.



   (E)   All final administrative decisions rendered by the Board shall
be subject to judicial review pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, ILCS
Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq., and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
The term “administrative decision” is defined in ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §
3-101.



   (F)   The Board, at its expense, shall provide a stenographer to
take the testimony and preserve a record of all proceedings under this
subchapter. The notice of hearing, the complaint, all other documents in the
nature of pleadings, written motions filed in proceedings, the transcript of
testimony and the findings of fact and decisions shall be the record of the
proceedings. The Board shall furnish a transcript of the record to any person
interested as a party to the hearing upon payment therefor of $1 per page for
each original transcript and $0.75 per page for each carbon copy thereof.
However, the charge for any part of the transcript ordered or paid for
previous to the writing of the original record shall be $0.50 per page.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.110)



§ 115.26  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS.



   A building used as a nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the
aged shall comply with the building, zoning and fire regulations of the city,
and with the minimum standards for nursing homes, sheltered care homes and
homes for the aged as prescribed by the Health Department. Those buildings in
existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
subchapter (Ordinance 504, passed July 27, 1970) and used for purposes set
forth in § 115.15, shall have a reasonable time to comply with any provision
of this subchapter affecting zoning, building and fire regulations. The time
for compliance shall be determined by the Department and the Fire Chief,
jointly.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.120)



§ 115.27  ACCOMMODATIONS; VENTILATION, SANITATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In every nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the
aged, each room occupied or to be occupied by a resident shall be of such
dimensions as will give the resident not less than 400 cubic feet of air
space. Every room shall have at least one window connecting with the external
air for each four beds. The window shall be of such dimensions as will secure
to each resident at least 1,500 cubic feet of fresh air per hour by
ventilation. If the window does not secure 1,500 cubic feet of fresh air per
hour by natural ventilation, then each room shall be fitted with such
appliances for ventilation as will secure to each resident in the room at
least 1,500 cubic feet of fresh air per hour. Each bed shall have at least 40
square feet of floor space. In every room or dormitory containing more than
one bed, the beds shall be arranged so as to leave a passageway of not less
than two feet horizontally on all sides of the beds.



   (B)   Each ward or wing of the home shall have running water
furnished in one or more places, either in the ward or wing or convenient
thereto so that the same is adequate and convenient to the occupants thereof.
The plumbing, water closets, bathrooms and sanitary appliances and equipment
shall be constructed in accordance with ordinances relating thereto. The
floor of the cellar or basement in the building used as a home shall be
properly cemented so as to be watertight.



   (C)   The halls of each floor shall be open to the external air with
suitable windows and shall have no room or other obstruction at the end
thereof, unless sufficient light and ventilation is otherwise provided for
the halls. The building as a whole shall be provided with adequate and proper
fire escapes, stairways or inclines for exits.



   (D)   All homes, including the culinary department, dining room,
laundry, laboratory, morgue and post-mortem rooms connected with the same,
shall be equipped from May 15 to November 15 with doors, screens and other
appliances necessary for the exclusion of flies.



   (E)   If a single or multiple dwelling is used for a home, and the
dwelling has sleeping accommodations above the first story, it shall be
provided with at least two stairways, each of which shall be not less than
three feet wide. Each such stairway shall be enclosed with walls, partitions,
floors and ceilings of noncombustible construction or of construction
consisting of wood studs or wood joists and a noncombustible surface material
providing fire resistance of not less than one hour, the door openings of
which shall be protected by self-closing Class B fire-resistive doors. A
separate door exit shall be provided for each such stairway and for each exit
from the basement to the outside of the building.



   (F)   Where sleeping accommodations are provided in the third story
of a building, they may not exceed six in number and may be used only for the
manager’s family and staff, if none of them is a patient. No person in any
home shall occupy any part of a basement as a habitable room.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.130)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.28  ISOLATION ROOMS.



   (A)   Each nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged
shall be provided with a suitable room, approved by the Health Department, to
be used for cases of serious illness, terminal cases and isolation of cases
of contagious, infectious, epidemic or communicable diseases. The room shall
have a stationary washstand with a hot and cold running water supply.



   (B)   Every person conducting or operating a nursing home, sheltered
care home or home for the aged in the city shall cooperate with the
Department in minimizing the danger of transmission of communicable diseases
as set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.140)



§ 115.29  REMOVAL OF DEAD PERSONS.



   (A)   There shall be provided in each nursing home, sheltered care
home or home for the aged a suitable room or area, approved by the Health
Department, for the proper care of the dead pending their removal after being
pronounced dead by a duly licensed physician of the state.



   (B)   No person acting as superintendent or manager, or who is
otherwise in charge or control of any nursing home, sheltered care home or
home for the aged, nor any person connected with any such home, in any
capacity whatsoever as a nurse, physician or attendant, shall order, permit
or allow the body of any resident or person who has been under care in the
home, and who has died therein, to be removed from the home at any time
within 24 hours after the hour of death, unless the removal of the body is
authorized, in writing, by some member of the immediate family of the
deceased person or by some other person legally authorized to order or permit
the removal. No body shall be kept at any such home longer than 36 hours
after death without permission from the Department.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.150)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.30  RECORDS.



   (A)   Each nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged
shall maintain individual records for each resident. The records shall
include the resident’s admission record, which shall show the name,
address, age, sex, marital status, information required for the filling in of
the death certificate and the date of admission and discharge or disposition
of the resident, a medical record, a physician’s order record, nursing
notes and a list of the resident’s belongings.



   (B)   Accurate records of financial transactions involving use of
the resident’s funds shall be on file in the nursing home, sheltered care
home or homes for the aged.



   (C)   Personnel files shall be maintained for all employees, which
files shall include records of education, experience and findings of physical
examinations as to physical and mental fitness and shall also show freedom
from any communicable disease. Daily work and time schedules of employees
shall be maintained.



   (D)   Each home shall maintain a permanent residents’ registry
book in which the name of each resident is entered in chronological order
with the date and number of entry.



   (E)   All records shall be open at all times to the inspection of
the Health Department or its duly authorized representative.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.160)



§ 115.31  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Nursing homes, sheltered care homes and homes for the aged shall comply
with rules and regulations set forth by the Health Department. In addition,
the Department may adopt and enforce rules and regulations relating to the
operation and conduct of the homes, and to the care, treatment,
rehabilitation, recreation and maintenance of the residents thereof, as it
deems necessary.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.170)



§ 115.32  REPORTS OF DISEASES.



   (A)   Every person conducting or operating a nursing home, sheltered
care home or home for the aged in the city shall make reports to the Health
Department as it deems necessary, by telephone and by mail, of all epidemic,
communicable or contagious diseases. The reports shall contain the names and
residences of all persons suffering from the diseases, together with such
other information as may be required by the Department.



   (B)   All reports required under this section shall be made in full
upon forms furnished for that purpose by the Department and shall be signed
by the chief physician, manager or licensee in charge of the home.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.180)



§ 115.33  INSPECTIONS.



   Every nursing home, sheltered care home and home for the aged shall be
open at all reasonable times to inspection by the Health Department, the
Building Department and the Fire Department, as often as is deemed necessary.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.190)



§ 115.34  TREATMENT BY SPIRITUAL MEANS.



   Nothing in this subchapter or in the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant hereto shall be construed as authorizing the medical supervision,
regulation or control of the remedial care or treatment of residents or
patients in any home or institution conducted for those who rely upon
treatment by prayer or spiritual means in accordance with the creed or tenet
of any well-recognized church or religious denomination. A license for such a
home is required and all remaining rules, regulations and minimum standards
shall apply.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.200)



§ 115.35  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   Notwithstanding any provision in this subchapter to the contrary, all
persons licensed under this subchapter shall comply with ILCS Ch. 210, Act
45, §§ 1-101 et seq. Where there is a conflict in standards and regulations
of the Act and this subchapter, the stricter or higher standard or regulation
shall govern.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.210)



§ 115.36  STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH STANDARDS, RULES AND
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The following minimum standards, rules and regulations of the
State Department of Public Health are adopted and made a part of this
subchapter by reference:



      (1)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the
Licensing of Sheltered Care Facilities;



      (2)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the
Licensing of Skilled Nursing Facilities; and



      (3)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for the
Licensing of Intermediate Care Facilities.



   (B)   Where there is a conflict in the standards, rules and
regulations adopted in division (A) of this section and any provision of this
subchapter, the stricter or higher standard, rule or regulation shall govern.
Three copies of each of the minimum standards, rules and regulations are on
file and have been on file for at least 15 days prior to the passage of the
ordinance codified in this subchapter, for public inspection, use and
examination.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.220)



§ 115.37  CONDITIONS FOR CLOSING HOMES.



   (A)   In the event of a conviction by any court of record of any
person for a violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter relating
to the health, safety and accommodations of patients or residents, the Health
Department is authorized to close a nursing home, sheltered care home or home
for the aged and to cause its vacation of all residents or patients
therefrom, pending the repairs, alterations or additions necessary to make it
safe and proper for the occupancy of its patients or residents and to make it
comply with this subchapter.



   (B)   Whenever an inspection of such a home discloses that the
continued operation of the home would be an immediate and serious menace to
public health and safety, the Health Commissioner is authorized to close the
home forthwith.



(2000 Code, § 5.40.230)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license,
whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 115.01 and 115.02 shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(2000 Code, § 5.04.040)



CHAPTER 116: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS



Section



Cable Television Franchises



   116.001   Purposes



   116.002   Definitions



   116.003   Rules of construction



Administration and Enforcement



   116.015   Cable Commission



   116.016   Franchise required; authority



   116.017   Compliance with applicable laws and regulations



   116.018   Diligence of grantee



   116.019   Notification of City Clerk prior to applications to FCC



   116.020   Grantee responsible for compliance



   116.021   Recourse and acknowledgments of grantee



   116.022   Reimbursement of city expenses



   116.023   Rights of city



   116.024   Regulation and administration by city



   116.025   Transfer of city’s rights, powers and duties



   116.026   Legal proceedings



   116.027   Arbitration



   116.028   Unlawful acts



   116.029   Amendments



Rules and Regulations



   116.040   Terms and conditions of franchises



   116.041   Selection of grantees



   116.042   Franchise agreement



   116.043   Cable/video service provider fee and PEG access support fee



   116.044   Technical standards



   116.045   Services



   116.046   Construction of the system



   116.047   Operation and maintenance of the system



   116.048   Subscriber privacy



   116.049   Cable and Video Customer Protection



   116.050   Rates and charges



   116.051   Employment discrimination prohibited



   116.052   Preferential practices prohibited



   116.053   Records and reports; inspections



   116.054   Nonliability of city; insurance



   116.055   Reviews, modifications and renewals of franchise



   116.056   Revocation of franchise



   116.057   Conditions for termination of franchise



   116.058   Procedures following revocation or expiration of franchise



   116.059   Lesser sanctions



Telecommunications Providers



   116.070   Definitions



   116.071   Recitals



   116.072   Registration of telecommunications providers



   116.073   Adoption of fee



   116.074   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee



   116.075   Collection, enforcement and administration of fee



   116.076   Audit



   116.077   Additional regulations



   116.078   Waiver and fee implementation



   116.079   Compliance with other laws



   116.080   Existing franchises and licenses



   116.081   Additional remedies



   116.999   Penalty




CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES




§ 116.001  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this subchapter, §§ 116.015 through 116.029 and
116.040 through 116.059 are to provide for the granting of nonexclusive
franchises to construct, operate and maintain broadband communication
networks in the public ways of the city, to provide specifications,
procedures and standards for the same, to provide for the regulation of the
networks and to provide for the payment to the city for the privilege of
exercising the rights granted by the franchises.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.010)



§ 116.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AFFILIATES OF ANOTHER PERSON.



      (1)   Any person directly or indirectly owning, controlling or
holding, with power to vote, 5% or more of the outstanding voting securities
of such other person;



      (2)   Any person, 5% or more of whose outstanding voting
securities are directly or indirectly owned, controlled or held, with power
to vote, by such other person;



      (3)   Any person directly or indirectly controlling,
controlled by, or under common control with, such other person; and



      (4)   Any officer, director, partner, copartner or executive
employee of such other person.



   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES.  All revenues received by a grantee, its
affiliates and/or subsidiaries, from and in connection with the operation of
a broadband telecommunications network (BTN) in the city, and all revenues
generated by the network or from the use of the network, including, but not
limited to, retail sales of personal property, data transmission, alarm or
signal transmission, advertising revenue, charges to subscribers for basic
service, pay service, two-way service and installation and any and all
revenue received from any source whatsoever for use of the network for the
transmission of electronic or microwave impulses, provided that the revenue
may lawfully be included in the base on which the city may calculate the
franchise fee herein. ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES does not include sales taxes or
other taxes or fees which are separately billed to subscribers by the grantee
or which are collected from subscribers for remittance to a governmental
agency or other third party.



   BASIC SERVICE.  The service package offered by the grantee to
subscribers, which package includes, but is not limited to, the signals
referred to in § 116.050(A) and at least one municipal access channel, at
least one educational access channel and at least one public interest
channel. If more than one service package meets such conditions, then the
service package which is offered at the lowest rate shall constitute the
basic service.



   BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (BTN) or NETWORK.  All of the
component physical, operational and programming elements of any NETWORK of
cables and optical, electrical or electronic equipment, including cable
television, designed, constructed, wired or used for the purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying and transmitting, by coaxial cable, fiber
optics, microwave or other means, audio and/or audio/visual electrical
impulses of television, radio and other intelligences, either analog or
digital, for sale or use by the inhabitants of the city, including, without
limitation, antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, conductors,
converters, equipment and facilities.



   COMMENCE OPERATION.  That time and date when operation of the network
is considered to have commenced, which shall be when sufficient distribution
facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full network
service to at least 20% of the potential subscribers in the franchise
territory.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
or elected successor with respect to federal regulation and licensing in
connection with the subject matter of this subchapter.



   FRANCHISE.  The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this
subchapter to construct and operate a broadband telecommunications network
along the public ways in the city. The authorization, in whatever form
granted, does not include any license or permit required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other
ordinances and laws of the city.



   FULL NETWORK SERVICE.  Basic service and all pay services. FULL
NETWORK SERVICE does not include two-way service.



   GRANTEE.  Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this subchapter
and under the granting franchise ordinance, its present subsidiaries and
affiliates and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.



   PAY SERVICE.  Any service package for which a monthly or other service
charge is made.



   PUBLIC SCHOOL.  Any public elementary or high school, and any private
school having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in a public
elementary or high school and having no rooms regularly used for housing or
sleeping purposes.



   REASONABLE NOTICE.  Written notice addressed to the grantee at its
office, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than four
days prior to the day on which the party giving the notice commences any
action which requires the giving of notice. In computing the four days,
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays recognized by the city shall be excluded.



   SALE.  Includes any SALE, exchange, barter or offer for SALE.



   SERVICE PACKAGE.  One or more communications channels which are
offered as a unit by the grantee to subscribers and for which a separately
identifiable charge is made.



   STREET.  Any of the following ways that have been dedicated to the
public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public
authority or by others and located within the city limits: STREETS, roadways,
highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and
similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, together with such
other public property and areas that the city permits to be included within
the definition of STREET from time to time.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person receiving a service package.



   SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED.  That sufficient distribution facilities have
been installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of full network
service to at least 90% of the potential subscribers in the franchise
territory.



   TWO-WAY SERVICE.  Any service which involves the transmission of a
signal from a subscriber to a facility maintained by the grantee as part of
the network. TWO-WAY SERVICE includes, but is not limited to, fire, security
and medical alert systems.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.020)



§ 116.003  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   This subchapter shall be construed and interpreted according to the
following principles.



   (A)   All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this
subchapter are repealed.



   (B)   Words in the present tense include the future.



   (C)   Words importing the singular number may extend to and include
the plural, words importing the plural number may extend to and include the
singular, and words in the masculine gender shall include the female gender.



   (D)   The specification in this section of principles to apply in
the construction and interpretation of this subchapter shall not be a
limitation as to other applicable principles.



   (E)   Whenever this subchapter sets forth any time for any act to be
performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the
essence and any failure of the grantee to so perform within the time allotted
shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to terminate, cancel and
revoke the franchise or use other remedies.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.030)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 116.015  CABLE COMMISSION



   (A)   Created. There is hereby created the Cable Commission, which
shall be advisory to the City Council and to city staff as requested by the
Council.



   (B)   Intent and purpose. It shall be the intent and purpose of the
Cable Commission to study and evaluate the operation of cable communications
systems within Oak Forest, including the quality and effectiveness of service
to cable customers, pursuant to the cable television franchise regulations
and the grant of any franchise.



   (C)   Commission membership.



      (1)   Appointment. the Cable Commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the
City Council. The City Administrator, or his or her designee, and an
alderperson-liaison appointed by the Mayor shall be ex officio non-voting
members of the Commission. The Cable Commission shall serve with compensation
as may be determined by the City Council.



      (2)   Vacancies. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled
in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made.



      (3)   Chairperson. The Mayor shall designate one of the
members of the Commission to be Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be
appointed annually in May of each year.



      (4)   Conflict of interest. Any member who has participated or
reasonably anticipates participating in the production of any program
presented for broadcast on the access channel(s) shall recuse himself or
herself from any Commission deliberations regarding the program, if any.



      (5)   City employees. No person employed by the city to
perform services relating to the government access channel or public access
channel may serve on the Cable Commission.



   (D)   Meetings.



      (1)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be monthly on a
day certain as determined by the Chairperson of the Commission. All regular
and special meetings of the Commission shall be noticed and conducted in a
manner consistent with the Open Meetings Act.



      (2)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Commission may
be called by the Chairperson, or any three members, from time to time.
Requests for special meetings by three or more members must be received by
the Chairperson no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting.



      (3)   Quorum. A majority of the Commission members shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any
regular or special meeting of the Commission, including the conduct of public
hearings. Less than a quorum may adjourn a meeting from time to time until a
quorum can be achieved.



      (4)   Manner of acting. The act of a majority of the members
present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the
Commission.



      (5)   Rules of procedure. The Commission shall enact rules of
procedure not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance
the purpose of the Commission. In the absence of any contrary rules,
Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the Commission.



   (E)   Duties. The Commission shall perform the following duties:



      (1)   Counsel and advise the Mayor and City Council on all
matters pertaining to cable communications within the city;



      (2)   Review and evaluate and, upon direction of the City
Council, conduct public hearings on any proposed changes in the rates, fees
or service charges, as required or permitted by the cable television
franchise regulations;



      (3)   Review the internal or external systems and the hardware
and software used, and recommend any upgrading deemed necessary or advisable
by the Commission;



      (4)   Recommend to the Mayor and City Council any proposed
changes in the cable television franchise regulations deemed necessary or
advisable by the Commission;



      (5)   Review the quality of access programming and provide for
rules for the use and operation of the access station(s) made available by
the franchisees;



      (6)    Review and evaluate and, upon direction of the City
Council, conduct public hearings on any alleged violations of the cable
regulations, an ordinance granting a franchise, a franchise agreement or
state or federal laws and regulations, including but not limited to customer
service standards, and recommend any penalty, fine, sanction or liquidated
damages.



      (7)   Perform such other duties and functions related to cable
communications as may be requested of it by the Mayor and City Council.



   (F)   Reports and records.



      (1)   The Commission shall keep records and minutes of its
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it.



      (2)   The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each
meeting to the Mayor and City Council in a timely manner.



      (3)   The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the
City Administrator in writing, together with any findings of fact necessary
to support the recommendations.



(Ord. 2007-06-0108O, passed 6-12-2007)



§ 116.016  FRANCHISE REQUIRED; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Franchise required. No person shall construct, install,
maintain or operate, on or within any street, any equipment or facilities for
the distribution of television signals, radio signals or other intelligences,
either analog or digital, over a BTN to any subscriber, unless a franchise
authorizing the use of the streets has first been obtained pursuant to this
subchapter, and thereafter only while such person is legally operating under
the terms and provisions of the franchise.



   (B)   Scope of authority. Any franchise granted under this
subchapter shall give to the grantee, subject to this subchapter, the right
and privilege, at its own expense, to construct, erect, operate, modify and
maintain in, upon, along, above, over and under the streets, such towers,
antennas, cables, electronic equipment and other network appurtenances as are
necessary for the operation of the network in the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.050)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.017  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.



   Each grantee, at its expense, shall comply with all laws, orders and
regulations of federal, state and municipal authorities and with any
directive of any public officer, pursuant to law, who legally imposes any
regulation, order or duty upon the grantee with respect to the franchise.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.060)



§ 116.018  DILIGENCE OF GRANTEE.



   Each grantee shall diligently apply for all necessary permits and
authorizations required in the conduct of its business and shall diligently
pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary pole attachment
agreements, necessary authorizations from the Federal Aviation Agency to
construct such receiving antenna towers as may be required and necessary
authorizations or waivers from the FCC, and shall assist the city in filing
its application to the FCC for waiver of franchise fee limitations.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.070)



§ 116.019  NOTIFICATION OF CITY CLERK PRIOR TO APPLICATIONS TO FCC.



   No grantee shall apply for a waiver, exception or declaratory ruling
from the FCC or from any other federal or state regulatory agency without
prior written notification to the City Clerk.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.080) Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.020  GRANTEE RESPONSIBLE FOR COMPLIANCE.



   A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of this subchapter or of the franchise agreement by any failure of
the city, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon the grantee’s
performance or to seek the grantee’s compliance with any one or more of the
terms and conditions.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.090)



§ 116.021  RECOURSE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OF GRANTEE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subchapter, the
grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss,
cost, expense or damages arising out of this subchapter or because of the
city’s enforcement of this subchapter.



   (B)   The grantee shall expressly acknowledge that upon accepting
the right, privilege and franchise granted by this subchapter, it does so
relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the city in connection with the BTN and this subchapter. By the
acceptance of the franchise granted by this subchapter, the grantee agrees
that it will not, at any time, set up against the city, in any claim or
proceeding, any provision, condition or term of this subchapter as being
unreasonable, arbitrary or void or beyond the power or authority of the city
to make a part of this subchapter, except as to those matters pre-empted by
federal or state law.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.100)



§ 116.022  REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY EXPENSES.



   In connection with the grant of all franchises, each successful grantee
shall reimburse the city for actual expenses incurred by the city in granting
a cable television franchise, including expenses incurred for legal services
and consultants. Upon receipt of all the expenses, the City Treasurer shall
transmit to the grantee an itemized listing of all of the expenses and the
grantee shall then reimburse the city within 30 days after receipt of the
listing.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.110)



§ 116.023  RIGHTS OF CITY.



   (A)   Eminent domain. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed or
construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the
city to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through
the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify
or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of
eminent domain.



   (B)   Legal rights and powers. There is reserved to the city every
right or power which is required to be reserved in this subchapter or
provided by law, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees
to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirement of the city
in its exercise of such rights or powers, whether heretofore or hereafter
enacted or established. Without limitation of the foregoing, the right is
reserved to the city to adopt and enforce, in addition to the terms,
conditions and provisions of this subchapter and of otherwise existing
applicable ordinances, such additional ordinances, rules and regulations as
it finds necessary in the exercise of its police powers, provided that the
ordinances, rules and regulations are reasonable and not in material or
substantial conflict with the rights granted in this subchapter.



   (C)   Waivers. Neither the granting of any franchise nor any
provision of this subchapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise
of any governmental right or power of the city, subject to the rights of a
grantee under its franchise and the franchise agreement.



   (D)   FCC jurisdiction. If the FCC or any other federal or state
body or agency now or hereafter exercises any paramount jurisdiction over the
subject matter of any franchise granted under this subchapter, then to the
extent that such jurisdiction pre-empts or precludes the exercise of like
jurisdiction by the city, the jurisdiction of the city shall terminate.
However, the city shall thereupon have the right to modify or amend any of
the provisions of this subchapter and of the franchise agreement to such
reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and
purpose of this subchapter.



   (E)   City’s contract rights. The preemption or preclusion by the
state of the exercise by the city of any of its police powers shall not
diminish, impair, alter or affect any contractual benefit to the city or the
grantee or any contractual obligation of the grantee under any franchise
issued under this subchapter. Any and all rights, powers, privileges and
authorizations arising under this subchapter or any franchise agreement are
each and all declared by the city and any grantee accepting any franchise to
be contractual in nature and to be for the benefit of the city.



   (F)   Rules and regulations. There is reserved to the city the right
to impose rules and regulations, reasonably required, in order to better
carry out the purpose and intent of this subchapter. Before any such rules
and regulations are adopted, the city shall give notice to the grantee and
afford the grantee an opportunity to be heard.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.120)



§ 116.024  REGULATION AND ADMINISTRATION BY CITY.



   (A)   Continuing supervision by Council. Council shall have
continuing supervision over the operation of any franchise granted under this
subchapter. Routine responsibilities in the administration of this subchapter
and any franchise agreement shall be performed by the cable television
committee.



   (B)   Responsibility of City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall
review and audit all reports and filings submitted to the city as required in
this subchapter, insofar as they apply to the financial operation of the BTN.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.130)



§ 116.025  TRANSFER OF CITY’S RIGHTS, POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee or
department of the city, shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other
officer, employee or department of the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.140)



§ 116.026  LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.



   A grantee shall, at its sole risk and expense, upon demand of the city
made by the City Attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or
other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative,
legislative or otherwise, brought, instituted or had by third persons or duly
constituted authorities against or affecting the city, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents or employees, and which arise out of or pertain to the
exercise or the enjoyment of the grantee’s franchise or the granting
thereof by the city, provided that neither the grantee nor the city shall
make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause
of action, action, suit or other proceeding without first obtaining the
written consent of the other.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.150)



§ 116.027  ARBITRATION.



   At the option of either the city or the grantee, any matter in
controversy or dispute between the city and the grantee may be submitted to
arbitration in all cases where the judgment of a court of law could be
sought. This option shall be exercised by serving written notice. The
arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the American
Arbitration Association.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.160)



§ 116.028  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Interception of communications. No person shall make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of a grantee’s BTN, for the purpose
of enabling the person or any other person to receive any signal, information
or intelligence transmitted over the network, without payment to the grantee
of the full amount properly due for the signal, information or intelligence.



   (B)   Tampering with equipment. No person, without the consent of
the owner, shall wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wire or
other equipment used for the distribution of signals, information or
intelligence over a grantee’s network.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.170)  Penalty, § 116.999



§ 116.029  AMENDMENTS.



   Council may amend this subchapter or the franchise agreement whenever
necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage of developments in the
field of transmission of communication signals which will afford it an
opportunity to more effectively, efficiently or economically serve its
customers. However, this section shall not be construed to require the city
to make any such amendment.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.180)




RULES AND REGULATIONS




§ 116.040  TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF FRANCHISES.



   (A)   Exclusivity. Franchises granted under this chapter are not
exclusive. The city reserves the right to grant other franchises to other
persons at any time.



   (B)   Effective period. Each franchise shall take effect and be in
force as provided in this chapter for 15 years from the effective date as
provided in § 116.041(F), subject, however, to the right of the city to
terminate the franchise as provided in this chapter.



   (C)   Noninterference with use of streets. The right and privilege
granted by a franchise shall be exercised so as not to interfere with the use
of the streets by the city and such others as may be designated by the city
to use such streets. The city may demand the removal of cables or equipment
that have been constructed by the grantee when the city believes that the
same is interfering with the use of the streets.



   (D)   Transfers.



      (1)   No franchise shall be sold, transferred, leased,
assigned or disposed of, whether by way of sale, merger, consolidation or
otherwise, without, in each case, the prior written consent of the city, and
then only after the distribution facilities have been substantially completed
and under such conditions as the city may establish. The consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (D)(1) of
this section, a franchise may be mortgaged, pledged or assigned as security
for the financing of the related BTN. The mortgage, pledge or assignment may
be made without the consent of the city, but any such mortgage, pledge or
assignment shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the franchise and
the related franchise agreement and to the rights of the city under this
chapter.



      (3)   Reference is made to division (I)(1) of this section for
the effect of changes in ownership or control of the grantee and to division
(I)(2) of this section for rules covering control of a network by a financial
institution.



      (4)   Reference is made to § 116.057 for transfers in
connection with insolvency proceedings.



   (E)   Territory.



      (1)   Each franchise shall relate to the territorial limits of
the city and to any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the
franchise. Subject to § 116.046, the grantee shall be required to extend the
network to and to offer the services of the network to potential subscribers
within the franchise territory where there are at least a total of 40
residential dwelling units and/or occupied commercial or industrial
structures per line mile.



      (2)   Where the density of residential dwellings and occupied
commercial or industrial structures, adverse terrain or other factors render
extension of the system and offer of services impractical or technically
infeasible, or create an economic hardship, the city may, upon petition of
the grantee, either waive the extension of the network into such areas or
allow the extension and offer of services on such special terms, conditions
and provisions as are reasonable and fair to the city, the grantee and
potential subscribers in the areas.



   (F)   Specification of privileges and exemptions. No privilege or
exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted except those
specifically prescribed in this chapter.



   (G)   Obligations of grantee to obtain other permits. A franchise
shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole
or conduit space from any department of the city, a utility company or others
maintaining utilities in streets.



   (H)   Obligation of successors and assignees. A franchise shall be
binding upon the grantee and all successors, lessees or assignees as may be
approved by the city.



   (I)   Transactions affecting ownership or control.



      (1)   (a)   Express approval of Council, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld, shall be required where ownership or control of more
than 10% of the right of control of or interest in the franchise or the
grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none
of whom already owns or controls 10% or more of the right of control or
interest, singularly or collectively. Transfer from a subsidiary to a parent
corporation or vice versa shall not be considered change of control.



         (b)   At the time a franchise is granted, and annually
thereafter, the grantee shall file with the city a current list of its
owners, partners (both general and limited), officers and directors, together
with a list of shareholders having 5% or more of its stock if the grantee is
a corporation.



      (2)   Any financial institution having a pledge of or other
form of security interest in a franchise, or in the assets of a grantee, for
the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the BTN,
shall notify the city whenever it or its designee satisfactory to the city
takes control and operates the network. However, the financial institution
shall also submit a plan for the operation that will ensure continued service
and compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial
institution exercises control over the network. The financial institution
shall not exercise control over the network for a period exceeding one year,
unless extended by Council, at its discretion, and during the time it shall
have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another
grantee. If the city finds that any transfer, after considering the legal,
financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the
applicant, is satisfactory, the city may transfer and assign the rights and
obligations of the franchise consistent with the public interest. The consent
of the city to the transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.



      (3)   As used in this section, “grantee” does not include
any affiliate of the grantee.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.190)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.041  SELECTION OF GRANTEES.



   (A)   Applications; fee. Applications for an original franchise
granted under this chapter shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $500. The applications shall
contain written information which is responsive to requirements established
from time to time by Council.



   (B)   Acceptance of certain applications. Applications for a
franchise which were submitted to and accepted by the city prior to October
22, 1980, shall be deemed to be in compliance with division (A) of this
section. The provisions for the filing fee shall not be applicable to the
applications.



   (C)   Criteria for evaluation of applications. Applications for a
BTN franchise will be evaluated according to the following criteria.



      (1)   Experience. Preference may be given to applicants that
can give evidence of providing dependable and complete service to other
communities and that have established a record of excellent construction
practices, the ability to meet deadlines and good planning and marketing
practices.



      (2)   Financial stability. Preference may be given to
applicants that present evidence of financial resources which will ensure
that the applicant will have the ability to complete the entire network in
the franchise area within the time period set forth in § 116.046(A).



      (3)   System design. Preference may be given to a system which
contains the flexibility to adjust to new technological development and which
indicates that high quality equipment will be used and that high quality
maintenance practices will be followed.



      (4)   Services. Preference may be given to the applicant that
proposes to provide superior programming. In determining what constitutes
superior programming, particular consideration will be given to local
origination and the resources which an applicant proposes to devote to local
origination in order to make it interesting, innovative and financially
feasible.



      (5)   Local studio facilities. Preference may be given to
applicants that propose to maintain studio facilities within the city.



      (6)   Rate schedules. Preference may be given to applicants
with the most reasonable installation and subscriber rate schedules. However,
the schedules must be justified in financial pro forma statements by the use
of realistic levels of penetration.



      (7)   Local ownership and control. The degree of local
ownership and control of an applicant may be taken into account.



   (D)   Priority. The criteria set forth in division (C) of this
section are not listed in any order of priority.



   (E)   Procedures for granting a franchise. If Council determines
that a franchise should be granted under this chapter, Council will then
proceed as follows.



      (1)   Council shall, by motion, make a tentative selection of
the applicant. This action shall not constitute the award of a franchise and
shall not confer any rights upon the applicant, except to proceed in
accordance with this division.



      (2)   The proper officers of the city and the applicant shall
discuss the terms of the franchise agreement described in § 116.042.



      (3)   If the city and the applicant reach agreement as to the
terms and conditions of the franchise agreement, the agreement shall be
presented to Council for approval and authorization for execution by the
Mayor.



      (4)   Council shall then, by ordinance, grant a franchise to
the applicant.



   (F)   Effective date of franchise. The effective date of a franchise
shall be the date on which the ordinance referred to in division (E)(4) of
this section is adopted by Council.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.200)



§ 116.042  FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Agreement required. No franchise shall be granted under this
chapter unless the applicant and the city have executed a franchise agreement
which shall set forth the terms and provisions of the franchise.



   (B)   Contents. Each franchise agreement shall contain the following
express representations by the grantee:



      (1)   The grantee has carefully read the terms and conditions
of this chapter and the franchise agreement and accepts all of the terms and
conditions and agrees to abide by the same;



      (2)   The grantee acknowledges that it has carefully read the
terms and conditions of this chapter and expressly waives any claim that any
provision of this chapter is unreasonable, arbitrary or void, except as to
those provisions which are pre-empted now or hereafter by superseding
provisions of federal or state law, in accordance with § 116.023(D);



      (3)   The grantee acknowledges that it has not been induced to
accept the franchise by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of the
city or by any third person, regarding any term or condition of this chapter
or of the franchise agreement not expressed therein; and



      (4)   The grantee represents that no promise or inducement,
oral or written, has been made to any city employee or official regarding
receipt of the franchise.



   (C)   Additional conditions or provisions.



      (1)   In addition to those matters required to be included in
the franchise agreement by virtue of this chapter, the franchise agreement
shall contain such further conditions or provisions as may be included in the
grantee’s proposal and/or negotiated between the city and the grantee,
except that no condition or provision shall conflict with any provision of
this chapter or other law.



      (2)   In case of such a conflict, or in case of any ambiguity
between any terms or provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter,
the words of this chapter shall control.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.210)



§ 116.043  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CABLE SERVICE.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



      COMMISSION.  The Illinois Commerce Commission.



      GROSS REVENUES.  All consideration of any kind or nature,
including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video
system to provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable
service or video service area within the city.



         (a)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



            1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



            2.   Event-based charges for cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and
video-on-demand charges;



            3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable
service or video service equipment;



            4.   Service charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation,
installation and repair charges;



            5.   Administrative charges related to the
provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to
service order and service termination charges;



            6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient
funds check charges and other charges assessed to recover the costs of
collecting delinquent payments;



            7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by
the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number
of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in
relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement;



            8.   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or similar channel,
subject to division (a)10. of this definition;



            9.   In the case of a cable service or video
service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services,
capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue
attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be
included in the GROSS REVENUE unless the holder can reasonably identify the
division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept
in the regular course of business; and



            10.   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



         (b)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



            1.   Revenues not actually received, even if
billed, such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi);



            2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price
adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder
of the state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit,
or discount is attributable to cable service or video service;



            3.   Regardless of whether the services are
bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video
service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service
or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services or the provision of
directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in
accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or orders;



            4.   The sale of cable services or video services
for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider
fee from the purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies
in writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service;



            5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability
imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or
any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



            6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers;
and



            7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home
shopping” or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping
channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.



         (c)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be
included in the calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of
the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect
of evading the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



      HOLDER.  A person or entity that has received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



      PEG.  Public, education and governmental.



      PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.  The amount paid under this section and
ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



      SERVICE.  The provision of “cable service” or “video
service” to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person
or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



      SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.  The amount paid under this section and
ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.



      VIDEO SERVICE.  Video programming and subscriber interaction, if
any, that is required for the selection or use of video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail or other services offered over the public internet.



   (B)   Cable/video service provider fee imposed.



      (1)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the city.



      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby
shall be 5% of the holder’s gross revenues.



      (3)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at
least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the city.



      (4)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and
pay the service provider fee to the city. The holder’s liability for the
fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days
after receipt of the ordinance adopting this section by the holder. The
ordinance adopting this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to
the address listed on the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6) to the city.



      (5)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee
shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.



      (6)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to
existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing
franchise agreement with the city in which a fee is paid.



      (7)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator
that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement
may deduct the amount of the credit from the fees that operator owes under
division (B)(2) above.



   (C)   PEG access support fee imposed.



      (1)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby
imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to division (B) above.



      (2)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater,
the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the
city or its designee for PEG access support in the city.



      (3)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee
to the city or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the
date set forth in division (B)(4) above.



      (4)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee
shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.



      (5)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator
that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All
payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that the operator owes under
division (C)(2) above.



   (D)   Applicable principles. All determinations and calculations
under this section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting
principles.



   (E)   No impact on other taxes due from holder. Nothing contained in
this section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or
may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is or may later be
required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or
video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement
of the holder with respect to payment of the city’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



   (F)   Audits of cable/video service provider.



      (1)   Audit requirement. The city will notify the holder of
the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers
to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with
the same requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and
records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the city. If all local franchises between the city and cable
operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch.
50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.



      (2)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an
audit shall be paid within 30 days after the city’s submission of an
invoice for the sum.



   (G)   Late fees/payments. All fees due and payments which are past
due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this city pursuant to the
Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1
et seq.



(Ord. 2007-11-0139O, passed 11-27-2007)



§ 116.044  TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   General requirements. Except to the extent to which the FCC
has pre-empted the field of technical standards, each BTN for which a
franchise is granted under this chapter shall be designed, installed and
operated so as to meet the following general requirements.



      (1)   The system shall be operationally capable of relaying to
subscriber terminals those television and radio broadcast signals for the
carriage of which the grantee is now or hereafter authorized by the FCC.



      (2)   The system shall consist of a cable network having a
minimum initial forward bandwidth in compliance with the technical standards
and rules of the FCC, provided that if a reverse or feedback circuit is
routed through a subscriber’s premises, it shall be connected so as to
permit subscriber notification and deactivation.



      (3)   The system shall be capable of continuous 24-hour daily
operation.



      (4)   The system shall be operated in such a manner as to
avoid causing interference with reception of off-the-air signals by
nonsubscribers to the network.



      (5)   The system shall be designed, installed and operated so
as to comply with all applicable technical standards and regulations
promulgated by the FCC.



      (6)   The system shall be designed, installed and operated so
as to ensure the delivery to all subscribers of standard color and monochrome
signals on the FCC-designated Class I television channels without noticeable
picture degradation or visible evidence of color distortion or other forms of
interference directly attributable to the performance of the network.



      (7)   The system shall be established and constructed in
accordance with the highest standards of the art of cable communications and
in accordance with the highest standards of the code of conduct with respect
to businesses of the size and type of the grantee.



   (B)   Performance monitoring. Except to the extent to which the FCC
has pre-empted the field of performance monitoring, the following rules shall
apply to the grantee.



      (1)   The performance of each network for which a franchise is
granted with respect to the standards set forth in division (A) of this
section shall be monitored in accordance with this division.



      (2)   Test procedures used in verification of the performance
criteria set forth in this section, if not as set forth in Paragraph 76.609,
Subpart K, of the FCC Rules and Regulations, shall be in accordance with good
engineering practice and shall be fully described in an attachment to the
annual certificate filed with the city.



      (3)   To the extent that the report of measurements as
required above may be combined with reports of measurements required by the
FCC or other regulatory agencies, the city shall accept such combined
reports, provided that all standards and measurements herein or hereafter
established by the city are satisfied.



      (4)   Not later than 13 months after any new or substantially
rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers,
or within such lesser period of time as may be required by the FCC from time
to time, technical performance tests shall be conducted by the grantee to
demonstrate full compliance with the technical standards of the FCC. The
tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision of, a qualified
registered professional engineer or an engineer with proper training and
experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the city describing
test results, instrumentation, calibration and test procedures, and the
qualifications of the engineer responsible for the tests.



      (5)   The city may require additional tests on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
significant noncompliance, but the tests shall be limited to the particular
matter in controversy. The city will endeavor to arrange its requirements for
such additional tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the
grantee or to the subscriber.



   (C)   Interconnections.



      (1)   Whenever it is financially and technically feasible, the
grantee shall construct and operate the network so that the network can be
interconnected into all other networks within the city.



      (2)   Whenever it is financially and technically feasible, the
grantee shall construct and operate the network so that the network can be
interconnected into all networks adjacent to the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.230)



§ 116.045  SERVICES.



   (A)   Carriage of Chicago-area television stations. Unless
prohibited by rules and regulations of the FCC, each BTN for which a
franchise is granted under this chapter shall carry the signals of all
television broadcast stations whose specified zone includes the city.



   (B)   Other channel requirements. Whether or not required by the
regulations of the FCC, each such network shall:



      (1)   Have a minimum capacity of 52 channels;



      (2)   Have the capacity for two-way active communications;



      (3)   Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on
which use by educational agencies within the city shall have priority over
all other uses;



      (4)   Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on
which the city shall have priority over all other uses;



      (5)   Provide at least one noncommercial access channel on
which public interest programming shall have priority over all other uses; and



      (6)   Provide at least one channel, the use of which is
available to the public on a leased basis.



   (C)   Service packages. Subject to division (D) of this section, a
grantee may offer service packages to subscribers or potential subscribers in
such number, description and content as the grantee determines, provided that
all service packages shall be offered on a nondiscriminatory basis as
provided in § 116.051.



   (D)   Basic service. Each grantee shall offer the basic service. The
basic service need not be offered by that name, insofar as subscribers are
concerned, but for purposes of this chapter, the service shall be known as
the basic service. The grantee is not required to provide the basic service
to a subscriber as a condition to the provision of other service packages.
This division shall not be construed as an effort by the city to regulate the
program content of the basic service. The only purpose of this division is to
ensure that the basic service will be offered to subscribers as one of the
grantee’s service packages.



   (E)   Public installations and service.



      (1)   The grantee shall connect the network to each public
school and public library, and to  the municipal buildings as the city may
designate, without charge for installation and maintenance of one basic cable
outlet per connection. The installation shall be made within 60 days of
completion of the cable trunk line that would serve the buildings.



      (2)   Any service granted pursuant to division (E)(1) of this
section may be extended by the persons receiving such service to other areas
within the building where the service is granted or its adjacent buildings
which are a part of the total complex receiving the service. The person
receiving the service shall pay all expenses for any such extension and shall
complete the extension so as not to interfere with the operation of the
network.



      (3)   The grantee shall provide, without charge, the basic
service to each installation made pursuant to division (E)(1) of this section.



   (F)   Emergency alert override. Each grantee shall incorporate into
its facilities the capability for a remotely activated emergency override
alert system whereby a designee of the city, in times of emergency, may
introduce an audio and/or visual message on all network channels
simultaneously. The city shall hold the grantee harmless and indemnify the
grantee for liability resulting from the emergency use of the network by the
city.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.240)



§ 116.046  CONSTRUCTION OF THE SYSTEM.



   (A)   Schedule.



      (1)   Permits. Within 90 days after the effective date of its
franchise, the grantee shall file with the appropriate governmental
authorities, and with the necessary utility companies, all initial papers,
applications, contracts and other documents necessary to permit the
commencement of construction and operation of the BTN, and shall thereafter
make diligent efforts to obtain the proper execution and delivery of the
documents. The grantee shall report to the city every 30 days on its progress
in obtaining necessary permits, contracts and other necessary documents, as
contemplated in this division, and on its construction progress as specified
in the following divisions.



      (2)   Substantial completion. Within 12 months after the
commencement of construction, the grantee shall have substantially completed
the network.



      (3)   Midway completion. Within eight months after the
commencement of construction, the grantee shall have installed sufficient
distribution facilities so as to permit the offering of full network service
to at least 50% of the potential subscribers in the franchise territory.



      (4)   Commencement of operation. Within six months after the
commencement of construction, the grantee shall commence operations
authorized under this chapter.



      (5)   Initiation of services. Within three months after the
commencement of construction, the grantee shall have installed sufficient
distribution facilities so as to permit the offering of full network service
to at least one potential subscriber in the franchise territory.



      (6)   Commencement of construction. Within eight months after
the effective date of its franchise, the grantee shall commence construction
of the network.



   (B)   Standards.



      (1)   Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices
shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, as well as all applicable state
and local codes.



      (2)   Compliance with electrical code. All installations of
electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, shall be durable and
shall be installed in accordance with the Electrical Code of the city.



      (3)   Antennas and towers. Antenna-supporting structures
(towers) shall be designed for the proper loading zone as specified in the
Electronics Industry Association’s R.S. - 222 City Specifications.



      (4)   Good engineering practices. All of the grantee’s plant
and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, the head-end
and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire,
cable, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances, if and to the extent
located within the city, shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in
accordance with good engineering practices. The work shall be performed by
experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to endanger or
interfere with improvements the city may deem proper to make, or to interfere
in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily
hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on city properties.



      (5)   Safety and nuisance requirements. The grantee shall, at
all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use
commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which
are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.



      (6)   Personnel. The grantee shall employ only such personnel
as have necessary and sufficient skill and experience or training as to
properly perform their respective jobs and positions.



   (C)   Street occupancy.



      (1)   The grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and
other facilities, whenever possible, and shall not construct or install new,
different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities on public
property until the written approval of the city is obtained, which approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld. The grantee shall not acquire any vested
interest in any location for any pole or wire-holding structure, and the pole
or structure shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense
whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced
thereby.



      (2)   The facilities of the grantee shall be installed
underground in those areas of the city where existing telephone and electric
services are both underground at the time of network construction. In areas
where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially
at the time of network construction, the grantee may install its facilities
aerially with the understanding that at such time as the existing aerial
facilities are required to be placed underground by the city, the grantee
shall likewise place its facilities underground at its own expense.



      (3)   The grantee shall notify the city at least ten days
prior to the time the grantee intends to commence construction in any street.
The city shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permits required,
provided that the grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not
unduly interfere with the use of the street and provided, further, that the
proposed construction is done in accordance with applicable ordinances and
regulations of the city.



      (4)   All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall
be installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners and shall at all times be kept and
maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition and in good order
and repair. The grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall
install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries
or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or
other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably
required for the safety of the public. Any pole or other fixture placed in
any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to
interfere with the usual travel on the public way.



      (5)   The grantee shall, at its own expense and in a manner
approved by the city, restore to city standards and specifications any damage
or disturbance caused to the public way as a result of its operation or
construction on its behalf. The grantee shall guarantee and maintain the
restoration for one year against defective materials or workmanship.



      (6)   Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes
necessary, in the judgment of the Mayor, the Director of Public Works, the
Fire Chief or the Police Chief, to remove or damage any of the grantee’s
facilities, no charge shall be made by the grantee against the city for
restoration and repair, unless that act amounts to gross negligence on the
part of the city.



      (7)   The grantee may trim trees on public property at its own
expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to
the supervision and direction of the city.



      (8)   The grantee, at its own expense, shall protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any of its property when, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, the same is required by reason of
traffic conditions, public safety, a street vacation, street construction, a
change or establishment of a street grade, the installation of sewers,
drains, waterpipes, power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities,
tracks or any other structure or improvement by governmental agencies,
whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or for any other
reason, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings, renewal of
areas within the city and any general program under which the city undertakes
to cause all such property to be located beneath the surface of the ground.
The grantee shall, in all cases, have the privilege, subject to the
corresponding obligation, to abandon any of its property in place. Nothing in
this section shall be deemed as taking of the property of the grantee, and
the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of any provision of
this section.



      (9)   Upon failure of a grantee to commence, pursue or
complete any work required by law or by this chapter to be done in any
street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the Director of
Public Works, the Director may, at his or her option, cause the work to be
done, and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized
amounts reported by the Director to the grantee, within 30 days after receipt
of the itemized report.



      (10)   The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts
unless they are absolutely necessary, and then only after written permission
has been given by the Director.



      (11)   The grantee shall install in conduit all cables passing
under the roadway.



   (D)   Letter of credit.



      (1)   The grantee shall furnish to the city an irrevocable
letter of credit in favor of the city in a form approved by the City
Attorney, certifying that $100,000 is and will remain available, until
reduced in accordance with this division, at a sound and reputable banking or
financial institution (selected by the grantee and approved by the city)
authorized to issue such letter of credit. The letter of credit shall be
conditioned upon the faithful performance by the grantee of its obligations
under this chapter and the franchise agreement, including timely compliance
with the construction schedule set forth in division (A) of this section, and
shall be reduced in accordance with the following table upon such timely
compliance by the grantee.



      (2)   If the following construction phase is timely completed
by the grantee, the dollar amount of the letter of credit shall be reduced as
follows:



         (a)   Commencement of construction (eight months after
effective date of franchise): $100,000;



         (b)   Initiation of service (three months after
commencement of construction): $80,000;



         (c)   Commencement of operation (six months after
commencement of construction): $60,000;



         (d)   Midway completion of construction (eight months
after commencement of construction): $40,000; and



         (e)   Substantial completion of construction (12 months
after commencement of construction): $0.



      (3)   When the grantee has substantially completed
construction, the letter of credit shall be released to the grantee.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.250)



§ 116.047 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM.



   (A)   Repair. Any damage caused by the grantee’s negligence shall
be repaired fully by the grantee.



   (B)   Office and phone for service. The grantee shall maintain an
office in the city, which shall be open during all usual business hours,
shall have a locally listed telephone and shall be so operated that
complaints and requests for repair or adjustment may be received at any time.
Alternatively, the franchise may designate an agent who has an office in the
city and who is authorized to receive complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments. In addition, the grantee shall maintain a convenient service in
the city during normal business hours for the receipt of sums due by its
subscribers and shall provide for regular billing of accounts.



   (C)   Notification of service procedures. The grantee shall furnish
each subscriber, at the time service is installed, written instructions that
clearly set forth procedures for placing a service call, requesting an
adjustment or making a complaint or request.



   (D)   Service response time. The grantee shall use its best efforts
to provide prompt service response for all complaints and requests for
repairs or adjustments. In no event shall response time exceed 24 hours,
except in circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the grantee.



   (E)   Service interruptions and notification. The grantee shall
interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good
cause and for the shortest time possible, and, except in emergency
situations, only after publishing notice of service interruption in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 24 hours in advance of
the service interruption. Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification,
any night except Friday, Saturday or Sunday, or the night preceding a holiday.



   (F)   Moving of buildings.



      (1)   The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding
a building moving permit issued by the Building Commissioner, temporarily
raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of a building. The expense of
such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the
person requesting the same, and the grantee may require the payment in
advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 15 days’ advance notice
of any move contemplated to arrange for temporary wire changes.



      (2)   The city shall notify the grantee at least ten days
prior to the intention of the city to commence any construction in the
streets that requires the relocation of the grantee’s lines, wires or other
network appurtenances so as not to interfere with the construction.



      (3)   If permanent use of a street is denied to the grantee by
the city for any reason, the grantee shall provide service to affected
subscribers over alternate routes within a reasonable period of time.



   (G)   Subscriber’s right to cancel service.



      (1)   Any subscriber may cancel any or all service packages
upon 30 days’ written notice to the grantee.



      (2)   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the
grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the
subscriber’s premises upon his or her request.



   (H)   Abandonment of service.



      (1)   After the grantee has established service pursuant to
this chapter in the franchise area, the service shall not be suspended or
abandoned in the whole or any part of the franchise area unless the
suspension or abandonment is authorized in writing by Council.



      (2)   Whenever the grantee files with Council a written
application alleging that the public interest no longer requires that the
grantee furnish service pursuant to this chapter in the whole or in any part
of the franchise area, Council may take evidence upon that question and make
a finding with respect to it. If Council finds that the public interest no
longer requires that the grantee furnish service, Council may authorize
suspension or abandonment of service upon such reasonable terms and
conditions as it may prescribe.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.260)



§ 116.048  SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.



   (A)   Use of data from subscriber. Neither the grantee nor any other
person shall initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring
information or data from a subscriber’s terminal by use of the BTN without
prior authorization from each subscriber so affected.



   (B)   Subscriber lists. The grantee shall not, without prior
authorization from each subscriber so affected, provide any list designating
subscribers’ names or addresses to the city or to any other party.



   (C)   Subscriber transmissions. The grantee shall not permit the
installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber’s premises
that will permit transmission from the subscriber’s premises of two-way
service, without first obtaining written permission therefor from the
subscriber.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.270)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.049 CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION.



   (A)   Customer service and privacy protection law.



      (1)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or
video providers offering services within the city’s boundaries.



      (2)   Amendments. Any amendment to the cable and video
customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of
this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the city.



   (B)   Enforcement. The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its
intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection
standards of the cable and video protection law with respect to complaints
received from residents within the city.



   (C)   Customer credits. The city hereby adopts the schedule of
customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in
the provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s) and applied on the
statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video
provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under
no obligation to request the credit.



(Ord. 2007-10-0130O, passed 10-9-2007)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.050  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Rates and service schedules. The grantee shall, at all times,
maintain on file with the city a complete and current schedule showing all
services being provided under the grantee’s franchise, the fees and charges
for each of such services, the charges for connections or disconnections and
any other charges which may be made by the grantee in connection with the
BTN. The schedule shall also show the component of the basic service and the
pay service, each on a channel-by-channel basis, the monthly charges for each
service package and reasonably complete descriptions of each service package.



   (B)   Initial rates. The rates and charges initially charged by a
grantee for each of its service packages, as shown in the first schedule
filed under division (A) of this section, shall be the same as those proposed
in the grantee’s application for a franchise. The rates and charges shall
not be increased until the later of the following dates:



      (1)   The date which is 30 months subsequent to the effective
date of the grantee’s franchise; and



      (2)   The date which is two years after the grantee has at
least one subscriber for full network services.



   (C)   Modification of rates. After the later of the date which is 30
months subsequent to the effective date of the grantee’s franchise, and the
date which is two years after the grantee has at least one subscriber for
full network services, the grantee may modify its rates from time to time by
filing a revised schedule in accordance with division (A) of this section.
Each rate adjustment and the establishment of a charge for a new or different
service shall become effective on the date designated by the grantee in the
schedule, provided that the date may not be less than 60 days from the date
on which the schedule was filed, and provided, further, that this division is
subject to the provisions of division (D) of this section.



   (D)   Regulation of rates. It is the policy of the city not to
regulate rates charged by a grantee for any of its services. However, the
city expressly reserves the right to regulate the grantee’s rates to the
extent permitted by law. At the time of each hearing conducted pursuant to §
116.055(A), the city shall consider whether or not to regulate rates. If the
city determines at any such time to regulate rates, this chapter shall be
amended to provide for appropriate standards and hearings in order that the
rates may be fairly and equitably determined. Each franchise granted under
this chapter shall be subject to the city’s right to amend this chapter for
the purpose stated in this division. The right shall be exercised at the sole
discretion of the city.



   (E)   Disconnections. No charge may be made for disconnection from
the network. However, if a subscriber has failed to pay properly due monthly
fees, or if a subscriber disconnects for seasonal periods, the grantee may
require, in addition to full payment of any delinquent amounts, a reasonable
fee for reconnection to the system.



   (F)   Consideration beyond schedule. A grantee shall not receive any
consideration whatsoever for or in connection with its provision of service
to its subscribers other than as set forth in this section or in the schedule
then on file with the city.



   (G)   Abatement of charges. Upon a subscriber’s request, charges
shall abate pro rata if service to a subscriber is interrupted for more than
48 continuous hours for any reason whatsoever, except interruption caused by
the subscriber.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.280)



§ 116.051  EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



   In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of
the BTN, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, creed, color, sex or national origin.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.290)  Penalty, see § 116.999



§ 116.052  PREFERENTIAL PRACTICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Uniform application of rates, charges and the like. The
grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, services, rules or regulations, or
in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any
person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage. This
provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate
subscription to the network or other legitimate uses thereof, nor shall it be
deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and
classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
classifications shall be entitled, provided that such schedules have been
filed with the city as provided in § 116.050, nor shall it be deemed to
prohibit the furnishing of services without charge or at a reduced charge to
the locations specified in § 116.045(E).



   (B)   Fairness of accessibility. The entire network of the grantee
shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and
equal accessibility of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios and other
services to all residents, businesses, public agencies or other entities
having a legitimate use for the network, and no person shall be arbitrarily
excluded from its use. Allocation of the use of the facilities shall be made
according to the rules or decisions of the grantee and any regulatory
agencies affecting the same.



   (C)   Subscribers’ antennas. The grantee is expressly prohibited
from requiring the removal, from offering to remove or from providing any
inducement for the removal of any potential or existing subscriber’s
antenna as a condition for provision of service by the grantee.



   (D)   Sale or service of television and radio receivers. During the
period of the franchise, neither the recipient of the franchise nor any of
its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent organizations, officers, directors or
stockholders holding 10% or more of the outstanding stock of such recipient
shall, within the corporate limits of the city or within ten miles in any
direction, directly or indirectly, engage in the retail sale, rental or
repair of radio or television receivers, or require, encourage or recommend
to any subscriber the purchase, rental or lease of radios or television sets
at any specific business which rents, leases or sells radios or television
sets or the utilization of the services of any special television or radio
service business for the repair or maintenance of the subscriber’s
receivers, either radio or television, wherever located.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.300)



§ 116.053 RECORDS AND REPORTS; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Records required. Each grantee shall maintain, at all times:



      (1)   A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experienced for the preceding three years;



      (2)   A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built
maps showing the exact location of all BTN equipment installed or in use in
the city (exclusive of subscriber service drops); and



      (3)   Financial records of the grantee in connection with its
activities within the city, which records shall be maintained in a manner
distinguishing revenue earned within the city from revenue earned by the
grantee in other municipalities.



   (B)   Reports required. Each grantee shall file with the city the
following reports.



      (1)   Reports to be filed within 90 days after the end of each
fiscal year of the grantee:



         (a)   An “Annual Report of Cable Television Systems”
(FCC Form 325, Schedules 1 and 2);



         (b)   An ownership report indicating all persons who at
any time during the preceding year controlled or benefitted from an interest
in the franchise of 10% or more. This report shall also include all creditors
secured by pledges or other forms of security interest in the network and all
unsecured creditors whose claims with respect to the operation of the
franchise in the city exceed $50,000;



         (c)   A summary list of all complaints and requests, as
submitted in writing to the grantee, and network “down time” received or
experienced during the year. However, the grantee shall maintain, for at
least three years, complete records identifying the person making the
complaint or the request, the subject matter thereof and the resolution of
the matter in question or the action taken by the grantee;



         (d)   A report showing or containing:



            1.   The total number of hours of utilization of
each of the channels described in § 116.045(B)(4);



            2.   The number of persons subscribing to two-way
service; and



            3.   A brief statement indicating whether or not
the grantee is planning any new services for the ensuing years as a result of
technological development in the cable television industry.



         (e)   An annual report of the annual gross revenues of
the grantee, prepared, certified and audited by an independent certified
public accountant to be selected by the grantee and approved by the city.



      (2)   Reports or certificates to be filed promptly after the
indicated event occurs:



         (a)   A copy of all petitions and applications filed or
submitted by the grantee with any governmental entity or agency having
jurisdiction with respect to any matter affecting the network or the
grantee’s undertakings with respect to this chapter, and



         (b)   Written evidence of the payment of each premium
for each policy of insurance required by this chapter.



   (C)   Documents required. Each grantee shall file with the city,
within 30 days after the end of the grantee’s fiscal year, a true copy of
the most current form of each of the following documents:



      (1)   The letter of credit required by this chapter;



      (2)   All policies of insurance or certificates thereof
required by this chapter; and



      (3)   All rules, regulations and policy statements adopted by
the grantee in operating the network.



   (D)   Filing. When not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, all
matters required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   (E)   Inspection of property and records. At all reasonable times,
the grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of
the city of all franchise property, together with any appurtenant property of
the grantee situated within or without the city. The grantee shall also
permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine and
transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the
grantee or under its control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions
or property of the grantee. If any of the maps or records is not kept in the
city, or upon reasonable request is not made available in the city, and if
the Director of Public Works determines that an examination of the maps or
records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of his or her
duties, then all travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in
making the examination shall be paid by the grantee.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.310)



§ 116.054  NONLIABILITY OF CITY; INSURANCE.



   (A)   Indemnification agreement.



      (1)   The grantee shall agree to indemnify, defend and save
whole and harmless the city and its officers, boards, commissions, agents and
employees from liabilities and related expenses of any kind which may arise
out of or from the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of
the BTN, the execution and implementation of this chapter, the granting of a
franchise to the grantee by the city or the exercise or enjoyment of its
franchise by the grantee, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and the
costs or liabilities of the city with respect to its employees. The city
shall notify the grantee if any person, in any way, notifies the city of any
claim or demand for which the grantee may be liable under this section or
otherwise.



      (2)   The undertaking of the grantee in connection with this
division includes, but is not limited to, liabilities or claims of liability
with respect to property damage, personal injury or death, invasions of the
right of privacy, defamation of any person, the violation or infringement of
any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, including
damages arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the
owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by
the grantee’s network, or of any other right of any person, and failure of
the grantee to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the grantee in
connection with this chapter or with its franchise. Without limitation of the
foregoing, the undertaking of the grantee in connection with this division
includes, but is not limited to, accountant fees, expert witness and
consultant fees, court reporter fees, court costs, per diem expenses and
traveling and transportation expenses.



   (B)   Insurance. The grantee shall keep the network continuously
insured against such risks as are customarily insured against by businesses
of like size and type, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Insurance upon a repair or replacement basis, if
available, and otherwise to the full insurable value of the network (with
reasonable deductible provisions) against loss or damage by fire and
lightning, with a uniform standard extended coverage endorsement, limited
only as may be provided in the standard form of extended coverage endorsement
at the time in use in the state;



      (2)   Insurance to the extent of $2,000,000 per occurrence
against liability for bodily injury, including death, and to the extent of
$500,000 per occurrence against liability for damage to property, including
loss of use, occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to, the
network. The policy shall name, as additional insured, the city and its
officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees;



      (3)   During any period of construction, adequate coverage to
meet liability under the Illinois Structural Work Act;



      (4)   Worker’s compensation insurance within statutory
limits and employer’s liability insurance of not less than $100,000;



      (5)   Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the
extent of $1,000,000 per occurrence against liability for bodily injury,
including death, and to the extent of $300,000 per occurrence against
liability for damage to property, including loss of use, occurring on,
arising out of, or in any way related to, the network; and



      (6)   This division shall not be a limit on the grantee’s
undertaking provided in division (A) of this section. The insurance shall be
issued by a company mutually acceptable to the grantee and the city in a form
satisfactory to the city.



   (C)   Notice of cancellation or reduction of coverage. The insurance
policies referred to in division (B) of this section hereof shall contain a
broad form contractual liability endorsement and shall also contain the
following endorsement.



 

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor
the amount of coverage thereof reduced until 30 days after receipt by the
city by registered mail of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce
the coverage.



 



(2000 Code, § 5.12.320)



§ 116.055  REVIEWS, MODIFICATIONS AND RENEWALS OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Three-year reviews. On or about the third, sixth, ninth and
twelfth anniversaries of the effective date of the franchise grant, Council
shall schedule and hold a special public meeting with the grantee to review
the performance by the grantee under the franchise, including future plans of
the grantee regarding operation and performance. In particular, the city may
inquire whether the grantee is supplying a level and variety of services
equivalent to those being generally offered at that time in the industry in
comparable market situations. At the meeting, Council may consider whether
the rates of the grantee should be regulated. The grantee shall make
available to the city, if required by the city, records, documents and
information which are relevant to the meeting and inquiry.



   (B)   Modifications necessitated by FCC regulations. Any changes in
the franchise agreement necessitated by modifications in the FCC’s
regulations shall be incorporated into the franchise agreement within the
time limit provided for in the rules and regulations of the FCC then in force
and effect.



   (C)   Franchise Renewal. At least six months prior to the expiration
of a franchise, the city shall schedule and hold a public meeting with the
grantee to review and discuss the performance of the grantee under the
franchise. The grantee shall make available, if requested by the city,
records, information and documents which are relevant to the meeting and
inquiry. The city shall thereupon reissue a franchise to the grantee for
another term unless Council determines that there is a compelling reason not
to reissue the franchise.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.330)



§ 116.056  REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Grounds. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise
granted under this chapter and to rescind all rights and privileges
associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which
shall represent a default and breach under this chapter and the franchise
agreement:



      (1)   A default by the grantee in the performance of any of
its material obligations under this chapter, under the franchise agreement or
under any document, contract or other term or provision entered into by and
between the city and the grantee pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   A failure by the grantee to provide or maintain in full
force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the letter of
credit required by this chapter;



      (3)   Frequent violations by the grantee of any order or
ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative
to the franchise;



      (4)   The grantee’s complete cessation of services for any
reason within the control of the grantee over the BTN. However, the grantee
shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any
provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of a provision is
prevented for reasons beyond the grantee’s control. Fault shall not be
deemed to be beyond the grantee’s control if it lies with a corporation or
other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest,
whether held directly or indirectly. The provisions of this division shall
not be construed as any effort by the city to regulate the program content or
program offerings of the grantee. The only purpose of this division is to
ensure that the grantee does not voluntarily cease to provide service under
its franchise;



      (5)   Attempts by the grantee to evade any of the provisions
of this chapter or of the franchise agreement, or the practice of any fraud
or deceit upon the city or subscribers; or



      (6)   Failure by the grantee to establish or construct the
network in compliance with the schedule set forth in § 116.046(A), or
failure, for a substantial time, to provide effective transmission and
receiving services and capabilities to subscribers, provided that if the
failure is due to strikes, war, civil commotions, acts of God or other causes
beyond the control of the grantee and without the grantee’s fault, or
causes constituting excusable negligence, the time for the grantee to
establish and construct the network or to meet any other time limit imposed
by this chapter shall be extended by the amount of time of any delay
resulting from the cases. The period of delay shall be determined by the
grantee, in writing, with the consent of the city, which consent shall not be
withheld unreasonably.



   (B)   Procedures prior to revocation. If it appears to Council that
one or more grounds exist for revoking a grantee’s franchise, the following
procedures shall then be followed.



      (1)   The Mayor may make a written demand that the grantee
comply with the requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation
which the Mayor believes to be applicable. The Mayor shall provide Council
with a copy of each written demand.



      (2)   If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee
continues for 30 days following the written demand, the Mayor may place a
request for termination of the franchise upon the agenda of the next regular
Council meeting.



      (3)   With or without compliance with the foregoing, the Mayor
may cause to be served upon the grantee reasonable notice, in writing, of his
or her intent to request a revocation of the grantee’s franchise. The
notice shall state the time and place of the Council meeting and notice of
the request shall be published by the City Clerk at least once during the
four-day period preceding the Council meeting in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city.



      (4)   Council shall consider the request of the Mayor and
shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, at its
discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was
with just cause.



      (5)   If the failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was
with just cause, Council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time
and manner, and upon such terms and conditions, as are reasonable.



      (6)   If Council determines that the failure, refusal or
neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then Council may, by motion,
declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be revoked and terminated,
unless there is compliance within such period as Council may fix.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.340)



§ 116.057  CONDITIONS FOR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Insolvency proceedings. The franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall, at the option of Council, cease and terminate 120 days after
the appointment of a receiver or trustee, however denominated, designated to
take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless the
receivership or trusteeship has been vacated prior to the expiration of the
120 day period, or unless both of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The receivers or trustees have, within 60 days after
their election or appointment, fully complied with this chapter, and the
franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees, within the
120 days, have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and



      (2)   The receivers or trustees shall, within 60 days, execute
an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby the receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and
every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted.



   (B)   Foreclosure or judicial sale. In the case of a foreclosure or
other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee, or
any part thereof, including or excluding the franchise granted to the
grantee, Council may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the
successful bidder at the sale. In this event, the franchise shall cease and
terminate within 30 days after service of the notice, unless:



      (1)   Council has approved the transfer of the franchise as
and in the manner provided in this chapter; and



      (2)   The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the
city to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.350)



§ 116.058  PROCEDURES FOLLOWING REVOCATION OR EXPIRATION OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Disposition of facilities. If a franchise expires, is revoked
or is otherwise terminated, the city may order the removal of the network
facilities from the city within a reasonable period of time as determined by
the city.



   (B)   Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
has been made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good a
condition as prevailed prior to the grantee’s removal of its equipment and
appliances, without affecting the electrical or telephone cable wires or
attachments. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the public
ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles after
removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance as provided in this chapter
shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and
until full compliance by the grantee with all the terms and conditions of
this chapter.



   (C)   Restoration by city; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any work required by divisions (A) and (B)
hereof, or any other work required by city ordinances, within the time
established by the city and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may
cause the work to be done and the grantee shall then reimburse the city for
the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of the
costs. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to
enforce this division.



   (D)   Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or the
revocation of a franchise, the city may permit the grantee to continue to
operate the network for an extended period of time, not to exceed six months
from the date of the expiration or revocation, operate the network itself for
the period or engage a third party to operate the network for the period. The
person (hereinafter called the interim operator) shall, as trustee for the
grantee’s successor in interest, use its best efforts to continue to
operate the cable television system under the terms and conditions of this
chapter and the franchise and to provide services that may be provided at
that time. During the interim period, the interim operator shall not sell any
of the system assets, nor shall the interim operator make any physical,
material, administrative or operational change that would tend to degrade the
quality of service to the subscribers, tend to decrease income or tend to
materially increase expenses, without, in each case, express permission, in
writing, from the city. The city shall be permitted to seek legal and
equitable relief to enforce this division.



   (E)   Effect on city’s rights. The termination and forfeiture of
any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under the
franchise or any provision of law, and the grantee may continue to maintain
records and make reports as required by this chapter until such time as all
payments due the city under this chapter have been paid and accounted for to
the reasonable satisfaction of the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.360)



§ 116.059  LESSER SANCTIONS.



   Nothing shall prohibit the city from enforcing its rules and
regulations to impose lesser sanctions or censures for a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, rather than revocation.



(2000 Code, § 5.12.370)




TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS




§ 116.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS CHARGES.  The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for
the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within
the city, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in
money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services,
and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or services costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel point within the city, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within the city, and charges for that
portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the city.
However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:



      (1)   Any amount added to a purchaser’s bill because of a
charge made under:



         (a)   The fee imposed by this subchapter;



         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill
under § 9-221 or § 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act;



         (c)   Amounts collected under § 811-17 of the Illinois
Municipal Code;



         (d)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise
Tax Act;



         (e)   911 surcharges; or



         (f)   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue
Code;



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside the city;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment, and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that
is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under §
9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of the exemption and during
the period of time specified by the city;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory-required profit for the corporation rendering such services;



      (7)   Bad debts (“bad debts” means any portion of a debt
that is related to a sale at retail for which GROSS CHARGES are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards). If the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made;



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or



      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided to the city.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A municipal street, alley, water or PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including
utility easements wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to
locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunication
facilities. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal city
property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and
shall not include city buildings and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE, or any like
term.  Any retailer having or maintaining within the state of Illinois,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent
or representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether the place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether the retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL.  The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS.  The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location,
as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment
as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  This term includes, but is not limited to,
messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized
mobile radio services, or any other transmission or messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include
wireless TELECOMMUNICATIONS as hereinafter defined.



      (1)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value-added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission.



      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
TELECOMMUNICATIONS by a TELECOMMUNICATIONS service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right-of- access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all TELECOMMUNICATIONS resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end TELECOMMUNICATIONS
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.



      (3)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of
the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as
now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. 



      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and



      (2)   any person that is not a telecommunications retailer
that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public
right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER.  Every person
engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as
defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any RETAILER not
maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the RETAILER to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner
and subject to the same requirements as a RETAILER maintaining a place of
business within the city.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services, as defined in § 704(C) of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 47 U.S.C. § 332(c) (7), as now or
hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging
services.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.010)



§ 116.071  RECITALS.



   The facts and statements contained in the preamble to the ordinance
codified in this subchapter are found to be true and correct and are adopted
as part of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.020)



§ 116.072  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this
subchapter shall register with the city within 30 days after the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter or becoming a
telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by
the city; provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer that has
filed a return pursuant to § 116.075(C) shall be deemed to have registered
in accordance with this section.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
city pursuant to division (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to
submit an amended registration form or current return as required by §
116.075(C), as the case may be, to the city within 30 days from the date of
the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.030)



§ 116.073  ADOPTION OF FEE.



   The city enacts the ordinance codified in this subchapter imposing a
City of Oak Forest municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance
fee.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.040)



§ 116.074  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.



   (A)   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of all
gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses
within the city for telecommunications originating or received by the city.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this
subchapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any
taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as
set forth in § 116.075.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.050)



§ 116.075  COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEE.



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Administrator, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer, provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the
city infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for
expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City
Administrator, which shall contain such information as the City Administrator
may reasonably require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this subchapter and any infrastructure maintenance fee collected
by a telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under division
(A) of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
subchapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for the services.



   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
subchapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
the amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to became due, under this subchapter, from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the City Administrator may
request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written
substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made
more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless:



      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the city within the applicable statutory period of
limitations; and



      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.



   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts as described immediately below:



      (1)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 630 §§ 1 et seq.;



      (2)   “Gross receipts” for purposes of the municipality
utility tax as prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2, the Illinois
Municipal Code;



      (3)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax as prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17, the
Illinois Municipal Code; and



      (4)   “Gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual
gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
2-202, the Public Utilities Act.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.060)



§ 116.076  AUDIT.



   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this subchapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by
the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. The sum shall be paid to
the city within 21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.070)



§ 116.077  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be
required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers
that are registered pursuant to § 116.072 of this subchapter of the
regulations.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.080)



§ 116.078  WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.



   (A)   (1)   The city waives all fees, charges and other
compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the
city by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing city
franchise, license or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer
during the time the city imposes the telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee.



      (2)   This waiver shall only be effective during the time the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this subchapter is subject to
being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by
the telecommunications retailer from the customer.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified
mail/return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom
the city has a franchise.



   (C)   The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
subchapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month
not less than 90 days after the city provided written notice by certified
mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing
franchise, license or similar agreement that the city waives all compensation
under the existing franchise, license or similar agreement during such time
as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer
and submitted to the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to
gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the
preceding sentence.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.090)



§ 116.079  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:



   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;



   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of,
or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided;



   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under or within, use of, or repair of the public rights-of-way; and



   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.100)



§ 116.080  EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.



   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the city entered into before the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this subchapter regarding the use of public
rights-of-way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms
except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.110)



§ 116.081  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.130)



§ 116.999  PENALTY



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   The city, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1),
does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of
the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to
the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a
material breach per customer.



      (1)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable
or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards
specified in any provision of the law.



      (2)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written
notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at
least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.



      (3)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming
penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has
not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in
division (B)(2) above.



   (C)   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of
this code.



(2000 Code, § 5.58.120)  (Ord. 2007-10-0130O, passed 10-9-2007)



CHAPTER 117: LODGING



Section



Motels, Hotels and Rooming Houses



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   License categories and fees



   117.03   Hotel and motel regulations



Hotel Accommodations Tax



   117.15   Definitions and construction



   117.16   Tax imposed



   117.17   Exemption



   117.18   Collection



   117.19   Transmittal of tax revenues



   117.20   Payment and penalty for nonpayment



   117.21   Suspension or revocation of licenses



   117.22   Disposition of funds



   117.23   Books and records



Residential Rental License



   117.35   License required



   117.36   Application for license



   117.37   License fee



   117.38   Term of license; transfer prohibited; renewal



   117.39   Inspection required



   117.40   Crime-free housing seminar required



   117.41   Criminal background investigations



   117.42   Crime-free lease addendum



   117.43   Periodic inspection



   117.44   Violation of “Crime-Free Lease Addendum” prohibited



   117.45   Suspension or revocation of license; hearing; appeal




MOTELS, HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES




§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EXTENDED STAY HOTEL.  A place where sleeping accommodations are
furnished for long-term occupancy in excess of 21 days for guests, including
facilities known as corporate apartments. The establishments in this industry
may offer laundry services, parking and recreational services, and limited
in-room kitchen facilities, including sink, microwave and conventional ovens,
refrigerators and freezers.



   EXTENDED STAY MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached
or detached lodging rooms with adjoining individual bathrooms and where the
lodging rooms are not entered from a common entrance lobby and where a
portion of the lodging rooms are occupied or designed for long-term occupancy
in excess of 21 days for guests. The establishments in this industry may, but
need not, offer laundry services, parking and recreational services, and
limited in-room kitchen facilities, including sink, microwave and
conventional ovens, refrigerators and freezers.



   HOTEL.  A place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for
occupancy by transient guests for short-term lodging up to 21 days which
provides customary hotel services, including but not limited to food and
beverage services, recreational services, conference rooms and convention
services, laundry services, parking and other services.



   MOTEL.  An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached
lodging rooms with adjoining individual bathrooms and where the lodging rooms
are not entered from a common entrance lobby and where more than 50% of the
lodging rooms are occupied or designed for occupancy by transient automobile
tourists.



(Ord. 2006-12-0073O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.02  LICENSE CATEGORIES AND FEES.



   (A)   License required; applications; investigation. No person shall
maintain or operate a motel, extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay
hotel in the city without first obtaining a license therefore. An application
for such a license shall state the maximum number of persons and vehicles to
be accommodated and shall be accompanied by bathroom and kitchen facility
plans.



   (B)   License categories and fees.



      (1)   Motel licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter are divided into the following classes.



         (a)   Class I motel license. The annual fee for a class
I motel license is $50, plus $5 for each lodging unit. No guest shall be
permitted to stay more than 21 consecutive days on the premises in any room
or rooms of the motel, whether it be in the same room or rooms or a
combination of rooms.



         (b)   Class II extended stay motel license. The annual
fee for a class II extended stay motel license is $500, plus $50 for each
lodging unit. Class II extended stay motel licensees are permitted to rent,
lease or let accommodations to guests in excess of 21 consecutive days. In
the event that such long-term rental or leasing activity shall be in addition
to permitting guests to stay in lodging rooms for durations shorter than 21
days, operators must be otherwise duly licensed under the city code and
possessing a current, valid class I motel license from the city.



      (2)   Hotel licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter are divided into the following classes:



         (a)   Class I hotel license.  The annual fee for a
Class I Hotel License is $30, plus $5 for each lodging unit. No guest shall
be permitted to stay more than 21 consecutive days on the premises in any
room or rooms of the hotel, whether it be in the same room or rooms or a
combination of rooms.



         (b)   Class II extended stay hotel/rooming house
license.  The annual fee for a class II extended stay hotel license is $300,
plus $50 for each unit of sleeping accommodations. Class II extended stay
hotel licensees are permitted to rent, lease or let accommodations to guests
in excess of 21 consecutive days. In the event that such long-term rental or
leasing activity shall be in addition to permitting guests to stay in lodging
rooms for durations shorter than 21 days, operators must be otherwise duly
licensed under the city code and possessing a current, valid class I hotel
license from the city.



(Ord. 2006-12-0073O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.03  HOTEL AND MOTEL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Sanitary requirements. No premises shall be operated as a
motel, extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay hotel unless each lodging
unit is equipped with adequate bathroom facilities. Such premises must be
kept clean and sanitary at all times and all waste material must be removed
therefrom at least once every 24 hours.



   (B)   Lighting. An area or premises of a motel, extended stay motel,
hotel or extended stay hotel that is open to use by the public or by persons
staying in such facility shall be kept adequately lighted at night, provided
that such lights are so shaded or otherwise regulated as to prevent them from
shining upon adjacent premises.



   (C)   Rates for Sleeping Accommodations. No motel, extended stay
motel, hotel or extended stay hotel licensed under this chapter or required
to be licensed under this chapter shall rent any sleeping accommodation for
any period of fewer than 24 consecutive hours; or advertise any rate for a
sleeping accommodation based on a rental period of fewer than 24 consecutive
hours.



   (D)   Public disorder. A licensee shall be guilty of maintaining a
public disorder when the licensee or any of the licensee's employees
knowingly or negligently permit prostitution, pimping, gambling or the
unlawful sale of narcotic or controlled substances to be conducted upon the
premises or immediately adjacent to the premises by any person or persons
renting a room or rooms from the licensee. However, no licensee shall be
punished for maintaining a public disorder if the licensee notifies the
police that he or she suspects that the aforementioned conduct is occurring
on his or her premises and terminates the letting of the room or rooms
immediately upon learning that the conduct is occurring upon or adjacent to
his or her premises by the person or persons.



   (E)   Inspections. Before a license is issued to any applicant under
this subchapter, the Fire Chief, Health Commissioner and Building
Commissioner shall inspect or cause to be inspected and approve the premises
of each motel, extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay hotel to ensure
compliance with this subchapter and approve the facility for which the
license is sought. The inspections shall cover all matters pertaining to the
condition of the motel, extended stay motel, hotel or extended stay hotel,
rooms and other occupied spaces with respect to light, heat, ventilation,
general sanitation and life safety systems and escapes, and be sufficiently
accurate and complete as to convince the officials or their duly authorized
representatives that the premises comply in all respects with the provisions
of this subchapter, and all other relevant city codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations and the laws of the State of Illinois pertaining to such
establishments. The inspections shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



   (F)   License suspension or revocation. In the event that an
inspection conducted under § 117.39 finds any violation of this subchapter,
or other relevant city code, ordinance, rule or regulation, the Mayor may,
after a public hearing conducted at a regular meeting of the City Council,
suspend or revoke any license issued under this subchapter. The operator of
the motel or extended stay motel shall have an opportunity to be heard and
the hearing shall not be held less than five days after notice of the time
and place of the hearing, addressed to the operator at his or her last known
place of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not
release or discharge the operator from civil liability nor from prosecution
of an offense.



   (G)   Display license. All licensees under this subchapter must
prominently display a valid, current license or licenses required under this
subchapter, posted in a conspicuous location readily visible and accessible
to the public and city officials.



(Ord. 2006-12-0073O, passed 12-12-2006)




HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX




§ 117.15  DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOOKS AND RECORDS.  All data maintained by the operator, including
data on paper, microfilm, microfiche, computer database or any type of
machine-sensible compilation.



   CITY.  The City of Oak Forest.



   HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS.  A room or rooms in any building or structure
located in the city and kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out
to the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, bed
and breakfast, dormitory or place where lodging or lodging and food,
sleeping, rooming, conference or exhibit accommodations are offered for a
consideration to guests for lease or rent, in which ten or more such
accommodations are used or maintained by guests, lodgers or roomers. The term
HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS does not include any room or rooms in the lodging
facility which a person occupies, or has the right to occupy, for a period
longer than 21 continuous days. Accordingly, accommodations within the
buildings or structures which are leased to the same occupant for a period of
more than 21 consecutive days shall be exempt from the tax provisions of this
subchapter.



   OPERATOR.  Any person conducting the operation of a hotel
accommodation or receiving consideration for the rental or lease of a hotel
accommodation, including, but not limited to, the owner or manager of a hotel
accommodation.



   PERMANENT RESIDENT.  Any person who occupies or has the right to
occupy any room or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or
rooms, in a hotel accommodation for at least 21 consecutive days.



   PERSON.  Any natural PERSON, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, for profit,
nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to corporations shall
include the officers thereof, and as applied to any other entity, the owners
or part-owners thereof.



   TREASURER.  The Treasurer of the City of Oak Forest.



(2000 Code, § 3.32.020)  (Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.16 TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of
renting, leasing or letting of rooms of any hotel accommodations in the city
at a rate of 10% of the gross rental receipts from the rental, leasing or
letting. The liability for payment of the tax shall be that of the operator
of the hotel accommodations. The tax levied in this subchapter shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes levied by the city, county, state or
federal governments. The operator of the hotel accommodations shall have the
duty to act as trustee for and account to the city and to collect the tax
from each lessee or tenant of hotel accommodations and to pay over to the
City Treasurer the tax under procedures prescribed by the Treasurer and as
otherwise provided by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.17  EXEMPTION.



   (A)   The tax imposed under this subchapter shall not apply to the
renting, leasing or letting of hotel accommodations to permanent residents.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PERMANENT RESIDENT.  Any person who occupies or has the right to
occupy any room or rooms in the lodging facility for at least 21 consecutive
days. Where an operator provides accommodations for both permanent residents
and guests staying for shorter durations, the gross receipts generated by
permanent residents shall not be included in the computation of the tax due.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.18  COLLECTION.



   Every operator required to collect the tax levied under this subchapter
shall collect the tax from the lessee or tenant of the hotel accommodations
by separately stating the tax as an additional charge on the lessee’s or
tenant’s statement of charges.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.19  TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUES.



   (A)   The hotel accommodation tax shall be paid to the City
Treasurer by the operator on a monthly basis. The hotel accommodations tax
shall be due on or before the fifteenth day of the succeeding calendar month.



   (B)   The operator of each hotel accommodation within the city shall
file sworn tax statements with the City Treasurer on a monthly basis at the
same time that the hotel accommodation tax is remitted. The tax statements
accompanying payment of the hotel accommodation tax shall show tax receipts
received with respect to each individual hotel accommodation room in the
preceding monthly period, upon forms provided by the City Treasurer. If an
operator provides accommodations for both permanent residents and other
guests staying for shorter durations, the tax statements shall clearly
indicate all rental, leasing and letting activity with respect to permanent
residents and designate the gross receipts that are exempt from the
computation of the tax due.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.20  PAYMENT AND PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT.



   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, or accompanying sworn
tax statements are not filed as provided in § 117.19 of this subchapter, a
penalty at the rate of 2% on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be
added and collected, calculated per 30 day period, or portion thereof, from
the day of delinquency. Whenever any person shall fail to timely pay any tax
required by this subchapter, the City Treasurer shall issue written notice to
the operator demanding the payment. If, after 15 days written notice, the tax
remains outstanding, the City Treasurer may request that the City Attorney
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax on
behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction with the cost of
the enforcement to be borne by the operator of the hotel accommodations.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.21  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   Failure to pay the tax imposed by this subchapter and after the 15 day
notice period set forth in § 117.20 of this subchapter, shall constitute
grounds for revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of the operator’s hotel or
motel license issued under subchapter 117 of this code; provided, however,
that before any revocation, suspension or nonrenewal, the operator shall have
an opportunity to be heard at the next regular meeting of the City Council
after the 15 day notice period set forth in § 117.20 of this subchapter, but
not before five days notice of the time and place of the hearing, addressed
to the operator at his or her last known place of business. The suspension or
revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the operator of
hotel accommodations from civil liability for the payment of the tax nor from
prosecution of the offense.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.22  DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the hotel accommodations
tax provided for under this subchapter, including penalties for delinquent
payments, shall be paid to the City Treasurer and shall be distributed within
30 days after the fifteenth day of the calendar month as follows.



   (A)   Ninety-five percent of 1% of the gross tax revenue collected
under this subchapter shall be paid to the Chicago Southland Convention and
Visitors Bureau for the sole purpose of promoting tourism, meetings,
conventions or other events or activities within the city or otherwise
attracting nonresidents to visit the city and patronize city businesses.



   (B)   The excess over 95% of 1% of the gross tax revenue collected
shall be retained by the city.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 117.23  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   (1)   Every operator of hotel accommodations shall keep
accurate books and records showing the prices, rents or charges made or
charged, and occupancies taxable under this subchapter. The records shall
include a daily sheet showing the number of hotel accommodation rooms rented
during every 24-hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or
motel room where such shall occur and the actual hotel or motel tax receipts
collected for the date in question.



      (2)   If an operator provides accommodations for both
permanent residents and other guests staying for shorter durations, the
operator shall keep separate books, records and daily sheets for rentals
obtained by permanent residents, which shall not be included in the
computation of the tax due under this subchapter, and rentals of shorter
durations, which are subject to the tax liabilities imposed by this
subchapter.



      (3)   If any operator fails to keep separate books or records,
he or she shall be liable to tax at the rate designated in § 117.16 upon the
entire gross receipts from his or her hotel.



   (B)   (1)   The City Treasurer, or his or her designate, may
enter the premises of any hotel accommodation between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. for the limited purpose of accessing, inspecting and examining
the books and records and guest registries in order to administer this
subchapter, and to assure enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder
or interfere with the City Treasurer or the Treasurer’s authorized
representative in the discharge of the Treasurer’s duties in the
performance of this subchapter, including refusing or causing to be refused
admittance or access to authorized officials for the limited purposes herein
set forth.



(Ord. 2006-12-0075O, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99




RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE




§ 117.35  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, corporation or business entity, agent, condominium,
townhouse or homeowners’ association shall engage in the business of
renting any dwelling unit to the public, operating a rental dwelling or
dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit, unless a valid residential
rental license has been issued by the City Clerk for the specific location.
This licensing requirement shall not apply to group homes governed by the
Specialized Living Centers Act, ILCS Ch. 405, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq., dealing
with the developmentally disabled, or other similar uses governed by state or
federal laws, rules or regulations.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.36  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for a residential rental license shall be made in the name
of the legal owner of the premises to be rented, submitted to the City Clerk
on forms provided by the Clerk. The application shall identify the location
of the property; the name, address and telephone of the owner; the name,
address and 24-hour telephone(s) of the manager or custodian of the property;
the owner’s agent for service of process; and such other information as the
Clerk may reasonably require.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.37  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for a residential rental license on each physical
property shall be paid at the time of application as follows:



   (A)   One to five dwelling units: $100 per year;



   (B)   Six to ten dwelling units: $150 per year;



   (C)   Eleven to 19 dwelling units: $200 per year;



   (D)   Twenty to 30 dwelling units: $300 per year;



   (E)   Thirty-one to 40 dwelling units: $400 per year; and



   (F)   Forty-one or more dwelling units: $500 per year.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.38  TERM OF LICENSE; TRANSFER PROHIBITED; RENEWAL.



   A residential rental license shall be issued for a period of one
calendar year. All licenses shall expire on December 31 next after issuance,
unless previously revoked. The license shall not be transferable. Each new
owner of the rental dwelling unit must obtain a license. Application for
renewal shall be made in the same manner as for a new license.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.39  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   No residential rental license shall be issued or renewed unless the
dwelling unit(s) and common area(s) in connection with which the license is
sought are found after inspection to meet all applicable laws and
regulations. Rental dwelling units that change ownership shall be required to
be inspected before a new license can be issued. The owner will be provided
with an inspection report describing any condition which constitutes a
violation of any applicable law or regulation, and shall be afforded a
reasonable opportunity to correct any such conditions. In the event that more
than two follow-up inspections are required to determine compliance, the
applicant shall pay an additional inspection service charge of $100 for each
additional inspection. Payment must be made in full prior to issuance of the
license.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.40  CRIME-FREE HOUSING SEMINAR REQUIRED.



   All persons applying for a residential rental license and all persons
administering, managing or controlling the operation of any rental dwelling
unit must attend a crime-free multi-housing seminar, administered by the Oak
Forest Police Department, prior to issuance of the license. The seminar may
be attended after application has been submitted and the license will be
issued after successful completion. Each licensee shall attend a seminar
every three years.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.41  CRIMINAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   The intent of this section is to protect and preserve the city
neighborhoods’ public health, safety and welfare of the residents by
requiring criminal history/background investigations of prospective tenants.



   (B)   Criminal background checks shall be conducted on all
prospective tenants prior to occupying and rental dwelling unit.



   (C)   The licensee shall conduct, or have conducted by a reputable
agency, a criminal history/background investigation on prospective tenants of
rental property in the city. It is, however, recommended that all prospective
tenants of rental residential property be required to submit credit checks,
and checks for past evictions prior to entering into a lease agreement.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.42  CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM.



   Every lease or other agreement for rental of any residential property
shall include a “Crime-Free Lease Addendum” in the following form:



 

City of Oak Forest Crime-Free Housing Lease Addendum




In consideration for the execution or renewal of a lease of the dwelling unit
identified in the lease, Manager or Owner and Resident agree as follows:


Resident, any member(s) of the resident’s household, a guest or any other
person affiliated with the resident, on or off the resident premises:


1.   Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate criminal activity
on or off the rental property.


2.   Will not permit the dwelling unit to be used for, or to facilitate
criminal activity, including but not limited to, violent criminal activity or
drug related criminal activity, misdemeanor or felony according to any State
Statutes.


3.   “Violent Criminal Activity"” means any criminal activity that has
as one of its elements the use, attempted use or threatened use of physical
force against the person or property of another.


4.   “Drug-related activity” means the illegal manufacture, sale,
distribution, use, or possession with the intent to manufacture, sell,
distribute, or use of a controlled substance or cannabis ( as defined in
Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act [21 U.S.C. 802]).


5.   One or more violations of Section 1 or Section 2 of this Lease
Addendum constitute a substantial violation of the Lease and material
noncompliance with the Lease. Any such violation is the grounds for
termination of tenancy and eviction from the unit.


6.   Proof of violation shall be by a preponderance of the evidence,
unless otherwise provided by law.


7.   In case of any conflict between provisions of this Lease Addendum and
any other provisions of the Lease, the provisions of this Lease Addendum
shall govern.


8.   This Lease Addendum is incorporated into the Lease between the
Landlord and the Tenant.


Resident Signature             Date

_____________________________    __________


Property Manager’s Signature       Date

_____________________________    __________


Property Address:

_____________________________________ _______




 



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.43  PERIODIC INSPECTION.



   Every residential rental property and dwelling unit is subject to
periodic inspection by the city at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner to ensure continuing compliance with all applicable laws and
regulations. Whenever it appears by inspection that conditions or practices
exist which are in violation of the provisions of this subchapter or of any
applicable laws and regulations, the city shall serve the owner or operator
with notice of the violation, stating what action is required to correct the
violation and the time period allowed for correction. The notice shall state
that unless the violations cited are corrected within the time allowed, the
residential rental license may be suspended or revoked.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



§ 117.44  VIOLATION OF “CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM” PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any tenant to occupy
any residential rental property in violation of any provision of the “Crime
Free Lease Addendum” required by this code.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.45  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING; APPEAL.



   The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any residential rental license, on
not less than five days notice to the licensee and an opportunity for a
hearing, whenever the Clerk finds that the licensee has failed or refused to
correct any violation of any law or regulation applicable to the property,
after reasonable notice and opportunity to take corrective action. Any person
whose license has been suspended or revoked by the City Clerk shall be
entitled to an appeal to the Mayor as provided in § 110.010 of this code.



(Ord. 2013-09-0461O, § 2 (part), passed 9-24-2013)



CHAPTER 118: COMMERCIAL RETAIL AND SERVICE PROVIDERS



Section



Service Stations



   118.001   Definition



   118.002   License required; fee



   118.003   Fire extinguishers



   118.004   Nonbusiness filling stations



   118.005   Dispensing of fuel; bulk sales



   118.006   Safety and sanitation



   118.007   Additional licenses for additional businesses; license
revocation



   118.008   Deceptive trade practices; identification of gasoline and
petroleum products



Sexually Oriented Businesses



   118.020   Purpose and intent



   118.021   Definitions



   118.022   Permit required



   118.023   Administration and enforcement responsibilities



   118.024   Permit application



   118.025   Investigation and application



   118.026   Issuance or denial of permit



   118.027   Expiration of permit



   118.028   Suspension of permit



   118.029   Revocation of permit



   118.030   Hearing



   118.031   Appeal procedure for permit denial, suspension or
revocation



   118.032   Transfer of permit



   118.033   Sexually oriented business employee license



   118.034   Regulations pertaining to the exhibition of sexually
explicit films or videos in booths



   118.035   Sexually oriented businesses featuring nudity or live
performance



   118.036   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually oriented
businesses



   118.037   Advertising, loitering and lighting regulations



   118.038   Hours of operation



   118.039   Additional prohibitions for the operation of a sexually
oriented business without a valid permit



   118.040   Exemptions



   118.041   Immunity from prosecution



Tobacco Sales



   118.055   License required; fee



   118.056   Sale of cigarettes to minors



   118.057   Purchase of tobacco products by minors; misrepresentations



   118.058   Possession of tobacco products by minors



Dry Cleaners



   118.070   Definitions



   118.071   License required; posting, suspension and revocation; fees



   118.072   License applications



   118.073   Buildings



   118.074   Sanitation



   118.075   Lighting



   118.076   Ventilation and exhaust systems



   118.077   Machines



   118.078   Machine installation



   118.079   Dry cleaning solvents



   118.080   Operations



   118.081   Safety and testing equipment



   118.082   Plant and equipment alterations



   118.083   Inspections by Fire Chief



Landscapers



   118.095   Permit required; fee



   118.096   Permit application; issuance or denial of permit



   118.097   Bond



   118.098   Inspections by City Engineer before issuance of permit



   118.099   Grading and drainage



   118.100   Inspections of completed work



   118.101   Release of bond



   118.102   Responsibility of property owners



   118.103   Maintenance by property owners



Itinerant Merchants, Peddlers and Solicitors



   118.115   Definitions



   118.116   License required; prohibited activities



   118.117   License applications



   118.118   Investigation; reasons for disapproval of applications



   118.119   License and permit revocation



   118.120   Reasons for revocation



   118.121   Appeals



   118.122   Service of process



   118.123   Display of license and badge



   118.124   Nonprofit organizations; blanket permits and waivers



   118.125   Request for individuals to solicit on public property on
behalf of nonprofit organizations



   118.126   Exceptions to subchapter



   118.127   Hours of operation



   118.128   Effective period of licenses and permits



   118.129   License fee; deposit



   118.130   Prohibited soliciting



   118.131   Nonliability of city



Scavengers



   118.145   License required; fee



   118.146   Vehicle requirements



   118.147   Disposal or storage of refuse



Secondhand Dealers and Lenders



   118.160   Definitions



   118.161   Authorization of subchapter



   118.162   Exceptions to subchapter



   118.163   License required; transferability; fee



   118.164   License applications



   118.165   Investigation of applicant



   118.166   Grounds for denial of license



   118.167   Appeals



   118.168   Exhibition of licenses; additional licenses and fee



   118.169   Designation of place of business



   118.170   Change in business location; license transfer and fee



   118.171   Purchasing from minors



   118.172   Performance standards



   118.173   Electronic reporting of transactions



   118.174   Records of transactions



   118.175   Inspection of records and goods by police



   118.176   Required holding period before disposing of goods;
exception



   118.177   Melting, wrecking or remodeling of articles made from
precious metals



   118.178   Coin collectors and dealers; coin collection swap meets
and conventions



   118.179   Non-conformance



   118.180   Suspension and revocation of licenses



Secondhand Articles Drop-off Containers



   118.190   Definitions



   118.191   Prohibitions



   118.192   Licensing and inspection



   118.193   Regulations



   118.194   Nonusable container



   118.195   Application for license



   118.999   Penalty




SERVICE STATIONS




§ 118.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SERVICE STATION.  Any place of business where gasoline or any highly
volatile fuel for a motor vehicle or an internal combustion engine is sold or
offered for sale to the public and where lubricating oil, grease, tires,
batteries and similar accessories and parts also may be offered for sale on
the premises, at retail, including minor services and installations
customarily incidental thereto. SERVICE STATION does not include open sales
lots, truck stops or vehicle repair shops.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.010)



§ 118.002  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)    No person shall maintain or operate a service station in the
city without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (B)   The annual fee for the license required by  division (A) of
this section shall be as set forth in § 110.007(B), plus $10 per pump nozzle.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.020)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006) Penalty,
see § 118.999



§ 118.003  FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.



   Each service station shall be equipped with at least one chemical fire
extinguisher suitable for oil or gasoline fires, which shall be kept in
serviceable condition.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.030)



§ 118.004  NONBUSINESS FILLING STATIONS.



   Any person maintaining or operating a storage tank for gasoline for the
use of automobiles of an owner, lessee, employee or agent of the person shall
comply with all of the provisions of this subchapter, except that the person
shall not be required to pay a fee for the license required by § 118.002.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.040)



§ 118.005  DISPENSING OF FUEL; BULK SALES.



   No motor fuel shall be dispensed at any service station except into the
fuel tank of a motor vehicle. However, an individual sale of up to five
gallons may be made in a metal receptacle when the receptacle is painted red
and labeled in full conformity with ILCS Ch. 430, Act 20, § 1.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.050)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.006  SAFETY AND SANITATION.



   (A)   No gasoline, naphtha or other flammable liquid shall be kept
inside of a service station, except in an original sealed container.



   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be serviced until the ignition has been
turned off.



   (C)   No open light or flame shall be permitted except within a
stove in the station building.



   (D)   Premises must be kept clean, neat and free from rubbish or
trash.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.060)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.007  ADDITIONAL LICENSES FOR ADDITIONAL BUSINESSES; LICENSE
REVOCATION.



   The license obtained for a service station shall not entitle the
licensee to conduct any other business without an additional license. If a
service station licensee operates any other business without an additional
license, the Mayor or the Business License Commissioner may revoke any
license issued under this subchapter and such licensee may be fined as
provided in § 118.999.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.070)



§ 118.008  DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICES; IDENTIFICATION OF GASOLINE AND
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS.



   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, at retail, any
gasoline or petroleum products for use in motor vehicles in any manner which
deceives or tends to deceive a purchaser or prospective purchaser as to
price, quality or identity of the product. The pump, dispensing device or
container shall have the name, brand, symbol, mark, lead content category and
minimum antiknock (octane) index (to be derived from the sum of research and
motor octane ratings divided by two ((R + M) ÷ 2), or the minimum cetane
rating, of the gasoline or petroleum product sold or offered for sale,
affixed to the pump, dispensing device or container, and the product therein
shall not be substituted, mixed or adulterated.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CETANE RATING.  The cetane rating described in ASTM Standard
Classifications of Diesel Fuel Oil (D 975 73), as amended, and ASTM Test
Method (D 613).



      LEAD CONTENT CATEGORY.  The lead content described in ASTM (D
439 73), as amended, and shall be determined by ASTM Test Methods (D 3237),
(D 3116) and (D 526).



      RESEARCH OCTANE RATING and MOTOR OCTANE RATING. The research
octane rating and motor octane rating described in ASTM (American Society for
Testing Materials) Standard Specifications for Gasoline (D 439 73), as
amended, and ASTM Test Methods (D 2699) and (D 2700).



   (C)    In addition to the fine provided for in § 118.999, any
violation of this section may be grounds for revocation of the license issued
by the city under this subchapter. However, nothing in this section shall be
construed to preclude the revocation of any such license for a violation of
any other provision of these codified ordinances.



(2000 Code, § 5.52.080)




SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES




§ 118.020  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city.
The provisions of this subchapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this subchapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to
their intended market when such is permitted under the First Amendment.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this subchapter to in any way condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene or harmful material to minors.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.010)



§ 118.021  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary,
wage or other compensation by the operator of the business or is paid solely
by tips from customers.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement or any sexually oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses
defined in this subchapter;



      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses
defined in this subchapter to any other existing sexually oriented business;



      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; or



      (5)   The addition of a sexually oriented business to an
existing business which is not a sexually oriented business.



   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.



      (1)   the appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, pubic region, or the areola or nipple of the
female breast; or



      (2)   a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover
a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or
nipple of the female breast.



   OPERATOR.  The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, OPERATOR or
person in charge or any permitted, licensed or unlicensed premises.



   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES.  Any premises that requires a permit
and/or license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.



   PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity of any kind.



   PUBLIC BUILDING.  Any building owned, leased or held by the United
States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school
district or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the
United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.



   PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA.  Any public land which has been
designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a
park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness
areas, or similar public land within the city which is under the control,
operation or management of the city or the park district or other recreation
authorities.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque temple or building
which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE.  An area containing single-family homes,
duplexes, townhouses, multiple-family units, a mobile park or subdivision and
campground, as defined in the city zoning ordinance.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or private educational facility, including but not
limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds,
administrative facilities, and the facilities used primarily for other
purposes by the SCHOOL.



   SEMINUDE or SEMINUDITY.  A state of dress in which clothing covers no
more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as
well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency or seminude or nude model studio.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.  Those businesses defined as follows.



      (1)   ADULT ARCADE.An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for
viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO
STORE. A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade in any one or more of the following; or derives
a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, or devotes a
significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising
to, the sale or rental for any form of consideration of any one or more of
the following:



         (a)   Book, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;



         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others; and/or



         (c)   An establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of
materials depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its
principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of
consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle
club,” carwash, maid service or similar commercial establishment or
business, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly
features:



         (a)   Persons who appear seminude or in a state of
semi-nudity; and/or



         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of or by pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. An adult cabaret
also includes any business which offers as part of its services or
entertainment and for any type of consideration, dancing with any patron
intended for the sexual stimulation of the patron, by an employee or person
hired by the business, while the employee is in any state of dress or undress;



      (4)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial
establishment which:



         (a)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, which provides patrons which closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material
by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any
off-premises advertising including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines,
pamphlets or leaflets radio or television;



         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time less than ten hours; or



         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the
sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours.



      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.A commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.



      (6)   ADULT THEATER.A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration,
regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity, or
live performances which are characterized by exposure of or by specified
sexual activities.



      (7)   ESCORT.A person who, for any form or consideration,
agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or
who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.



      (8)   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



      (9)   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form or
consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or
manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection
with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such
treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto exposes his or her
specified anatomical areas or massages the specified anatomical areas of the
customer, unless prescribed by a physician or registered physical and massage
therapist. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include
the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed
physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician
working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor
or osteopath, nor by trainers amateur, semiprofessional or professional or
any athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.



      (10)   SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO.Any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of seminudity or nudity, is provided for money
or any form or consideration to be observed, sketched drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.



      (11)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISH- MENT.A business or
commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration a place where two or more persons may
congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual
activities when one or more of the persons is seminude or nude. The
definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment
where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar
professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and
recognized sexual therapy.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes any of the following:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and/or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT.  Includes any criminal act or conduct as
defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, United States Code, Criminal Code of
any other state; Criminal Code of any United States Territory; or the City of
Oak Forest codified ordinances, which is defined as or has as one of its
elements, any of the following:



      (1)   Exploitation of a minor;



      (2)   Sexual penetration;



      (3)   Sexual touching;



      (4)   Pornographic images of a minor;



      (5)   Incest;



      (6)   Public sexual activity or indecency;



      (7)   Prostitution or solicitation of prostitution;



      (8)   Pimping;



      (9)   Pandering; and/or



      (10)   Attempt, solicitation or conspiracy of any item on the
foregoing list.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated
including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;



      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; and/or



      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An increase
in the floor area occupied by the business by more than 15%.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. 
Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities or objects signifying
ownership, which constitute a substantial or controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, gift, or similar means;



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person
possessing the ownership or control.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.020)



§ 118.022  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate
without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the
particular type of business.



   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a
permit.



   (C)   All permits or licenses issued under this subchapter expire on
December 31 of each year.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.030)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.023  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designee is responsible
for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually
oriented business permits for sexually oriented businesses.



   (B)   The city’s economic development coordinator or his or her
designee is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented
business for which a permit is being applied for complies with all location
requirements of the city zoning ordinance, all applicable zoning laws and/or
regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter in the city.



   (C)   The Oak Forest Police Department is responsible for providing
information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal act during the time period set forth.



   (D)   The city’s Code Enforcement Officer is responsible for
inspecting a proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business
in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes
and ordinances.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.040)



§ 118.024  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for permit must be made on a form provided by
the city. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall
file with the city an original and two copies of a sworn permit application
on the standard application form supplied by the City Administrator.



   (B)   The completed application shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents.



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state its
legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is 18
years of age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, and the names of all general partners, whether the partnership
is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of Illinois, the names and capacity of all
officers directors, employees and stockholders, if any, in charge of the
day-to-day operations of the sexually oriented business, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the
applicant must:



         (a)   State the sexually oriented business’s
fictitious name; and



         (b) Submit the required Illinois registration documents;



      (3)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
listed pursuant to this subchapter has, within the two- or five-year period
as specified in this subchapter been convicted of a specified criminal act,
and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and
the place of conviction;



      (4)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
pursuant to this subchapter has had a previous permit under the subchapter or
any other similar sexually oriented business subchapters from another city or
county denied suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of and reasons for the denial, suspension or
revocation and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant
to this subchapter has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this
subchapter whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location or the sexually oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of and
reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation;



      (5)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed
pursuant to this subchapter holds any other permits and/or licenses under
this subchapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from
another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other
permitted businesses;



      (6)   The single classification of permit for which the
applicant is filing;



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any;



      (8)   The applicant’s mailing addresses and residential
address;



      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);



      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social
Security number and its state or federally issued tax identification number;



      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but it must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior
of the premises to an occurrence of plus or minus six inches;



      (12)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing
prepared within 30 days prior to application by an Illinois registered land
surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
established existing uses regulated by this subchapter within 1,000 feet of
the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area or public
building within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; and the property
lines or any residential zoned area or residential property within 1,000 feet
of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted;



      (13)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit
as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a 10%
or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as
applicant; and



      (14)   If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business which shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes, or other
video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, then the person shall comply with the application
requirements stated in this subchapter.



   (C)   Applicants for a permit under this subchapter shall have a
continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by
this section in the event that the information changes in any way from what
is stated on the application. The failure to comply with the continuing duty
within the 30 days from the date of a change, by supplementing the
application on file with the City Administrator or his or her designee, shall
be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit.



   (D)   In the event that the City Administrator or his or her
designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly
completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or
she shall promptly notify the applicant of that fact and allow the applicant
ten days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting
or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant
is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.) In the event
that the applicant knowingly provides false information on the application
form, this provision will not apply.



   (E)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this subchapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with Health, Fire and Building Codes and laws.



   (F)   The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable
application fee of $100 at the time of filing an application under this
section of this subchapter for the administrative costs of processing an
application.



   (G)   Prior to obtaining any permit to operate any sexually oriented
business deemed in this subchapter, and as part of any application for a
permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the city or its
designee a certification that the proposed location of such business complies
with the location requirements of the city zoning ordinance.



   (H)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city
permits and/or licenses does not exempt the person from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.



   (I)   By applying for a permit under this subchapter, the applicant
shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this subchapter and to
the exercise by the City Administrator or his or her designee, the city’s
Police Department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the
laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the city or their respective
responsibilities under this subchapter.



   (J)   The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the
names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to
this subchapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit
is granted or renewed.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.050)



§ 118.025  INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city
and upon payment of the nonfundable application fee, the city or its designee
shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately
thereafter send photocopies of the application to the city’s Police
Department and any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of Health,
Fire and Building Codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly
conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed
sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law
and as set forth in this subchapter. The investigations shall be completed
within 20 days of receipt of the application by the city or its designee. At
the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate
on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the
application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves state the
reasons therefor. The city shall only be required to certify the criminal
records request check required in this subchapter. The city’s Police
Department shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.



   (B)   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it
finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation or
any provision of any statute, code, subchapter, regulation or other law in
effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each
department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the
application to the city or its designee.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.060)



§ 118.026  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Administrator or his/or designee shall grant or deny
an application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper
filing. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the applicant
requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall
be permitted to begin operating the business for which the permit is sought,
unless and until the city or its designee notifies the applicant of a denial
of the application and states the reason(s) for that denial.



   (B)   Grant of application for permit.



         (1)   The City Administrator or his or her designee
shall grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in
division (C) of this section is present.



         (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face
the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date,
and the address of the sexually oriented business, whether permitted or not
may be subject to indecency laws pursuant to the United State Supreme Court
decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). The permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.



   (C)   Denial of application for permit. The City Administrator or
his or her designee shall deny the application for any of the following
reasons:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on
any payment to the city or any other governmental body of taxes, fees, fines
or penalties assessed against him/her individually or any taxes imposed upon
any corporation or partnership in relation to a sexually oriented business;



      (3)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been
denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within
the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;



      (4)   An applicant has failed to provide information required
by this subchapter for the issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (5)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved as being in compliance with Health, Fire and
Building Codes by the department or agency responsible under law for
investigating the compliance;



      (6)   The application or permit fees required by this
subchapter have not been paid;



      (7)   An applicant of the proposed business is in violation
of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this subchapter
including, but not limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a
sexually oriented business under the city zoning ordinance;



      (8)   The granting of the application would violate a statute,
ordinance or court order;



      (9)   The applicant has a permit under this subchapter which
has been suspended or revoked;



      (10)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
act for which:



         (a)   Less than two years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified
criminal acts;



         (b)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the specified criminal
acts;



         (c)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date if the applicant has been convicted of two or more misdemeanor offenses
for specified criminal acts occurring within any 24-month period; or



         (d)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on disqualification of the applicant;



      (11)   An applicant who has been convicted of any specified
criminal acts may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only when
the time period required in division (C)(10) of this section has elapsed; and



      (12)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an
employee who does not have a valid license as required in this subchapter.



   (D)   If the City Administrator or his or her designee denies the
application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reasons(s) for the denial.



   (E)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular location
within a period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an
intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to
lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the
application shall be denied.



      (1)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives
of the Code Enforcement Officer, the county’s Health Department, and the
Fire Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied
or open for business or at any other reasonable time.



      (2)   It is unlawful, and a person who operates a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for
the business under this subchapter, or its agent or employee, commits a
misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit the lawful inspection of the
premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business or any other
reasonable time.



      (3)   The provisions or this section do not apply to areas of
an adult motel, as defined in this subchapter, which are currently being
rented by a customer for use as permanent or temporary habitation.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.070)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.027 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Each permit shall expire on December 31 of each year and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in this subchapter (for
renewals, filing of the original survey shall be sufficient).



   (B)   When the City Administrator or his or her designee denies
renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this
subchapter for one year from the date of denial. Reasons for the denial of
the permit shall be enumerated by the City Administrator or his or her
designee in accordance with this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.080)



§ 118.028  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall suspend a
permit for a period not to exceed 60 days if he or she determines that a
permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this subchapter;



      (2)   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances (not prescribed under the supervision of a licensed
physician) while working on the sexually oriented business premises;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises;



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises;



      (5)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of
a building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, subchapter or regulation
whether federal, state or local the determination being based on
investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing
the rules or laws. In the event of a statute, code, subchapter or regulation
violation, the city or its designee shall promptly notify the permittee of
the violation and shall allow the permittee a three-day period in which to
correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before
the expiration of the three-day period, the city or its designee, shall
forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension;



      (6)    Engaged in a permit transfer contrary to this
subchapter. In the event that the city or its designee suspends a permit on
the ground that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to this
subchapter, the City Administrator or his or her designee shall forthwith
notify the permittee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect
until the applicable section of this subchapter has been satisfied;



      (7)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of
the hours of operation as specified in this subchapter;



      (8)   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid
license as required in this subchapter;



      (9)   Commits any crime on the premises; or



      (10)   Knowingly employs a minor.



   (B)   The suspension shall remain in effect for the entire period of
the suspension or until the violation of the statute, code, subchapter or
regulation in question has been corrected, whichever is later.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.090)



§ 118.029  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall revoke a
permit if a cause of suspension in this subchapter occurs and the permit has
been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall revoke a
permit upon determining that:



      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading material
information in the documents submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;



      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s
permit was suspended;



      (5)   A permittee has been convicted of a specified criminal
act for which the time period required in this subchapter has not elapsed;



      (6)   A person or persons commits an offense, occurring in or
which is shown to have occurred in the appropriate civil administrative
procedure, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit;



      (7)   A permittee is convicted of any tax violation;



      (8)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or



      (9)   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually
oriented business under a single roof.



   (C)   When the City Administrator or his or her designee revokes a
permit, the revocation shall continue for one year from the date revocation
became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City Administrator or his
or her designee finds that the basis for revocation under § 118.035 has been
corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least one year has
elapsed since the date revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked
under division (B)(6) of this section, an applicant may not be granted
another permit until the number of years required under this section has
elapsed.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.100)



§ 118.030  HEARING.



   (A)   No license or permit shall be revoked, suspended, or
nonrenewed except after a public hearing by the City Administrator with
written notice sent to the licensee or permittee at least three days prior to
the hearing affording the licensee or permittee an opportunity to appear and
defend. However, if the City Administrator has reason to believe that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately
threaten the welfare of the community, he or she may, upon the issuance of a
written order stating the reason for the conclusion, and without notice or
hearing, order the licensed or permitted premises closed for not more than
seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period.



   (B)   The notice provided hereunder shall include the time, date and
place of hearing and a general description of the alleged cause for the
possible revocation or suspension or the reason for the nonrenewal. At any
hearing hereunder, the licensee shall be entitled to all the protections and
rights allowed by law.



   (C)   The City Administrator shall, within ten days after the
hearing, if he or she determines after the hearing that the license should be
revoked, suspended or nonrenewed, state the reason or reasons for that
determination in a written order of revocation suspension, or nonrenewal, and
shall serve a copy of the order within ten days upon the licensee.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.110)



§ 118.031  APPEAL PROCEDURE FOR PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The permittee or applicant, as the case may be, shall, within
ten days after he or she has been notified of an adverse determination,
submit a notice of appeal to the City Clerk. The notice of appeal shall be
addressed to the City Council and shall specify the subject matter of the
appeal the date of any original and amended applications or requests, the
date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the action
requested of the City Council, and the name and address of the applicant or
permittee. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular
Council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after
receipt of the application for Council action.



   (B)   When an appeal is placed on the Council agenda, the Council
may take either of the following actions:



      (1)   Set a hearing date and instruct the City Clerk to give
such notice as may be required by law; and



      (2)   Appoint a Hearing Officer and fix the time and place for
hearing. The Hearing Officer may not be a city employee, and may be appointed
for an extended period of time. The Clerk shall assume responsibility for
giving any notice as may be required by law. If a Hearing Officer is
appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures
set out in this section.



   (C)   Whenever the city has scheduled an appeal before the City
Council, at the time and date set thereof, the Council shall receive all
relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee or applicant as the case
may be from interested parties and witnesses, and from city staff. The City
Council may sustain, overrule or modify the action of the City Administrator.
The action of the City Council shall be final.



   (D)   The Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set
out in this section or the City Council may receive and rule on admissibility
or evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as may be deemed
advisable.



   (E)   The City Council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by
the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this section.



   (F)   If a Hearing Officer is appointed to hear an appeal, the
Hearing Officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from
the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the City
Council. The report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered
and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall
be filed with the City Clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy
of the report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant
the same day it is filed with the City Clerk, with additional copies
furnished to the City Administrator and the Chief of Police. The City Clerk
shall place the Hearing Officer’s report on the agenda of the next regular
Council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed
and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of the meeting at least
ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a
shorter notice period.



   (G)   The City Council may adopt or reject the Hearing Officer’s
decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed report or recommendation.
If the Council does not adopt the Hearing Officer’s recommendation, it may:



      (1)   Refer the matter to the same or another Hearing Officer
for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on
specific points, in either of such cases the Hearing Officer shall proceed as
provided in this section; or



      (2)   Decide the case upon a review of the entire record
before the Hearing Officer with or without taking additional evidence.



   (H)   Any suspension or revocation appealed pursuant to this section
shall remain in effect unless reversed pursuant to this section.



   (I)   If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed upon
review, the administrative action shall be final and subject to such judicial
review as provided for by law.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.120)



§ 118.032  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated in the application for permit.



   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer its permit to another person
unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:



      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the City
Administrator or his or her designee, which provides that he or she is now
the permittee which amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed
and properly filed an application with the City Administrator or his or her
designee, setting forth the information called for in the application as
required by this subchapter; and



      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee set
by this subchapter.



   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the City Administrator or
his or her designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation
proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.



   (D)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another
location.



   (E)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly
in violation of this section is declared void and the permit shall be deemed
revoked.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.130)



§ 118.033  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented business
shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license.
Each applicant shall pay an annual license fee of $50. The fee is to cover
reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process.



   (B)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented
business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the City Administrator or its designee the following information:



      (1)   The applicant’s name or any other names (including
“stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;



      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   State driver’s license or identification number;



      (7)   Social Security number;



      (8)   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least
18 years of age;



      (9)   Attached to the application form as provided above, a
color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and
the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the city Police
Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by
the applicant;



      (10)   A statement detailing the license or permit history of
the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether the applicant previously was or is
operating or seeking to operate, in Cook County or any other county, city,
state or country and has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do
business denied, revoked or suspended, and had any professional or vocational
license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such
denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the denial,
revocation or suspension. A copy of an order of denial, revocation or
suspension shall be attached to the application; and



      (11)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any
specified criminal act or pleaded nolo contendere (or similar plea) to any
charge or performing a specified criminal act. This information shall include
the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and
identify the convicting jurisdiction.



   (C)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall refer the
sexually oriented business employee license application to the city’s
Police Department for an investigation to be made of such information as is
contained on the application. The application process shall be completed
within 15 working days from the date the completed application is filed.
After the investigation, the City Administrator or his or her designee shall
issue a license unless the report from the city’s Police Department finds
that one or more of the following findings is true:



      (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading
or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license,
or in any report or record required to be filed with the city’s Police
Department or other department of the city;



      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
act of this subchapter or entered a plea of nolo contendere (or similar plea)
to any charge of performing a specified criminal act;



      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local, state, or federal law,
statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this
subchapter; and/or



      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business
employee license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the
current application or similar license revoked by the state, federal
government, any commonwealth or any other municipality.



   (D)   (1)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be
subject to annual renewal by the City Administrator or his or her designee
upon the written application of the application and a finding by the City
Administrator or his or her designee and city’s Police Department that the
applicant has not been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to any specified
criminal act or committed any act during the existence of the previous
license period which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application. All licenses issued under this section expire on December 31 of
each year.



      (2)   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment
of a renewal fee of $25.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.140)



§ 118.034  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT
FILMS OR VIDEOS IN BOOTHS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless
of whether or not a permit has been issued to that business under this
subchapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150
square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements.



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business
permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s
stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, the location of the
booths, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not
be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor
area with no dimension greater than eight feet. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which this permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature or an engineer’s
or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and
should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to
show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The City Administrator
or his or her designee may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted
and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station or booths may be made without the prior approval of the
city or its designee.



      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station to
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises have two or more manager’s stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager’s stations. The view required in this division must be by direct
line of sight from the manager’s station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises,
to ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(5) of this section
remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials or persons at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this
section.



      (7)   It shall be the duty of the owners, operator and of any
agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that no viewing room
may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access and an illumination of not less than two footcandle as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



      (10)   It shall be the duty of the owners, operator, and of
any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that no act of
sexual intercourse, oral sexual contact, or any other sexual contact,
including masturbation, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.,
occurs in or on the licensed premises.



      (11)   At no time may any door be attached to the viewing
rooms or booths as specified in this section, and it shall be the duty of the
owners and the operator, and of any employees and agents present on the
premises, to ensure that no doors are placed on the rooms as specified in
this section.



      (12)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and of
any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that no openings
of any kind exist between viewing rooms or booths. It shall also be a duty of
the owners and operator, and of any agents and employees present on the
premises, to ensure that no openings or holes of any kind, commonly referred
to as “glory holes,” be made or attempted to be made by any person
between viewing rooms, booths, restrooms, or any other room on the premises.



   (B)   A person having a duty under this section commits a
misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.150) Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.035  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES FEATURING NUDITY OR LIVE
PERFORMANCE.



   (A)   A sexually oriented business which features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or seminudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities shall be operated in accordance with the following
regulations. It is unlawful for an owner, permittee, or operator, and all
agents and employees, to fail to ensure compliance with these regulations.



      (1)   A person shall not appear in a state of nudity or
seminudity or engaged in a live performance which is characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities
except upon a stage elevated at least 36 inches above floor level. All parts
of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof within which the person
appears in a state of nudity or seminudity or performs, shall be a distance
of at least six feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which
patrons may be present. The stage or designated area thereof shall be
separated from the area, in which patrons may be located by a barrier or
railing the top of which is at least four feet above floor level. No person
appearing in a state of nudity or seminudity or engaging in such live
performances or patron may extend any part of his or her body over or beyond
the barrier or railing.



      (2)   An employee may not touch the breast, buttocks or
genitals of a patron, nor may a patron touch the breast, buttocks or genitals
of an employee.



      (3)   A patron may not place any money on the person or in or
on the costume of any employee.



      (4)   A person below the age of 18 years may not observe or
appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or in such live performances on the
premises of a sexually oriented business.



   (B)   A sign, in a form to be prescribed by the City Administrator
and summarizing the provisions of divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this
section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business
in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.160)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.036  PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for the business under this subchapter, and knowingly or with
reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers or allows:



   (A)   Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business
premises;



   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business
premises;



   (C)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services
at the business premises; or



   (D)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business
premises as an employee.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.170)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.037  ADVERTISING, LOITERING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued for the business, under this subchapter, and
advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable
federal or state statute or local ordinance.



   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this
subchapter, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or
performances at the sexually oriented business in any advertising which is
visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall extend to advertising of
the existence or location of such sexually oriented business.



   (C)   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior
premises to be visible from outside the premises.



   (D)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface
and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to
provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees
and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting
shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented
business to:



      (1)   Initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the
external boundaries of the real property upon which the sexually oriented
business is located;



      (2)   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is
permitted on such property; and



      (3)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the
activities of persons on the property by visually inspecting the property at
least once every ten minutes or inspecting the property by use of video
cameras and monitors.



   (F)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the
operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with the
requirements of the city, commonly know as the sexually oriented business
ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently
enacted city ordinances or regulations.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.180)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.038  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operated or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this
subchapter, and allows such business to remain open for business, or to
permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a
sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.



   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working
as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not
a permit has been issued for a business under this subchapter, the employee
engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a
sale, provides a service or solicits a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.190)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.039  ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions found at other sections of this
subchapter, the following additional provisions shall also apply to sexually
oriented businesses.



   (B)   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this
subchapter, and the person knows or should know that:



      (1)   The business does not have a sexually oriented business
permit under this subchapter for any applicable classification;



      (2)   The business has a permit which is under suspension;



      (3)   The business has a permit which has been revoked; or



      (4)   The business has a permit which has expired.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.200)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.040  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this
subchapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:



      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



      (3)   In a structure:



         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing; and



         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class a
student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class;



         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at any one time; and



         (d)   Where the class is a general art class (not
limited to painting nudes) consisting of at least 16 hours of training
instruction.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
subchapter that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not it is permitted under this subchapter, exposed any specified
anatomical area during the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or
during the employee’s bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible
only to employees.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.210)



§ 118.041  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.



   The city and its designee, the city’s Police Department and all other
departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and employees
charged with enforcement or state and local laws and codes shall be immune
from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon
a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope or authority
conferred by this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.230)




TOBACCO SALES




§ 118.055  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall sell tobacco or tobacco products at retail in
the city without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (B)   The annual fee for the license required by division (A) of
this section shall be $100 per year, per establishment.



   (C)   The license obtained under this section shall not entitle the
licensee to conduct any other business on the premises without first
obtaining a license for that business, if and as required.



(2000 Code, § 5.60.010)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.056  SALE OF CIGARETTES TO MINORS.



   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer of
cigarettes or other tobacco products, or any agent, employee or
representative of a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler or
retailer of cigarettes or other tobacco products, shall do any of the
following:



   (A)   Give, sell or otherwise distribute cigarettes or other tobacco
products to any person under 18 years of age; or



   (B)   Give away, sell or distribute cigarettes or other tobacco
products in any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a sign
stating that giving, selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes or other
tobacco products to a person under 18 years of age is prohibited by law.



(2000 Code, § 5.60.020)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.057  PURCHASE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS; MISREPRESENTATIONS.



   No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase tobacco products,
misrepresent his or her identity or age or use any false or altered
identification, for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.



(2000 Code, § 5.60.030)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.058  POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS.



   No person under the age of 18 years shall possess any tobacco products,
provided that the possession by a person under the age of 18 years, under the
direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person, in the privacy
of the parent’s or guardian’s home, shall not be prohibited.



(2000 Code, § 5.60.040)  Penalty, see § 118.999




DRY CLEANERS




§ 118.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ATTENDANT.  A person thoroughly trained to supervise a coin-operated
dry cleaning machine plant, to advise customers in the operation of
coin-operated dry cleaning machines and to recognize health and safety
hazards.



   BUILDING COMMISSIONER.  The Building Commissioner of the city or his
or her duly authorized agent.



   COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING MACHINE.  Any dry cleaning machine,
including integral parts, originally designed and/or intended for use as a
self-service dry cleaning machine by the general public for a consideration.



   COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING MACHINE PLANT. Any structure in which any
number of coin-operated dry cleaning machines are installed for use as
self-service dry cleaning machines.



   DRY CLEANING.  The process of removing dirt, grease, paint and other
stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs and similar items by the
use of nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable.



   EQUIPMENT.  All mechanical and electrical items within or on the
exterior of a plant necessary for the plant’s operation and includes, but
is not limited to, dry cleaning machines, ductwork, fans, blowers, solvent
storage tanks, pumps, heating devices and refuse containers.



   FIRE CHIEF.  The Fire Chief of the city or his or her duly authorized
agent.



   HEALTH COMMISSIONER.  The Health Commissioner of the city or his or
her duly authorized agent.



   MACHINE.  A coin-operated dry cleaning MACHINE.



   PLANT.  A coin-operated dry cleaning machine PLANT.



   SPOTTING.  The local application of solvent to spots, dirt, grease,
paint and stains for the removal of the same.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.010)



§ 118.071  LICENSE REQUIRED; POSTING, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; FEES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a plant in the city who does not
possess a license from the city. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place. Only persons who comply with this subchapter, all applicable state
laws and regulations and local ordinances, rules and regulations shall be
entitled to receive and retain such a license.



   (B)   The license may be suspended by the Mayor upon a violation by
the holder of any of the provisions of this subchapter, or may be revoked,
after an opportunity for a hearing, upon a serious or repeated violation.



   (C)   The license fee for a plant shall apply for each fiscal year
or any portion thereof. This fee shall consist of a base fee of $100 for each
plant.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.020)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006)  Penalty,
see § 118.999



§ 118.072  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for the license required by § 118.071 shall be on forms
provided by the city, shall be made to the City Clerk in writing, shall be
signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership or
by a duly authorized officer thereof if a corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the
Mayor and Council at their discretion after the application has been
submitted to the City Clerk. Thereafter it shall be the duty of the Building
Commissioner to issue the license.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.030)



§ 118.073  BUILDINGS.



   Structures intended for use as plants shall conform with all applicable
city zoning and building ordinances, permits, rules and regulations and, in
addition, the following.



   (A)   Such structures shall be single-story with concrete floors in
good condition.



   (B)    Machines shall not be installed in buildings used in whole or
in part as dwellings.



   (C)   Maintenance areas shall be separate from customer service
areas.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.040)



§ 118.074  SANITATION.



   (A)   Every room or place of a plant shall, at all times, be kept in
good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (B)   Separate toilet facilities for men and women shall be
provided, as follows:



      (1)   One water closet and one urinal for men; and



      (2)   One water closet for women.



   (C)   Both employees and customers shall have access to these
facilities.



   (D)   Toilet rooms shall be installed with adequate ventilation to
the exterior of the plant and shall be kept unlocked at all times the
establishment is open to the public, except when in use.



   (E)   Handwashing facilities, including lavatory, soap and approved
hand-drying facilities shall be provided in each of the toilet rooms
described in division (B) of this section.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.050)



§ 118.075  LIGHTING.



   All rooms in which coin-operated dry cleaning machines are installed
and all maintenance areas shall be illuminated to a minimum of ten foot
candles of light in all parts of the rooms or places not directly obstructed
by equipment.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.060)



§ 118.076  VENTILATION AND EXHAUST SYSTEMS.



   (A)   (1)   The room in which a coin-operated dry cleaning
machine is installed shall be ventilated so that there is a minimum flow of
air per machine from the area to which the public is admitted of at least 500
cubic feet per minute in a room where there are not more than three machines
installed; 400 cubic feet per minute where there are not more than eight
machines installed; 375 cubic feet per minute where there are not more than
16 machines installed; and 360 cubic feet per minute where there are 17 or
more machines installed.



      (2)   For this purpose, each cleaning cell shall be considered
one machine.



   (B)   (1)   Ventilation facilities shall be constructed so that
air is exhausted from the customer service area either directly to the
exterior of the plant or through properly sized openings in a partition
separating the front of the machine from the maintenance portion of the
machines.



      (2)   The openings, if grills are used, shall be sized on the
basis of 500 cubic feet per minute per square foot of net grill area, and
each opening shall be located in such a manner that the bottom of the opening
is from six to 12 inches above the top of the machine. The exhaust
ventilation shall be provided on a continuous basis while the plant is open
to the public or in operation.



   (C)   The exhaust ventilation equipment shall be wired in such a
manner that machines cannot be placed in operation unless the ventilating
equipment is in operation.



   (D)   (1)   A general dilution ventilation fan shall be installed
in the maintenance area of the plant.



      (2)   The ventilation shall, when combined with the system
required in division (B) of this section, enable the exhausting of air
directly to the exterior of the plant in accordance with the following
schedule:



 


Number of Machines

 

Minimum Air Flow Rate Per Machine (cubic feet per minute)




1 to 3

 

1,000




4 to 8

 

800




9 to 16

 

750




17 or more

 

720




 



   (E)   Solvent storage rooms, if separate from maintenance areas,
shall be provided with exhaust ventilation equipment capable of exhausting
air directly to the exterior of the plant at the rate of 1,000 cubic feet per
minute.



   (F)   The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of 100 cubic
feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is
open.



   (G)   The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which
the machines are located shall extend at least two feet above the level of
any window which can be opened, located within 50 feet of the outlet of the
stack, and shall be at least 50 feet away from any fresh air intake leading
to any premises.



   (H)   One scavenger pipe shall be provided for every two machines to
provide adequate local exhaust ventilation around base tanks and machine
bases. Each scavenger duct shall be located in back of and exactly between
two machines two to four inches above the floor line and exhausted to a
discharge stack as described in division (G) of this section.



   (I)   All air required to be exhausted shall discharge to the
exterior of the plant and shall discharge a minimum of 25 feet horizontally
from any fresh air intake.



   (J)   A supply of tempered (heated to a minimum of 60°F) make-up
air, equal to or greater than the total volume of air exhaust from the plant,
shall be provided from the exterior.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.070)



§ 118.077  MACHINES.



   (A)   Any machine used in a dry cleaning business shall be
completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with the intake at the
top and the outlet at or near the bottom of the machine. Groups of machines
may be entirely enclosed or supported on all open sides by an enclosure
topped with a hood vented as provided for each individual machine.



   (B)   No machine shall have a rated capacity of greater than ten
pounds dry weight.



   (C)   The exhaust system of the machine shall be such as to effect
compliance with this subchapter.



   (D)   The cleaning cycle control shall be such that there is no odor
of solvent or solvent vapor in the material being cleaned at the end of the
complete cleaning cycle.



   (E)   The machine must be constructed so as to prevent the loading
door from being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine
shall be equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination
of the status of the cleaning cycle.



   (F)   Any connection of a machine with the water supply system must
be equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the
condenser with no control valves downstream from such a gap or breaker. Waste
water shall be discharged through an air gap.



   (G)   Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent
the leakage of liquids, gas or vapors.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.080)



§ 118.078  MACHINE INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Machines and filter assemblies shall be installed within
either a liquid tight concrete dike of a four-inch minimum height or within a
pan and piping system to contain the solvent should leakage occur. The floor
within the dike shall be pitched to drain to a six-inch floor drain or a sump
well. The drain or sump well shall be connected to an emergency solvent
storage tank and the tank shall be of sufficient capacity to hold all of the
cleaning solvent contained in all of the machines installed. Storage tanks
shall be suitably vented to the exterior of the building and a minimum of two
feet above the roof line.



   (B)   No machine shall be installed in the same room with any gas,
oil or electrically fired equipment. The combustion equipment shall be so
installed that all combustion air is drawn directly from the exterior of the
plant.



   (C)   Machines shall be installed in such a manner that only the
fronts of the machines are exposed in the customer service area. The
maintenance portion of the machines shall be separated from the front of the
machines by a solid partition, except for exhaust vents. The partition shall
be a wall so constructed that the only access to the maintenance portion of
the machines is through one or more doors capable of being locked.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.090)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.079  DRY CLEANING SOLVENTS.



   No cleaning solvent, other than perchlorethylene and water, shall be
used in a plant, provided that the use of such solvent has been approved by
the manufacturer of the coin-operated dry cleaning machine.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.100)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.080  OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all
of the equipment described in § 118.077 is properly installed and in good
operating working condition.



   (B)   No establishment for which a license is required under this
subchapter shall be open for business, and no person shall admit the public
or customers into the room where such a machine is located, unless there is
on duty, at all times, a competent person in charge of the establishment and
in charge of the operation of the machine. There shall be warning signs
posted in places of easy observation, warning of the dangers if leakage of
liquids, gas or vapor occurs.



   (C)   No person shall permit any residue containing solvent to flow
into the sewerage system of the municipality. Tightly covered metal
containers may be used for the temporary storage of the waste outside the
building. The containers shall bear labels indicating the contents and
dangers involved in handling, and shall be locked if in an unenclosed place.



   (D)   At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place
available to customers, giving the name, address and telephone number of the
owner of the establishment and the service department or agency responsible
for the proper maintenance of the machines.



   (E)   Customers shall not be permitted in maintenance service areas.
The doors of any such area shall be kept locked at all times, except when the
attendant or other authorized plant personnel are entering, leaving or
working within the area.



   (F)   Complete step-by-step operating instructions shall be posted
near the machines in the customer service area. The instructions shall also
include the following statements: “Notify attendant if any odor of solvent
remains in garment or material” and “Garment or materials bearing the
odor of solvent are dangerous if enclosed in an automobile or other enclosed
place”.



   (G)   The attendant shall take all reasonable precautions to see
that materials that cannot be properly cleaned are not placed in machines.



   (H)   All machines shall be inspected by plant personnel daily and
any machine found to be operating improperly or found to be unsafe shall not
be placed in service and shall be clearly marked “Out of Order — Do Not
Use”.



   (I)   All pipes, connections and transfer pumps carrying the
cleaning solvent shall be maintained tight and free from leaks.



   (J)   Servicing of machines shall be done only during the operation
of the exhaust ventilation required in this subchapter.



   (K)   Filter residue and other residues containing dry cleaning
solvent shall be stored in tightly covered metal containers outside of the
plant in an area not accessible to the public and shall be collected by a
scavenger.



   (L)   Spotting of materials shall be done with no solvent other than
water.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.110)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.081  SAFETY AND TESTING EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Respiratory protective equipment, approved for use in the
plant by the Fire Chief, shall be provided for attendants and maintenance
personnel and shall be kept in good repair and available for immediate use.



   (B)   Utility fire extinguishers shall be provided. The type,
capacity, number and location of extinguishers shall be designated by the
Chief. The extinguishers shall be maintained properly.



   (C)   Safety goggles, rubber gloves and rubber safety aprons shall
be provided for service personnel.



   (D)   A device for testing the concentration of solvent vapors in
the plant atmosphere shall be provided by the licensee. The device shall be a
Kitagawa Precision Gas Detector, Unico Model No. 400, or its equivalent, and
shall be maintained with not fewer than ten gas detector tubes of the
appropriate type. The equipment shall be kept at the plant and made available
for on-site inspection services by the Building Commissioner, the Health
Commissioner and the Fire Chief.



   (E)   A telephone of the nonpay type shall be available at the plant
for emergency use. City Fire and Police Department numbers shall be posted
conspicuously at the telephone.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.120)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.082  PLANT AND EQUIPMENT ALTERATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall effect an alteration, including an addition or
elimination of equipment for a plant, without first obtaining the approval of
the Building Commissioner.



   (B)   The operation or use thereof shall not commence until an
inspection has been made and approval has been granted by the Building
Commissioner.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.130)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.083  INSPECTIONS BY FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   (1)   The Fire Chief or other official designated by the
Mayor shall inspect or cause to be inspected every establishment licensed
under this subchapter at least once every six months.



      (2)   Any violation of this subchapter or of other ordinances
relating to dry cleaners, premises and/or flammable liquids shall be reported
to the Mayor.



   (B)   The Fire Chief may enter any building or premises situated in
the city, occupied by any dry cleaning establishment, in order to examine the
same and to determine whether or not the building or premises, or any
material, chemical or compound kept therein or used thereon, or any article
or fabric dry cleaned, dyed, spotted or finished, as received, used, kept,
maintained or stored on the premises or in such building, conforms to the
fire ordinances and regulations of the municipality or constitutes a fire
hazard within the municipality.



(2000 Code, § 5.16.140)




LANDSCAPERS




§ 118.095  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   No person shall engage in the business of landscape contractor within
the city without first obtaining an annual business permit therefor. The fee
for an annual business permit shall be as set forth in § 110.047(A)(14) of
this code.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.010)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.096  PERMIT APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   An application for a permit required by § 118.095 shall be obtained
from the City Clerk’s office and the permit shall be issued by the Building
Commissioner. On the application, the applicant shall state who has hired him
or her to do the particular work. In addition, the applicant shall file with
the City Clerk a statement listing the training and experience tending to
qualify the applicant for the performance of landscaping. In the case of
firms or corporations, the statement shall cover the training and experience
of responsible officers. The City Clerk shall make an investigation of the
training, experience and general qualifications of the applicant. If the City
Clerk does not approve of the applicant, the recommendation shall be
forwarded to Council, which may approve or disapprove the application. Any
disapproval of an application shall be based on the fact that the applicant
is not qualified to fulfill the requirements in regard to the business, as
set forth in this subchapter and in any rules or regulations controlling this
type of business or activity.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.020)



§ 118.097  BOND.



   No permit required by § 118.095 shall be issued unless and until the
applicant therefor has filed with the City Clerk a bond as required by §
110.047(A)(14) and § 110.049, with sureties to be approved by Council,
conditioned to indemnify the city and hold it harmless from any loss, damage,
claim or liability arising out of or resulting from the conduct or operation
of the business or the doing of or failure to do any act in connection
therewith.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.030)



§ 118.098  INSPECTIONS BY CITY ENGINEER BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Prior to the issuance of a permit required by § 118.095, the City
Engineer shall inspect the land or area which is to be landscaped and shall
take a grade reading of the soil. The City Engineer shall also render his or
her opinion regarding any potential drainage problem. If, in the opinion of
the City Engineer, flooding or drainage problems may arise as a result of the
landscaping, no permit shall be issued until the landscape contractor agrees
to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the City Engineer, make
the land and any adjacent land safe from flooding or drainage problems.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.040)



§ 118.099  GRADING AND DRAINAGE.



   A landscape contractor and the owner of the property being landscaped
shall make certain that the work done on the property does not change the
grade of the soil or cause any flooding or drainage problem to the
surrounding or adjacent land or area.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.050)



§ 118.100  INSPECTIONS OF COMPLETED WORK.



   After a landscape contractor has completed his or her work, he or she
shall notify the City Engineer, who shall then reinspect the land and take a
grade reading of the soil to guarantee that the grade of the soil has not
been changed. The City Engineer shall further inspect the land to see that
the contractor has not caused any flooding or drainage problem to the
surrounding or adjacent land or area. If the City Engineer is not satisfied
that the work was done properly, he or she shall immediately advise the
contractor and the owner, in writing, as to why the work is not satisfactory
and what must be done to correct the situation. A report of the proceedings
shall also be sent to the Mayor’s office. In those cases where the
contractor has caused flooding or drainage problems, the contractor shall
have not more than 30 days to correct any defect. If the contractor fails to
correct the situation within the stated time, then the city may proceed to
make the correction using the bond posted under this subchapter to satisfy
any expense involved in making the correction.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.060)



§ 118.101  RELEASE OF BOND.



   The City Engineer shall authorize the release of the bond required by
§ 118.097 only after he or she is satisfied that the landscape work has been
properly completed according to the provisions of this subchapter and other
city ordinances.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.070)



§ 118.102  RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   Nothing in this subchapter is meant to relieve an owner of landscaped
property from responsibility for work which is improperly done by a landscape
contractor.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.080)



§ 118.103  MAINTENANCE BY PROPERTY OWNERS.



   An owner of landscaped property has the additional responsibility of
providing adequate and reasonable maintenance of the property.



(2000 Code, § 5.32.090)




ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS




§ 118.115  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  The BUSINESS carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor.



   CHARITABLE. Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social
service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or
fraternal, either actual or purported.



   CONTRIBUTIONS. Includes the words alms, money, pledges, property, or
any donations under the guise of a loan or money or property.



   GOODS.  Merchandise of any kind, including but not limited to, goods,
wares or tangible personal property.



   ITINERANT VENDOR.  Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee,
who transports tangible goods, wares, merchandise or personal property for
retail sale, other than a peddler, as defined herein, and who does not
maintain an established office, distribution house, warehouse, service center
or residence from which such business is conducted.



   PEDDLER. Any person who goes upon any premises in the city, not having
been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for
sale. This definition also includes any person who solicits orders and as a
separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme to
evade the provisions of this subchapter. A PEDDLER is not an itinerant
merchant.



   PEDDLING.  Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler
as indicated under the definition of “peddler” in this section.



   RESIDENCE.  A domicile, and includes every separate living unit
occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within
any type of building or structure.



   SOLICITING.  Includes any one or more of the following activities:



      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods,
wares, merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or
description, for any kind of consideration;



      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application
or purchase of insurance of any kind; or



      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, and every other kind of publication.



   SOLICITOR.



      (1)   Any person who goes upon any premises in the city, not
having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other
personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be
performed in the future.



      (2)   Political, religious, charitable, and other
noncommercial speech are exempt from the licensing requirements of this
subchapter.



      (3)   Sales of newspapers, books, magazines, periodicals and
every other kind of printed publications and material, and subscriptions
related to same, are exempt from the licensing requirements of this
subchapter, but are subject to other reasonable provisions in this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, regulation under §§ 118.127 and
118.130.



      (4)   Persons under the age of 17 years engaged in
solicitation for charitable or fund-raising purposes are exempt from the
licensing requirements of this subchapter, but are subject to other
reasonable provisions in this subchapter, including, but not limited to,
regulation under §§ 118.127 and 118.130.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee,
who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of tangible goods, wares,
merchandise or personal property, and in pursuance of such sales occupies any
building, room, vehicle, structure, or unoccupied or unimproved lot for the
purpose of conducting such sale.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.010)  (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009)



§ 118.116  LICENSE REQUIRED; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   License required.  No person shall engage in peddling or
soliciting in the city without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (B)   Prohibited activities.  Itinerant vendors and transient
merchants are prohibited within the corporate limits of the city. The
definitions of and prohibition on itinerant vendors and transient merchants
shall not be construed to apply to:



      (1)   Any person selling vegetables, fruit, foodstuffs or
other perishable farm products at an established city farmers market or other
city-sponsored event or market, or area within the city's corporate municipal
boundaries requiring a business license and/or health inspection (if
applicable), at a church fair or other similar event of limited duration held
by a unit of local government or not-for-profit organization for fund-raising
purposes, or other location on the private property of a consenting owner.



      (2)   Any person delivering goods, wares, merchandise or
tangible personal property who is fulfilling an order for such property which
was selected or placed by mail or other means.



      (3)   Any person meeting the definitions of either
“peddler” or “solicitor” as defined in § 118.115.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.020)  (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009) 
Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.117  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this subchapter shall
file a written, sworn application with the City Clerk. The application shall
be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership or
by a duly authorized signatory if a corporation. Applications shall be made
on forms available in the office of the City Clerk. The application shall
state:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The name of the individual having management authority
or supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is
proposed to be carried on in the city; the local address of the individual,
if any; the permanent address of the individual; and the capacity in which
the individual will act;



      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose
purpose the business will be carried on and, if a corporation, the state and
date of incorporation;



      (4)   The time period during which it is proposed to carry on
the business;



      (5)   The nature, character and quality of goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered and if goods, their invoice value and
whether they are to be sold by sample as well as from stock, where and by
whom such goods are manufactured or grown and where such goods are at the
time of application;



      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for
the business; and



      (7)   Whether or not the applicant or the person identified in
divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section has been found guilty, within the
previous five years, of any felony under the laws of the State of Illinois,
any other state, or the United States, or has been convicted of a misdemeanor
for a crime involving moral turpitude or truth and veracity, under the laws
of the State of Illinois, any other state, or the United States, or of
violating any provision of any previous city regulation regarding peddling,
solicitation, or itinerant vending, of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or of any local, state, or federal regulation relative to peddling,
solicitation, canvassing or itinerant vending, and the nature of any such
conviction and penalty assessed. Felonies based solely on the applicant's
participation in a political protest or for nonviolent crimes that did not
involve fraud or dishonesty do not have to be disclosed.



   (B)   Applications for peddler or solicitor licenses shall state, in
addition to statements required by division (A) of this section:



      (1)   A description of the applicant; and



      (2)   The make, model, license plate and vehicle
identification number of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business.



   (C)   Applicants for licenses required by this subchapter shall
attach to their application the following:



      (1)   Two letters of recommendation from any person residing
or doing business in the county, certifying the applicant’s good moral
character and business responsibility or, in lieu of such letters, other
evidence which may be used by the City Clerk to satisfy his or her duties
under § 118.118;



      (2)   Copies of all advertising proposed to be used in
connection with the applicant’s business; and



      (3)   Credentials from the person, if any, for which the
applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as a
representative.



   (D)   (1)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall
also attach to their application, in addition to attachments required by
division (C) of this section, a statement from a licensed physician, dated
not more than ten days prior to the date of application, certifying that the
applicant is free of any contagious or communicable disease.



      (2)   Foodstuffs offered for sale under this subchapter shall
be subject to the health regulations of the city, County of Cook and State of
Illinois.



   (E)   A photograph of the applicant, which shall have been taken
within 60 days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application,
shall be attached. The photograph shall measure three inches by five inches
and show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.



   (F)   All solicitors requiring cash deposits or taking orders for
cash on delivery (C.O.D.) purchases or who require a contract of agreement to
finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery,
or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish a bond in the
amount of $100.



   (G)   A record of all permits issued shall be maintained by the City
Clerk for a period of two years.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.030)  (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009)



§ 118.118  INVESTIGATION; REASONS FOR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a license required
by this subchapter, the City Clerk shall request the Chief of Police to
investigate the applicant.



      (2)   The Chief is limited to ten days to conduct this
investigation.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall approve the application unless the
investigation discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the
applicant’s business would pose a substantial threat to the public health,
safety, morals or general welfare. In particular, tangible evidence of any of
the following will constitute a valid reason for disapproval of an
application:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude;



      (2)   The applicant has made wilful misstatements in the
application;



      (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of
ordinances pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the
like;



      (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; and/or



      (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of
solicited contracts.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.040)



§ 118.119  LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATION.



   Any license or permit granted under this subchapter may be revoked by
the City Clerk, after notice and hearing, pursuant to § 118.120. Notice of
the hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.050)



§ 118.120  REASONS FOR REVOCATION.



   A license or permit granted under this subchapter may be revoked for
any of the following reasons:



   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license
application;



   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the business being conducted under the license;



   (C)   Any violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter;



   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of any misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; and/or



   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in
such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the public.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.060)



§ 118.121  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under § 118.118 or §
118.120 may appeal to Council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the
City Clerk, within 14 days after notice of the decision has been mailed to
the person’s last known address, a written statement setting forth grounds
for the appeal. The City Clerk shall set the time and place for a hearing and
notice of the hearing shall be given to the person in the same manner as
provided in § 118.120.



   (B)   The order of Council after the hearing shall be final.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.070)



§ 118.122  SERVICE OF PROCESS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of notice of approval of his or her application,
the applicant shall file with the City Clerk an instrument appointing the
City Clerk as his or her true and lawful agent with full power and authority
to acknowledge service of process for and on behalf of the applicant with
respect to any matter arising under this subchapter.



   (B)   Forms for the required statement are available at City Hall.
The form or instrument shall contain recitals to the effect that the
applicant consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be
made upon an agent and, when so made, shall be taken and held to be as valid
as if personally served upon the applicant, according to the law of this or
any other state, and that the applicant waives all claim or right of error by
reason of that acknowledgment.



   (C)   Immediately upon service of any process upon the City Clerk
under this subchapter, the City Clerk shall send, by registered mail, a copy
of such process to the licensee at his or her last known address.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.080)



§ 118.123  DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND BADGE.



   (A)   A badge shall be issued, by an authorized representative, to
each peddler or solicitor licensed under this subchapter. The badge shall
contain the words “licensed peddler” or “licensed solicitor” the
expiration date of the license, the number of the license, and the peddler or
solicitor’s photograph (supplied by the applicant). The badge shall be worn
conspicuously by the peddler or solicitor during such time as he or she is
engaged in the business licensed.



   (B)   A peddler or solicitor is required to exhibit his or her
license at the request of any resident.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.090)  (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009) 
Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.124  NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS; BLANKET PERMITS AND WAIVERS.



   Nonprofit organizations may secure, by formal letter, a blanket permit
by applying to the Mayor and Council, giving the purpose and date upon which
solicitations or canvassing will be made. The Mayor and Council may waive the
requirements of this subchapter or parts thereof for the organizations. If no
waiver is granted, the nonprofit organization must comply fully with this
subchapter. A nonprofit organization shall be registered with the State
Attorney General before any permit is granted to the organization under this
section, and shall furnish a letter attesting to this registration.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.100)



§ 118.125  REQUEST FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SOLICIT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY ON BEHALF
OF NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the other requirements of this subchapter all
individuals who wish to solicit funds on public properties, including
sidewalks and street corners, to allow aid or contributions to their
participation in any charitable event, as a walk-a-thon, bike trip, race or
other occurrence, must secure a permit from the city.



   (B)   The application for this permit shall include the following:



      (1)   Name of the individual or individuals participating in
the solicitation;



      (2)   A letter from the nonprofit or charitable organization
acknowledging and authorizing the solicitation;



      (3)   Proof the nonprofit or charitable organization is in
full compliance with the requirements of § 118.124; and



      (4)   Any other documents or proofs the City Council shall
deem necessary to render its decision.



   (C)   If granted, the individual shall fully comply with all
applicable provisions of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.105)



§ 118.126  EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter does not apply to an officer or employee of the
municipal, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof
when on official business.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.110)



§ 118.127  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No person, while conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor,
whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any premises, knock on doors
or otherwise disturb persons in their premises between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
to 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and 12:01 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. on
Sundays, except when having made a prior appointment with the person being
solicited.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.120)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.128  EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   Permits issued under this subchapter are valid for not more than six
months from the date of issuance.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.130)



§ 118.129  LICENSE FEE; DEPOSIT.



   (A)   The fee for the license required by this subchapter is $50 per
month. Multiple peddlers or solicitors representing the same vendor,
corporation or organization will be required to each have an individual
license/badge.



   (B)   In addition to the fee set forth in division(A) of this
section, an applicant shall deposit $5 with the city at the time he or she
files his or her license application. This sum will be returned to the
applicant when he or she returns the badge issued to the person under §
118.123.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.140)  (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-2-2009)



§ 118.130  PROHIBITED SOLICITING.



   (A)   Notice regulating soliciting. No person shall solicit at
residences or businesses within the corporate limits of the city if a “NO
SOLICITORS” sign has been posted on the residence or business in accordance
with this section. Every person seeking to secure the protection provided by
this section shall post a notice, no smaller than approximately three inches
by four inches in size, on or near the main entrance door to the residence or
business, stating “NO SOLICITORS”. For purposes of uniformity, the
notices shall be provided by the City Clerk’s office, at no cost, to
persons requesting the notices. The notice, so exhibited, shall constitute
sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of
the residence or business to prohibit soliciting at that residence or
business.



   (B)   Duties.



      (1)   Every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the
city upon which a residence or business is located, shall first examine the
entrance area thereof to determine if a notice as set forth in division (A)
of this section is attached. If so, he or she, whether licensed or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.



      (2)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence
or business, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant thereof.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.150)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.131  NONLIABILITY OF CITY.



   All peddlers and solicitors, including nonprofit corporations and
agencies, shall hold harmless the city from any liability, damage or injury
which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of a peddler or
solicitor.



(2000 Code, § 5.30.160)  (Am. Ord. 2009-09-0259O, passed 9-22-2009)




SCAVENGERS




§ 118.145  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall maintain or operate a scavenger business in
the city without first obtaining a license therefor.



   (B)   The annual fee for the license required by division (A) of
this section shall be $200 for each truck used in the business.



(2000 Code, § 5.48.010)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.146  VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.



   Any vehicle used by a scavenger in his or her businesses shall be
watertight and equipped with airtight covers for portions used for the
transportation of refuse.



(2000 Code, § 5.48.020)



§ 118.147  DISPOSAL OR STORAGE OF REFUSE.



   No scavenger shall dispose of or store any refuse in any place within
the municipality or within one mile thereof, except with the permission of
the Mayor and Council.



(2000 Code, § 5.48.030)  Penalty, see § 118.999




SECONDHAND DEALERS AND LENDERS




§ 118.160  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENGAGED IN OR CONDUCTING BUSINESS. The purchase, sale, barter or
exchange of any item set forth in the definition of SECONDHAND DEALERin this
section, including advertising therefor, and including such business
conducted by an established dealer in a permanent location.



   GEM. Any item containing or having any precious or semiprecious stones
customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation.



   JUNK/SCRAP. Manufactured articles or parts that have been discarded or
are useful only as material for reprocessing or recycling.



   PAWNBROKER/PAWNSHOP. Any person engaged in the business of lending
money on the security of pledged goods or engaged in the business of
purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time.
For the purposes of this subchapter, PAWNBROKERS, PAWN SHOPS, or the like may
be referred to as SECONDHAND DEALERS.



   PRECIOUS METAL. Any item containing as part of its composition, in any
degree, gold, silver, platinum or pewter.



   SECONDHAND DEALER. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint
venture, trust, association or any other legal entity, however organized,
engaged in or conducting business in the city for purchasing, trading,
bartering or exchanging multiple secondhand personal property items that
differ in nature, gold, silver and other precious metals.



   SECONDHAND GOODS and USED PERSONAL GOODS. Any item of personal property
or object of value, such as gold, silver, jewelry and other precious metals,
which is not purchased or sold as new. SECONDHAND GOODS and USED PERSONAL
GOODS do not include property purchased by one licensed, established merchant
in the normal course of business from another licensed, established merchant.
SECONDHAND GOODS and USED PERSONAL GOODS include, but are not limited to, the
following items:



      (1)   Jewelry of any kind and/or any metal, precious or
semiprecious in nature;



      (2)   Gold, silver and/or other precious metals in whatever
identifiable form, except for numismatic coins or bullions;



      (3)   Any type of gem or precious stone, including diamonds;



      (4)   Office supplies;



      (5)   Furniture fixtures;



      (6)   Electronic equipment such as televisions, radios and
stereos; and/or



      (7)   Appliances.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.010) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.161  AUTHORIZATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   All uses and structures defined in this subchapter  and the like, are
subject to the following standards, regulations, and requirements at all
times in those zoning districts in which they are permitted, special
permitted, or existing as a non-conformance use as established in Appendix A
of the City Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.162  EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter does not apply to the following businesses or dealers:



   (A)   Junk;



   (B)   Used motor vehicles;



   (C)   Antique dealers which, for purpose of this exclusion, means
any dealer who engages exclusively in the business or occupation of selling,
bartering or exchanging any painting, furniture, china or other object
painted or made more than 50 years prior to the date of sale, which is
valuable primarily by reasons of age, scarcity or the skill and craftsmanship
of the article and artisan. Antiques do not include family heirlooms made of
gold and silver or other precious metals;



   (D)   Coin collectors or coin shops which engage exclusively in the
coin business or occupation. However, this exclusion does not exempt such
dealers or businesses from compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
that relate to any gold, silver, platinum or other precious metal or jewelry
which they may purchase, trade, barter or exchange in addition to their coin
and bullion operations;



   (E)   Flea markets;



   (F)   Neighborhood garage sales;



   (G)   Nonprofit or charitable secondhand goods or thrift shops;
and/or



   (H)   Used furniture stores, used clothing stores, or
similar/compatible uses.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.020) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.163  LICENSE REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of dealing in
secondhand goods or used personal property, gold, silver and/or other
precious metals without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in
this subchapter. A separate license shall be required for each location,
place or premises used for the conduct of the business of the secondhand
dealer.



   (B)   The privilege extended by the license is a personal privilege
and shall not be transferable to another individual or entity, nor shall
there be any abatement of the fee for such license by reason of the fact that
the license holder has exercised the privilege for any period less than that
for which it was granted.



   (C)   The annual fee for the license required by this section shall
be as set forth in § 110.007(B).



(2000 Code, § 5.50.030)  (Ord. 2006-12-0072O, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord.
2014-05-0493O,  passed 5-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.164  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file a
sworn application, in writing, with the Business License Commissioner, signed
by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, by all
members of a joint venture or association and by the president of a
corporation.



   (B)   The application shall indicate:



      (1)   The name of the person having the management or
supervision of the applicant’s business;



      (2)   The local address of the person while engaged in the
business;



      (3)   The permanent address of the person;



      (4)   The capacity in which the person will act, that is,
whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise;



      (5)   If a corporation, other than a state corporation, the
laws of the state that the same is incorporated under;



      (6)   The place in the city where it is proposed that the
applicant’s business will be conducted;



      (7)   A brief statement of the nature and character of the
advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers;



      (8)   Credentials from the person for whom or which the
applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as a
representative;



      (9)   Whether or not the person having management or
supervision of the applicant’s business has been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the
offense and the punishments assessed therefor; and



      (10)   The place, other than the permanent place of business
of the applicant, where the applicant, within the six months prior to the
current application, conducted a previous business in secondhand or used
personal goods, stating the nature thereof and giving the street address of
any building or office in which the business was conducted.



      (11)   Applicants shall provide the Community Development
Department with a plot plan or plat of survey prepared by a registered
engineer or land surveyor illustrating the nearest lender and single-family
residential parcel/lot line and the distances between each.



      (12)   Prior to license approval, the applicant must submit
any zoning approvals that are required by the City Zoning Ordinance.



      (13)   Applicant must submit an original criminal record
history from the State of Illinois for each owner/partner/principal corporate
officers (if a corporation).



(2000 Code, § 5.50.040) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.165  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the city, in conjunction
with the Police Department, shall cause an investigation of the applicant’s
business responsibility or moral character to be made as deemed necessary to
protect the public good.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.050) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.166  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The city may deny a secondhand dealer’s license if the
investigation required by § 118.165 or the information attained through the
application process required by § 118.164 reveals one or more of the
following:



      (1)   Conviction of any felony within five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application of any
owner/partner/principal operator/principal corporate officer (if a
corporation);



      (2)   Conviction of any crime of moral turpitude within five
years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application of any
owner/partner/principal operator/principal corporate officer (if a
corporation);



      (3)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement of facts of
material consequence in the application; and/or



      (4)   Proof of a complaint made to appropriate officials, in
the area where business was pursued within the 12 months preceding the
current application, indicating that the applicant has engaged in a
fraudulent transaction or enterprise.



   (B)   The Business License Commissioner or the Mayor shall send a
letter of rejection of the license application to the applicant’s listed
address, by certified mail, with a statement indicating the reasons for the
rejection.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.060) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.167  APPEALS.



   (A)   An appeal from the Business License Commissioner’s or the
Mayor’s decision to deny an application for a secondhand dealer’s license
shall be made to Council, in writing, within seven days of the receipt of the
decision.



   (B)   The appeal shall state the specific grounds thereof.



   (C)   The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present his or
her evidence at a Council hearing to show why the Mayor’s or the
Commissioner’s decision should not be sustained.



   (D)   The provisions of §§ 110.001 through 110.018 relative to
appeals shall be applicable to appeals taken under this section.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.070) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.168  EXHIBITION OF LICENSES; ADDITIONAL LICENSES AND FEE.



   (A)   The license issued under this subchapter shall be posted
conspicuously in the place of business named in the license.



   (B)   If the person applying for the license desires to do business
in more than one place within the city, a separate license shall be issued
for each place of business and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of
business. A separate $500 fee shall be charged for each additional license
issued. A separate license application is needed for each additional place of
business.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.080) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.169  DESIGNATION OF PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   Any person(s) applying for a license must first demonstrate that all
zoning requirements and permits have been attained prior to application
submittal. Any license issued under this subchapter shall designate the place
in which the secondhand dealer shall carry on his or her business. The
business shall not be carried on or conducted at any place other than that
designated in or by the license.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.090) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.170  CHANGE IN BUSINESS LOCATION; LICENSE TRANSFER AND FEE.



   If a secondhand dealer moves either his or her main or satellite
licensed dealership from an existing location to a new location before the
expiration of his or her current license, he or she shall be permitted to
obtain a transfer license at a fee of $100 per unexpired license, to be valid
until his or her existing license expires.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.100) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O,  passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.171  PURCHASING FROM MINORS.



   No secondhand dealer shall purchase, trade or deal in secondhand
articles with an individual under 18 years of age, or receive any goods or
articles from any such person.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.110) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) Penalty,
see § 118.999



§ 118.172  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Storefronts shall have glass or transparent glazing in the
windows and doors, and shall be absent of bars or security scissor gates. No
more than 10% of the window or door area shall be covered signs, banners, or
opaque covers of any kind.



   (B)   Days and hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m., seven days a week.



   (C)   The use of buzzer doors that require the business to unlock
the door mechanically/electronically for patrons to enter the business is not
permitted.



   (D)   All pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall provide a 24-hour
video monitoring and security system that shall clearly record any person(s)
that enter(s) or exit(s) the business, and also record the transaction
between the employee and the customer. The video may be duplicated at the
request of the Oak Forest Police Department.



   (E)   No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall sell, purchase, or
accept as collateral any firearms, or other weapon that requires a license to
carry or sell.



   (F)   Any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer operation shall run
criminal background checks on all new employees and provide the Police
Department with an original of such document. No employee with a felony
conviction within the past five years shall be employed by any pawn shop or
secondhand dealer, in accordance with §§ 118.164 and 118.165.



(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.173  ELECTRONIC REPORTING OF TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   The City of Oak Forest Police Department shall enter into a
contract for service and maintain its contract for service with LeadsOnline,
or a similar entity as designated by the Chief of Police, in order to enhance
its investigative services to protect both pawnbrokers/secondhand dealers and
members of the general public. In the event of a change to its electronic
reporting system, the city will notify all impacted licensees of the change
within a reasonable time prior to such change.



   (B)   Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall operate and
maintain a computer system with inherent access and photographic or video
capability sufficient for the electronic reporting requirements described in
this article. Any failure or malfunction of such equipment on the part of the
licensee shall not exempt the licensee from the recording/reporting
requirements outlined in this section. The licensee shall immediately notify
the Police Department of any such failure or malfunction, and shall have such
resolved as soon as practical. Failure by the licensee to resolve any failure
or malfunction of equipment in a reasonable amount of time will lead to
license revocation or suspension proceedings.



(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.174  RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   Every secondhand dealer shall keep a record of transactions.
Record system guidelines shall be established in conjunction with the Chief
of Police, for the purpose of promoting uniformity and accessibility to the
Police Department with minimum inconvenience to both the dealer and the
Department. However, under no circumstances will a looseleaf system be
considered to be a proper medium of record keeping.



   (B)   The record of all transactions shall be written in the English
language and in a clear, legible manner.



   (C)   The record maintained by the secondhand dealer shall be made
at the time of the transaction and shall set forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, age, sex and a general description of the
individual with whom the transaction is had, as well as the individual’s
residence and his or her signature on the receipt and permanent record kept
by the dealer;



      (2)   Confirmation of identification by a driver’s license
number, state of issuance of the license, a military identification card
number with a copy of such license, and the account number of a major credit
card account, if used for purchase;



      (3)   The price or consideration paid or received at the time
of the transaction;



      (4)   A description of every article (except newspapers,
magazines, wastepaper, rags and clothing) received, purchased, sold or
exchanged by the dealer, including the manufacturer’s name and other marks
of identification appearing on the article, including, but not limited to,
the serial number, if any, on the article;



      (5)   If the property is delivered by motor vehicle, the
license number of the delivering vehicle and the issuing state of the
license; and



      (6)   The signature of the person making the entry.



      (7)   A detailed receipt, in duplicate, for any purchases made
by the dealer shall be signed by the dealer and/or the individual making the
purchase on behalf of the dealer. One copy will be provided to the seller and
one copy retained by the dealer made available to the Chief of Police or his
or her designated agent in accordance with § 118.172.



   (D)   The record shall be retained for one year from the date of the
transaction.



   (E)   A digital photograph(s) of each non-junk/scrap article
purchased or received as trade, barter, pledge, or pawn by a pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer, sufficiently detailed to allow reasonable identification
of each article. If each article contains any identifying numbers, marks,
writing, engraving, etc., or any other distinguishing characteristics, the
digital image(s) shall capture the same. Such digital photographs shall be
made available to the Police Department upon request and shall be posted on a
city designated LeadsOnline system on the same business day acquired.



   (F)   All video attained through the 24-hour video monitoring system
shall be retained for 15 calendar days and made available to the Police
Department upon request.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.120) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) 
Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.175  INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND GOODS BY POLICE.



   (A)   Every secondhand dealer shall make out and make available for
the inspection of the Chief of Police or his or her designated agent, before
12:00 p.m. each and every business day, a copy of the records required to be
kept under this subchapter, reflecting the completed transactions of the
previous day.



   (B)   The record book and the goods, articles or things purchased,
received or kept for sale or exchange by every secondhand dealer shall be
open to inspection by any member of the Police Department at all reasonable
business times or by any person duly authorized, in writing, by the Chief of
Police, to make the inspections.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.130) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.176  REQUIRED HOLDING PERIOD BEFORE DISPOSING OF GOODS; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   Every dealer in secondhand goods must keep, without
concealment for 15 calendar days, subject to inspection by any police
officer, all goods, wares and merchandise, purchased or received from any
person, before selling, shipping or otherwise disposing of the same.



   (B)   Any goods, wares or merchandise purchased or received from any
person may be sold, shipped or otherwise disposed of prior to the expiration
of such 15 calendar days if the goods, wares or merchandise have been sooner
inspected by the Chief of Police or his or her designated agent and written
clearance for such further disposition has been received.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.140) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-17-2014)



§ 118.177  MELTING, WRECKING OR REMODELING OF ARTICLES MADE FROM PRECIOUS
METALS.



   No secondhand dealer shall melt any watch, watchcase, jewelry or other
identifiable article composed or manufactured, in whole or in part, of gold,
silver, platinum or other precious metal, until the dealer has made a record
of his or her intention to do so, along with all other data required to be
recorded, as set forth in § 118.171, and has reported the same to the Chief
of Police or his or her designated agent within the burglary and theft
division of the Police Department, and unless and until he or she has kept
the article intact, in his or her licensed place of business, for inspection,
for 15 calendar days after the report provided for in § 118.172(A) has been
made available to the Chief of Police or his or her designated agent.
However, the identifiable article may be melted down, wrecked or remodeled if
it has been sooner inspected by the Chief or his or her designated agent and
written clearance for the melting, wrecking or remodeling has been received
from the Chief.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.150) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014) 
Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.178  COIN COLLECTORS AND DEALERS; COIN COLLECTION SWAP MEETS AND
CONVENTIONS.



   (A)   Coin collectors and coin dealers are not subject to the
extensive record keeping and goods retention requirements for secondhand
goods or used personal property dealers to the extent of their actual
dealings in coins. However, if any such coin establishment also purchases,
trades, barters or exchanges any other type of secondhand personal property,
including gold, silver and/or other precious metals or jewelry, in
conjunction with its coin dealership, the establishment shall be subject to
the extensive record keeping, licensing and goods retention requirements of
this subchapter so far as the items of gold, silver and/or other precious
metals or jewelry are concerned.



   (B)   Coin collectors and coin dealers, although not subject to the
record keeping, licensing and goods retention requirements of this subchapter
so far as their coin dealings are concerned, are nevertheless required to
meet the following conditions as they relate to their coin business.



      (1)   All coin dealers and/or collectors who conduct a coin
business and no other precious metal business are required to register with
the Business License Commissioner.



      (2)   The sponsor of a coin swap meet or convention is
required to register with the Commissioner not later than three days before
the scheduled date of the swap meet or convention. The sponsor is required to
submit the following information at the time of registration:



         (a)   The type of swap meet to be conducted;



         (b)   The location of the swap meet or convention;



         (c)   The time and date of the swap meet or convention
and its expected duration; and



         (d)   The approximate number of participants.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.160) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.79  NON-CONFORMANCE.



   Any existing pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall meet the standards
of Section 10-102 regulating non-conforming uses of land and non-conforming
uses in structures designed for a permitted use.



   (A)   All standards and procedures established herein shall be
enforced for all zoning non-conformities except for the following standards
which will be enforced one year from the approval date of this section:



      (1)   Twenty-four hour video surveillance.



      (2)   Online network established for electronic reporting of
transactions.



(Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



§ 118.180  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Upon conviction of any person for a violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter, the license granted to the person under this
subchapter shall be suspended for not less than one year, at the end of which
period the individual must obtain a clearance from the Business License
Commissioner verifying the expiration of the suspension period.



   (B)   Upon a second conviction for a violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter, the license granted under this subchapter
shall be revoked permanently and the licensee shall not be able to reapply
within the city limits.



(2000 Code, § 5.50.180) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)




SECONDHAND ARTICLES DROP-OFF CONTAINERS




§ 118.190  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SECONDHAND ARTICLES DROP-OFF CONTAINER.  Any receptacle, box or holder
used to collect secondhand articles. Whenever the words “container” or
“containers” are used in this subchapter, they shall mean a SECONDHAND
ARTICLES DROP-OFF CONTAINER. Examples of these containers are the containers
placed by Good Will, Amvets and other organizations for the collection of
secondhand articles.



(2000 Code, § 5.74.010)



§ 118.191  PROHIBITIONS.



   Secondhand articles drop-off containers are prohibited in all zoning
districts except the manufacturing districts.



(2000 Code, § 5.74.020)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.192  LICENSING AND INSPECTION.



   All containers located in the city must be inspected and licensed by
the city. The inspections shall be conducted annually by the city’s Fire
Department The annual fee for such a license and inspection shall be $250 for
the first container owned by the entity and $50 for each additional container
owned by the entity that is located in the city.



(2000 Code, § 5.74.030)



§ 118.193  REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all such containers:



   (A)   No articles shall be permitted to accumulate outside of the
container;



   (B)   The container must not block any public road or sidewalk;



   (C)   The container must not impede motorists’ line of sight;



   (D)   No flammable or hazardous materials or perishable items should
be placed or kept in the container;



   (E)   The container shall be no larger than 60 cubic feet;



   (F)   The container shall be anchored to the ground in such a manner
that it cannot be easily tipped over;



   (G)   The container and the area surrounding it shall be kept clean
and free from trash and debris;



   (H)   The container shall be kept freshly painted and no rust shall
be allowed to show; and



   (I)   The container shall be equipped with a lid and/or doors that
automatically close after articles are deposited in the container.



(2000 Code, § 5.74.040)



§ 118.194  NONUSABLE CONTAINER.



   Once a container becomes unusable, or does not pass inspection by the
Fire Department, it must be immediately removed. If it is not removed within
14 days of the Fire Department’s notice to remove, the city may remove and
dispose of same and charge the licensee its costs of removal and disposal.



(2000 Code, § 5.74.050)  Penalty, see § 118.999



§ 118.195  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   An applicant for a license must submit an application form
provided by the city. The application must be signed by the applicant. In the
event the applicant is a corporation or partnership, it must be signed by the
president and secretary of the corporation, if a corporation, and by the
partners, if a partnership. All such signatures shall be under oath.



   (B)   The application shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information and documents:



      (1)   Name and principal street address of applicant;



      (2)   A statement that the applicant is a not-for-profit
entity (documentation evidencing same shall be furnished);



      (3)   A description of where the used articles are sent and
the ultimate disposition of same;



      (4)   Whether the used articles are sold, and if so, an
explanation why;



      (5)   A statement as to how long the entity has been in
business;



      (6)   A color photograph of the proposed container; and



      (7)   A site plan showing the proposed location of the
container.



(2000 Code, § 5.74.060)



§ 118.999  PENALTY



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable
under the Illinois Criminal Code, if a person fails or refuses to obey or
comply with or violates any of the provisions of §§ 118.020 through 118.041
or § 118.160 through 118.180 the person, upon conviction of an offense,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $750 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, in the
discretion of the court. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered
a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or
noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the
city from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent
jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or
noncompliance. Other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited
to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.



      (3)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this division
(B) shall be cumulative and independently available to the city and the city
shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this division
(B) or other applicable law to the full extent allowed by law.



(2000 Code, § 5.54.220)



   (C)   Whoever violates §§ 118.057 and 118.058 shall be referred,
by a juvenile officer, to the Adolescent Smoking Awareness Program. The
program will run on the second Monday of each month at the Family Care Center
in Tinley Park (Ingalls Wellness Center). The cost of the program, $30, will
be paid by the offender. Subsequent offenses will require the violator to
perform community service.



(2000 Code, § 5.60.050)



   (D)   The general penalty provisions of § 10.99 of the City of Oak
Forest Codified Ordinances shall be applicable to violations of this
subchapter. Additionally, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs and
expenses, including its reasonable attorneys fees, that it may incur in
enforcing the provisions of this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.74.070) (Am. Ord. 2014-05-0493O, passed 5-27-2014)



CHAPTER 119: GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES



Section



   119.01   Number and duration of sales



   119.02   Obstruction of streets and sidewalks; hours of sales



   119.03   Items for resale prohibited



   119.04   Permit required; display



   119.05   Exceptions to chapter



§ 119.01  NUMBER AND DURATION OF SALES.



   No person shall conduct a rummage, garage or other similar sale more
often than three times a year from the same premises, nor shall any person
conduct such a sale for more than three consecutive days.



(2000 Code, §5.22.010)



§ 119.02  OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; HOURS OF SALES.



   No sidewalk or public parkway shall be obstructed as a result of a
rummage, garage or other similar sale. No such sale shall commence before
9:00 a.m. or extend beyond 8:00 p.m.



(2000 Code, §5.22.020)



§ 119.03  ITEMS FOR RESALE PROHIBITED.



   Sale items purchased for intentional sale or resale may not be sold
from a private residence.



(2000 Code, §5.22.030)



§ 119.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; DISPLAY.



   No person shall conduct a garage or rummage sale pursuant to this
chapter without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Clerk, which
permit shall be granted at no cost to the applicant. The applicant shall post
this permit in a conspicuous place on his or her residence while the garage
or rummage sale is being conducted.



(2000 Code, §5.22.040)



§ 119.05  EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER.



   All nonprofit church and school organizations located in residential
areas are excepted from this chapter.



(2000 Code, §5.22.050)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND
GOVERNMENT




         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY



         132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



         133.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS



         134.   WEAPONS



         135.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT



Section



   130.01   Impersonating officers or employees; obstructing official
business



   130.02   Aiding and abetting escape from authority



§ 130.01  IMPERSONATING OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES; OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL
BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an
officer or employee of the city or, without being duly authorized, exercise
or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of any officer
or employee of the city.



   (B)   No person shall hinder, obstruct or otherwise interfere with
any city officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties.



(2000 Code, § 9.04.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  AIDING AND ABETTING ESCAPE FROM AUTHORITY.



   No person shall attempt to rescue from any officer of the city any
person in the officer’s lawful custody who is convicted of or charged with
the commission of a misdemeanor. No person shall aid, abet, or encourage the
rescue or escape from a penal institution or custody of any person lawfully
committed thereto because that person has been convicted of a misdemeanor or
is charged with the commission of a misdemeanor, or convey into the
institution or transfer to the prisoner anything for use in escaping.



(2000 Code, § 9.04.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY



Section



Miscellaneous Offenses



   131.01   Loitering



   131.02   Public urination or defecation



   131.03   Assault



   131.04   Disorderly conduct



   131.05   Fighting in public areas



   131.06   Loudspeakers and amplifiers



   131.07   Excessive noise



   131.08   Disturbing lawful meetings



   131.09   Boisterous parties or gatherings



   131.10   Tricks and games



   131.11   Drug paraphernalia



   131.12   Possession of cannabis



Sex Offenses



   131.25   “Public place” defined



   131.26   Soliciting



   131.27   Pandering



   131.28   Obscenity



   131.29   Public indecency



   131.30   Adult uses



   131.99   Penalty




MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES




§ 131.01  LOITERING.



   (A)   No person shall loiter or prowl in any public or private place
at a time, in a manner or under circumstances which warrant alarm for the
safety of persons or security of property in the surrounding area. Without
limitation, the following circumstances may be considered in determining
whether the alarm is warranted:



      (1)   The flight of a person upon the appearance of a police
officer;



      (2)   Attempted concealment by a person upon the appearance of
a police officer; and/or



      (3)   The systematic checking by a person of doors, windows or
other means of access to buildings, houses or vehicles.



   (B)   Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it
impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted, by requesting him or her to identify himself or
herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the actor was true, and if believed by the police
officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LOITERING. Includes the following activities: lingering, hanging
around, delaying, sauntering and moving slowing about, where the conduct is
not due to physical defects or conditions.



      PRIVATE PLACE.  Places privately owned but open to the public
generally, such as shopping centers, retail stores, transportation terminals,
movie theaters, office buildings, restaurants and all distinctly private
places such as homes or private residences and apartment houses.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Public streets and alleyways, public restrooms,
public sidewalks, public parks and public buildings.



      SURROUNDING AREA.  The area easily and immediately accessible to
the person under observation.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION.



   (A)   No person shall urinate or defecate upon any street, sidewalk,
public way, yard, side or wall of any building, structure, bush, tree or
other public place. Only facilities provided within a public or private
restroom shall be used for such purposes.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following  definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DEFECATION. The voiding of one’s bowels.



      URINATION.  The voiding of one’s bladder.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.020)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.03  ASSAULT.



   No person shall commit an assault or assault and battery upon any other
person in the city.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.030)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   No person shall knowingly:



   (A)   Do or make any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance,
gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and
present danger of a breach of the peace or an imminent threat of violence;



   (B)   Refuse or fail to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or
activity likely to produce a breach of the peace where there is an imminent
threat of violence and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to
protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity and have requested that
the conduct and activity be stopped and explain the request if there is time;



   (C)   Fail to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by
him or her to be a peace officer under circumstances where three or more
persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity,
which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm;



   (D)   Assemble with three or more persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace;



   (E)   Go about begging or soliciting funds on the public ways,
except as provided by ordinance;



   (F)   Appear in any public place manifestly under the influence of
alcohol, narcotics or other drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the
degree that he or she may endanger himself or herself or other persons or
property or annoy persons in his or her vicinity;



   (G)   Carry in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority
of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto,
knuckles, slingshot, object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or
substance or other dangerous weapon, or conceal such a weapon on or about his
or her person or vehicle;



   (H)   Picket or demonstrate on a public way within  150 feet of any
primary or secondary school building while the school is in session, one-half
hour before the school is in session and one-half hour after the school
session has been concluded, provided that this division does not prohibit the
peaceful picketing of any school involved in a labor dispute;



   (I)   Picket or demonstrate on a public way within 150 feet of any
church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship while services are being
conducted, one-half hour before the services are to be conducted and one-half
hour after services have been concluded, provided that this division does not
prohibit the peaceful picketing of any church, temple, synagogue or other
place of worship involved in a labor dispute; or



   (J)   Picket any establishment in a manner that would impede or
restrict access by the public or those engaged in legitimate business with
the establishment, or in a manner that would restrict or impede the movement
of the public upon a public way.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.040)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  FIGHTING IN PUBLIC AREAS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in any physical fight or congregate for
the purpose of participating in or gathering in order to view a physical
fight in any public place within the city.



   (B)   PUBLIC PLACE is defined as recited in § 131.01. Nothing in
this section is intended to restrict classes or licensed exhibitions.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.045)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.06  LOUDSPEAKERS AND AMPLIFIERS.



   No person shall play, operate or use any sound-amplifying device from a
sound truck or from the outside of any building within the business district,
or any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker
or sound amplifier, or any instrument of any kind or character which emits
loud and raucous noises and which is attached to any building within the
business district or upon any vehicle, unless the person in charge of the
vehicle or building has first applied to and received permission from the
Chief of Police to operate the loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.050)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.07  EXCESSIVE NOISE.



   (A)   No person shall operate and/or maintain a motor transportation
engine, truck engine, reefer and/or refrigeration unit, or allow a motor
transport engine, truck engine, reefer and/or refrigeration unit to be
operated on one’s property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
in any place within the city in which the majority of the buildings within a
radius of  300 feet are used exclusively for residential purposes.



   (B)   No person shall operate a loading dock, by actively performing
loading and/or unloading functions in relation thereto, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any place within the city in which the majority
of the buildings, within a radius of 300 feet, are used exclusively for
residential purposes.



   (C)   No person shall conduct any building operations (construction,
repair, reconstruction or maintenance) or property maintenance work
(including, but not limited to landscaping and landscaping maintenance work)
which involves the operation of any steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, steam
electric hoists, hammers, tractors, power lawnmowers or other apparatus, the
use of which is attended with loud or unusual noise, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at any location within the city in relation to which
the majority of the buildings, within a radius of 300 feet, are used
exclusively for residential purposes, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. at any location within the city in relation to which the majority
of the buildings, within a radius of 300 feet, are used for other than
residential purposes. The provisions of this division shall not be applicable
to emergency situations where the building operations or property maintenance
work are being undertaken in response to a situation that poses an immediate
threat to the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding residents.



   (D)   No persons shall in other ways than as recited in the previous
divisions to this section make any loud or boisterous noise within the city,
or cause the same to be done by any natural or mechanical method. The ringing
of bells or moderate sounding of chimes by any religious institution between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. is exempted from this prohibition.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.060)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.08  DISTURBING LAWFUL MEETINGS.



   No person shall willfully interrupt or disturb any school, Council
meeting, commission meeting, public hearing or other assembly of people who
are meeting for any lawful purpose.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.070)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.09  BOISTEROUS PARTIES OR GATHERINGS.



   (A) Prohibited actions. It is unlawful for any persons who are in
possession of, or are record owners of a premises, to permit guests, tenants,
invitees, visitors or trespassers to engage in any of the following
activities:



      (1)   Create such noise as disturbs and interrupts the peace,
quiet and repose of the neighborhood;



      (2)   Amplify music or other sounds to disturb the peace,
quiet and repose of the neighborhood;



      (3)   Litter public property;



      (4)   Trespass onto adjacent private property without specific
consent of the owners of that private property;



      (5)   Litter private property without consent;



      (6)    Block or obstruct public rights-of-way;



      (7)   Allow harmful, offensive or noxious odors to permeate
the air of adjacent property; and



      (8)    Engage in fighting, boxing, wrestling or any martial
art.



   (B)   Authority to order dispersal. Any police officer of the city
may order all persons present at any such boisterous party or gathering,
wherein any or all of those persons present are engaging in any of the
foregoing prohibited activities, to disperse immediately.



   (C)   Duty of owners or occupants to abate disturbance. Owners or
occupants of the premises, upon being given a dispersal order by any police
officer, shall immediately abate the disturbance within  30 minutes, and
failing to do so, shall be in violation of this section.



   (D)   Resumption of party constitutes second offense. In the event
that the boisterous party or gathering on the premises reconvenes within two
hours of the order of abatement by any police officer, the resumption shall
be considered a second offense.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.080)



§ 131.10  TRICKS AND GAMES.



   No person shall manage, use or practice any trick, slight-of-hand, game
or device with the intent to win or procure the money or property of another
person by inducing him or her to bet, loan, deposit or stack money or
property upon the result of the trick or game.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.090)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.11  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of law. It includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness
or purity of controlled substances;



         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, marmite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for
use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining, marijuana;



         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers
used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



         (k)    Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects
used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body; and



         (l)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish
or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic
or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads
or punctured metal bowls;



            2.   Water pipes;



            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            5.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold
burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand;



            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



            7.   Chamber pipes;



            8.   Carburetor pipes;



            9.   Electric pipes;



            10.   Air-driven pipes;



            11.   Chillums;



            12.   Bongs; and



            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.



   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Statements by an owner, or by anyone in control of the
object, concerning its use;



      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, under any city, state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance;



      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation of state law relating to controlled substances;



      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;



      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;



      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intending to use the object to
facilitate a violation of state law relating to controlled substances. The
innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct
violation of state law relating to controlled substances, shall not prevent a
finding that the object is intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;



      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;



      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      (11)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise;



      (12)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community; and



      (13)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



   (C)   No person shall use, or possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of law.



   (D)   No person shall deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver
or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia,
knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of law.



   (E)   No person shall place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or
other publication any advertisement knowing that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.



   (F)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, practitioners,
pharmacists, owners of pharmacies and other persons whose conduct was in
accordance with state law. This section shall not be construed to prohibit
any possession, manufacture or use of hypodermics made lawful by state law.



   (G)   Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall
be seized and forfeited as provided in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 12 and ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 570, § 505.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.100)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.12  POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CANNABIS.  Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring
or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction, independently by means of chemical synthesis or by
a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis. CANNABIS does not include
the mature stalks of the plant; fiber produced from the stalks; oil or cake
made from the seeds of the plant; any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom); fiber, oil or cake; or the sterilized seed of the plant
which is incapable of germination.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly possess any quantity of any
substance containing cannabis, except that this section shall apply only to
persons knowingly possessing 30 grams or less of any substance containing
cannabis.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any person who has been authorized by the Department of
Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities, with the approval of the
Department of Law Enforcement, to possess and deliver substances containing
cannabis; or



      (2)   Persons registered under federal law to conduct research
with cannabis.



   (D)   A court may impose a sentence of supervision upon any person
who violates this section if, due to the nature and circumstances of the
offense and to the history, character and condition of the person, the court
is of the opinion that the penalty provided for in this chapter is
inappropriate.



      (1)   When a person is placed on supervision, the court shall
enter an order for supervision, specifying the period of the supervision, and
shall defer further proceedings in the case until the conclusion of the
period.



      (2)   The period of supervision shall be reasonable under all
the circumstances of the case, but may not be longer than one year.



      (3)   The court may, in addition to other considerations,
require that the person:



         (a)   Make a report to, appear in person at or
participate with the court or any such court, person or social agency as
directed by the court in the order of supervision;



         (b)   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational
training;



         (c)   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or
treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism;



         (d)   In the case of a minor, reside with his or her
parents or in a foster home;



         (e)   In the case of a minor, attend school;



         (f)   In the case of a minor, attend a nonresidential
program for youths;



         (g)   Perform some reasonable public service work such
as, but not limited to, picking up litter along public highways or
maintaining public facilities; or



         (h)   Pay a fine in an amount provided for in § 10.99.



      (4)   The court shall defer entering any judgment on the
charges until the conclusion of the supervision.



      (5)   At the conclusion of the period of supervision, if the
court determines that the person has successfully complied with all of the
conditions of supervision, the court shall discharge the person and enter a
judgment dismissing the charges.



      (6)   Discharge and dismissal upon a successful conclusion of
a disposition of supervision shall be deemed to be a discharge without
adjudication of guilt or innocence and shall not be deemed to be a conviction
for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon
conviction of a



crime. A person may have his or her record of arrest expunged as may be
provided by law.



      (7)   No person assigned to a public service employment
program shall be considered an employee for any purpose, nor shall the city
be obligated to provide any compensation for the person.



   (E)   (1)   It is declared to be the policy of the city that a
parent or legal guardian of a minor shall be notified and required to appear
in court whenever the minor is charged with a violation of this section. To
this end, it is directed that a notice, in substantially the following form,
shall be sent to the parents or legal guardians of the minor:



 

LEGAL NOTICE


TO: (Parents' or Legal Guardians' Names)


FROM: City of Oak Forest


You are hereby notified that (minor's  name) has been involved with a
violation of an ordinance prohibiting the possession of cannabis, and which
requires the appearance of the minor in court. You are further notified that
one of the parents or legal guardians of the minor must appear in court
before the case will be tried or disposed. If you fail to appear, the City
Attorney has been directed to have issued a subpoena to bring you into court.
Failure to obey a subpoena can result in contempt of court, with a fine or
imprisonment as the penalty.



 



      (2)   The City Attorney is directed to have subpoenas issued
whenever a parent or legal guardian of a minor does not appear in court after
the first two times the minor’s case has been before the court.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.110)  Penalty, see § 131.99




SEX OFFENSES




§ 131.25  “PUBLIC PLACE” DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza,
park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility, or the doorways and
entrance ways to any building which front on any such place, or a motor
vehicle in or on any such place or any other area generally visible to public
view.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.120)



§ 131.26  SOLICITING.



   No person shall remain in or wander about a public place and repeatedly
beckon to, or repeatedly attempt to stop, or repeatedly attempt to engage
passers-by in conversation, or repeatedly interfere with the free passage of
other persons in that place for the purpose of prostitution, as defined in
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-14, or of soliciting for a prostitute, as those
terms are defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-15.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.130)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.27  PANDERING.



   (A)   No person shall remain in or wander about a public place and
repeatedly beckon to, or repeatedly stop, or repeatedly interfere with the
free passage of other persons in that place for the purpose of “pimping,”
as that term is defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-19.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be prosecuted in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.140)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.28  OBSCENITY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      A REASONABLE BONA FIDE ATTEMPT.  An attempt to ascertain the
true age of a minor by requiring production of a driver’s license, marriage
license, birth certificate or other governmental or educational
identification card or paper and not relying solely on the oral allegations
or apparent age of the minor.



      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description, exhibition,
presentation or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, when the material or
performance, taken as a whole, has the following characteristics:



         (a)   The average adult person, applying contemporary
community standards, would find that the material or performance has a
predominant tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors;



         (b)   The average adult person, applying contemporary
community standards, would find that the material or performance depicts or
describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse
in a manner that is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community with respect to what is suitable for minors; and



         (c)   The material or performance lacks serious
literary, scientific, educational, artistic or political value for minors.



      KNOWINGLY.  Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:



         (a)   The character and content of any material or
performance which is reasonably susceptible to examination by the defendant;
and



         (b)   The age of the minor. However, an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor.



      MATERIAL.  Any paper, handbill, card, drawing, magazine, book,
newspaper, poster, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, phonographic record or
tape, recording tape, videotape, motion picture film, print, picture, figure,
image, description or other tangible thing capable of being used to arouse
interest through sight or sound or in any other manner.



      MINOR.  Any unmarried person under the age of 18 years.



      NUDITY.  The showing, representation or depiction of human male
or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, of any female breast with less than a full, opaque covering or any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



      PERFORMANCE.  Any motion picture, preview, play, show, skit,
dance or other exhibition performed before an audience.



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity of any kind.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE.  Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Masturbation, homosexuality, lesbianism,
sadism, masochism, natural or unnatural sexual intercourse or any physical
contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks
or, if the person is a female, breast.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   (B)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, distribute, circulate or
give away any obscene material or show or exhibit any obscene performance.
Any material or performance shall be considered obscene if, to the average
adult person applying local contemporary community standards, the dominant
theme of the material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in
sex and portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way and if, taken as
a whole, the material or performance lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   (C)   No person having custody, control or supervision of any
commercial establishment shall knowingly:



      (1)   Display material which is harmful to minors in such a
way that minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to
view the material, provided, however, that a person shall be deemed not to
have displayed material harmful to minors if the material is kept behind
devices commonly known as “blinder racks” so that the lower two-thirds of
the material is not exposed to view;



      (2)   Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or
otherwise disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material
which is harmful to minors; or



      (3)   Present to a minor or participate in presenting to a
minor, with or without consideration, any performance which is harmful to a
minor.



   (D)   It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under
this section that the material or performance involved was displayed,
presented or disseminated to a minor at a recognized and established school,
church, museum, medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency
or quasi-governmental agency by persons acting in their capacity as employees
or agents of the institutions and organizations, which institutions and
organizations display, present or disseminate the material or performance for
a bona fide governmental, educational or scientific purpose.



   (E)   No person shall violate, disobey, neglect or refuse to comply
with, or reject the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this section.



   (F)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of
this section and any provision of state law, the state law provision shall
prevail.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.150)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.29  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   (A)   Any person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place,
engages in sexual intercourse, engages in deviate sexual conduct, appears in
a state of nudity or fondles the genitals of himself or herself or another
person, commits an act of public indecency.



   (B)   No person shall commit an act of public indecency within the
city.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      NUDITY.  The exposure of male or female genitals, pubic area,
female breasts with less than a full opaque covering of the nipples thereof,
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered, or that portion of the buttocks which would be covered by a
properly worn thong-type bikini bottom.



      PUBLIC PLACE. 



         (1)   Any location frequented by the public, or where
the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may
reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. PUBLIC PLACE
includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, pools, business and
commercial establishments (whether for-profit or not-for-profit and whether
open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a coverage charge
or membership requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country
clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by social, fraternal or
similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether
permanent or temporary in routine, shall not be deemed a PUBLIC PLACE. 
PUBLIC PLACE shall not include enclosed single-sex public restrooms, enclosed
single-sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities,
enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping
accommodations, doctors’ offices, churches, synagogues or similar places
when used for circumcisions, baptisms or similar religious ceremonies,
portions of hospitals or similar places in which nudity or exposure is
necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home, or a modeling
class, in which a person appears in a state of nudity, which class is
operated by a proprietary school licensed by the state, a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college.



         (2)   The definition of PUBLIC PLACE set forth herein
shall be interpreted to be no broader than the definition of PUBLIC PLACE set
forth in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-9 (formerly Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 38, §
11-9), as upheld by the Illinois Supreme Court in People v. Garrison, 8211.2d
444, 412 N.E.2d 483 (1980).



   (D)   This section is patterned after and shall be interpreted in
the same manner as the Indiana Public Indecency Statute held constitutional
by the United States Supreme Court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre. Inc., 501 U.S.
560, 111 S.Ct. 2456 (1991).



(2000 Code, § 9.08.160)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.30  ADULT USES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having, as a substantial or
significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films
for rent, sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by
coin-operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished by or relate to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of materials; or an
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of the
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from
the establishment’s premises or any other factors showing that the
establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey the material.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET.  A public or private establishment
which features topless dancers, strippers or male or female impersonators;
which not infrequently features entertainers who display specified anatomical
areas; which features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or
conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the
prurient interest of the patron; or which features entertainers who engage in
or are engaged in explicit simulation of specified sexual activities.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or area used for
presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.



      ADULT USE.  Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters,
adult entertainment cabarets and other similar uses.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, a buttock or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and



         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy; and fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, the pubic
region, a buttock or female breasts.



   (B)   No person shall permit, allow, maintain, conduct or provide an
adult use within 1,000 feet of any residence, school, church or park.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.170)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of the sex offenses subchapter shall be fined not less than $750 for each
offense. Unless otherwise provided, a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.



   (B)   Except as may be otherwise provided in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§§ 8-2 and 8-4, every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to
commit or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared in the sex
offenses  subchapter to be an offense, whether individually or in connection
with another person, or as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of
an offense. Every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully
induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any
provision of the sex offenses subchapter shall likewise be guilty of an
offense.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.180)



      (1)   The penalties for violation of § 131.09 shall be:



         (a)   First offense: $150;



         (b)   Second offense: $250; and



         (c)   Third offense: $500.



      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating any division of §
131.09 shall be responsible and reimburse the city for all actual costs in
excess of normal patrol expenses incurred in dispersing and/or controlling
and cleaning public property following any such boisterous party or gathering.



(2000 Code, § 9.08.080)



CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   132.01   Theft



   132.02   Vandalism



   132.03   Injuring, damaging or defacing public or private property;
false fire alarms



   132.04   Billposting



   132.05   Destruction of posted bills, notices and the like



   132.06   Unauthorized cutting, trimming and the like, of vegetation



   132.07   Graffiti



   132.08   Deposits on public ways and places and on private property



   132.09   Accumulations of garbage and rubbish on private property



   132.10   Storage of lumber, crates and the like, on private
property; nuisance



   132.11   Junk vehicles



   132.12   Open burning



   132.13   Snow removal from multi-family and commercial parking
facilities



   132.14   Playing games in streets



   132.15   Obstructing public ways



   132.16   Obstruction of fire hydrants prohibited



   132.17   Theft of cable services



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  THEFT.



   (A)   No person shall commit theft.



   (B)   A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of
another;



      (2)   Obtains, by deception, control over property of another;



      (3)   Obtains, by threat, control over property of another;
and/or



      (4)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the
property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce him or her to believe that the property was stolen, and:



         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the
use or benefit of the property;



         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property
knowing that the use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the
owner permanently of the use or benefit; or



         (c)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property
in such a manner as to permanently deprive the owner of the use or benefit.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.010)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.02  VANDALISM.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LEGAL GUARDIAN.  A person appointed guardian or given custody of
a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile
Court Act.



      MINOR.  A person who has attained 11 years of age but who has
not yet reached 18 years of age.



      PROPERTY.  Any real estate, including improvements thereon, and
tangible personally.



   (B)   Offenses. No person shall:



      (1)   Knowingly or recklessly damage or cause to be damaged
any property of another person without his or her consent; or



      (2)   Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain
control over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part
thereof, of another person without his or her consent.



   (C)   Penalty; court supervision; restitution.



      (1)   If a minor is found guilty of an offense under division
(B) of this section, he or she may be punished as provided in § 10.99. In
addition thereto, or in lieu thereof, a court may, without entering a
judgment of guilty, place that person under court supervision for any period
not exceeding one year. The supervision may include any of the conditions
provided for in division (C)(2) of this section, as the court determines
appropriate. If the person completes the period of supervision without
violating the conditions imposed by the court, the court shall discharge the
defendant from supervision and dismiss the charge against him or her. If the
person, while under court supervision, is convicted of, or pleads guilty or
no contest to, any criminal offense in any jurisdiction, and the state’s
attorney or the city prosecutor, as the case may be, moves for termination of
supervision, the court shall terminate the supervision and enter a judgment
of guilty on the plea or finding.



      (2)   The conditions of court supervision may require that the
defendant:



         (a)   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational
training;



         (b)   Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to
exceed the total of the actual loss or damage to the property and the actual
pecuniary loss, combined, or $2,500, whichever is less;



         (c)   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or
treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism; and/or



         (d)   If a minor, reside with his or her parent or in a
foster home; attend school; attend a nonresidential program for youth; or
contribute to his or her own support at home or in a foster home.



      (3)   When a court orders restitution or reparation as a
condition for court supervision, the court shall determine the amount and
conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment have not been
satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration of termination of
the period of court supervision, may impose an additional period of not more
than two years to make restitution or reparation. Only the conditions of
payment shall continue to apply during the additional period. The court shall
retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority
to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to revoke the penalty of
court supervision if the conditions of payment are violated during the
additional period.



      (4)   When the petition is filed charging a violation of a
condition imposed for court supervision, the court:



         (a)   May order a summons to the offender to appear, or
order a warrant for the offender’s arrest where there is danger of his or
her fleeing the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the
offender fails to answer a summons. The issuance of such a warrant or summons
shall stay the sentence of court supervision until the final determination of
the charge, and the term of court supervision shall not run so long as the
offender has not answered the summons or warrant;



         (b)   Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation.
The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing;



         (c)   Shall receive evidence in open court with the
right of confrontation, cross- examination and representation by counsel. The
city has the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the
violation by a preponderance of the evidence;



         (d)   Shall not revoke court supervision for failure to
comply with conditions of a sentence which impose financial obligations upon
the offender, unless the failure is due to his or her willful refusal to pay;
and/or



         (e)   May modify the conditions of court supervision on
motion of the city, on its own motion or at the request of the offender after
notice to all parties and a hearing.



      (5)   If the court finds that the offender has violated a
condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period,
it may continue the offender on the existing period, with or without
modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that
was available at the time of the initial penalty.



      (6)   A judgment revoking a sentence of court supervision is a
final appealable order.



   (D)   Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender. The
parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with the parent or
legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or
reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for a violation of this section,
provided that the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or
reparation within the time ordered by the court, and provided, further, that
the parent or legal guardian has been served with a summons or notice to
appear in the original cause against the minor and all proceedings thereafter.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.020)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  INJURING, DAMAGING OR DEFACING PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY; FALSE
FIRE ALARMS.



   (A)   No person shall willfully injure or damage any sign, signpost,
structure or property owned by the city by any unusual, improper or
unreasonable use thereof, or by careless driving or use of any vehicle
thereon, or by mutilation, defacing or destruction thereof, or cause,
encourage, direct or permit another to do the same.



   (B)   No person shall negligently or willfully injure, destroy or
deface any bridge, crossing, sidewalk, lamppost, tree, shrub, plant or other
property of the city, or cause, encourage, direct or permit another to do the
same.



   (C)   No person shall willfully destroy, injure or deface any engine
or other fire apparatus belonging to the city, or cause, encourage, direct or
permit another to do the same.



   (D)   No person, except a person connected with the management of
the Fire Department, shall open any signal box or otherwise cause a fire
alarm to be sounded, unless an actual fire emergency exists, or break, cut,
deface, derange or in any other manner meddle or interfere with any signal
box, fire alarm or telegraph or telephone wire, or cause, encourage, direct
or permit another to do the same.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.030)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  BILLPOSTING.



   No person shall paste, post, paint, print, nail or otherwise fasten any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the
same to be done, on any curbstone, flagstone or any portion or part of any
sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, lamppost, telegraph pole, hydrant,
bridge, pier, building, vehicle, fence or structure within the limits of any
street in the city, except as may be required by the ordinances of the city
or the statutes of the state, without the express consent of proper city
authority.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.040)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.05  DESTRUCTION OF POSTED BILLS, NOTICES AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall willfully tear, mutilate, deface, remove or render
illegible any notice, handbill, poster, ordinance or other public document
lawfully posted in any public place in the city, or cause, encourage, direct
or permit another to do the same.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.050)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.06  UNAUTHORIZED CUTTING, TRIMMING AND THE LIKE, OF VEGETATION.



   No person shall, in any manner, cut, trim or mutilate any tree or shrub
standing upon any private property in the city and not belonging to the
person without first obtaining the consent of the owner of the property, or
cause, encourage, direct or permit another to do the same. No person shall
cut, trim or mutilate any tree or shrub growing upon any public street or
road without the consent of the city, or cause, encourage, direct or permit
another to do the same.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.060)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.07  GRAFFITI.



   (A)   Placement without owner’s permission. It is unlawful for any
person to place graffiti upon the property of another, whether publicly or
privately owned, real or personal.



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GRAFFITI.  Any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial,
word, diagram, sketch, picture or letter, placed, without the express,
written permission of the owner, upon the real or personal property of the
owner.



   (C)   Placement with owner’s permission. It is unlawful for an
owner and/or occupant of property which is in the public view to place or
give permission to place any graffiti on the property if the graffiti incites
violence by reference to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses
obscenity by referring to sexual activity or contains defamatory material
about a public or private person.



   (D)   Possession of equipment with intent to create or allow
graffiti.  It is unlawful for any person to possess spray paint containers,
paint, ink, marking pens which contain a non-water soluble fluid, brushes,
applicators or other materials for marking, scratching or etching, with the
intent to use the materials to violate division (A) or (B) of this section.



   (E)   Removal of graffiti. Upon notification by the city, the owner
of property upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the
graffiti within 72 hours of the date of notice. Failure to remove the
graffiti within the specified time shall cause the summary abatement of this
nuisance, and costs therefor shall be assessed to the owner. This remedy
shall be in addition to the penalty provided in § 10.99. If the graffiti is
deemed an issue adversely affecting the public safety by the Mayor, upon the
advice of the Chief of Police, the city is authorized to remove the graffiti
at once at its cost. Any such decision shall immediately be reported to
Council.



   (F)   Mandatory restitution. In addition to the remedies provided in
division (D) of this section and in addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99, a mandatory restitution requirement shall be imposed by any court
finding a person guilty of violating division (A), (B) or (C) of this
section. As a condition to any probation or supervision, the court shall
order full and complete restitution to be made to the owner of property upon
which graffiti has been illegally placed for expenses incurred in the removal
of the material and for the repair of any structure, wall or other property.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.070)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.08  DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES AND ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall place, deposit or dump any solid or liquid
waste, yard waste, ashes, branches, trees, stone, sand, dirt, building
materials, debris or material of any kind in any city street, walk, path,
alley, parkway or area under the control, ownership or custody of the city,
or in any place or area for which the city has the responsibility of care and
maintenance, except where the same is authorized by a permit obtained
pursuant to §§ 151.215 through 151.223 of this code.



   (B)   No person shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or
deposited in any street, sidewalk, drainage ditch, creek or culvert, or upon
any sidewalk or public grounds in the city, any solid or liquid waste, yard
waste, ashes, branches, trees or other rubbish.



   (C)   No person shall place or deposit or cause to be placed or
deposited in any street, sidewalk, drainage ditch, creek or culvert, or upon
any sidewalk or public grounds in the city, any manure, filth or substance
emitting an unwholesome or offensive smell, or any garbage, trash, old iron,
brickbats, ashes, papers, tin cans or other rubbish.



   (D)   No person shall place, deposit, dump or attempt to dispose of
any solid or liquid waste, yard waste, ashes, branches, trees, sand, dirt,
stone, building materials or debris in any public, municipally-owned or
privately-owned area within the city other than in the receptacles or other
lawful containers located on that person’s own property.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.080)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.09  ACCUMULATIONS OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate and
control the accumulation, removal and disposal of garbage, debris and yard
waste and to eliminate unhealthy, unsanitary and unsightly conditions in the
city.



   (B)   Garbage, debris and yard waste defined.  For the purpose of
this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      GARBAGE AND DEBRIS. Rejected food wastes, including every waste
accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food
and such paper as may necessarily be used for wrapping the same, and all
solid wastes including GARBAGE, ashes, rubbish, dead animals, paper,
sweepings, solid market and industrial wastes, cans, metalware, glass,
crockery, boxes, lumber, wood, abandoned machines and litter of any kind.



      YARD WASTE.  Lawn and grass cuttings or clippings, sod, dirt,
leaves, branches, twigs, cuttings from trees or shrubbery and other plantings
or vegetation.



   (C)   Responsibilities of owners, occupants and lessees.



      (1)   The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the
city shall cause to be removed from the premises all garbage, debris and yard
waste; and shall keep the premises, at all times, free and clean from any
accumulation thereof, except when in proper containers for the refuse
collector. Yard waste may not be intermingled with garbage and debris, and
must be kept in separate containers.



      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         COMPOSTING OPERATION.  A compost pile or area upon one’s
land designed for the purpose of composting yard waste, and designed to
accommodate yard waste from one’s own land. A COMPOSTING OPERATION shall be
an allowable alternative method for disposing of yard waste. The COMPOSTING
OPERATION must be maintained in accordance with the recommendations contained
in the Illinois Department of Energy and Natural Resources Pamphlet Number
ILENR/RR-89/03, or as amended from time to time.



   (D)   Removal by city. The corporate authorities may cause to have
removed from private property all garbage, debris, yard waste or composting
operations after five days’ written notice is given to the owner of record
of that private property by the Health Commissioner. The written notice shall
state the purpose and intent of the city and the reason for the action, as
well as notification that any and all costs incurred by the city in the
execution of the stated action shall be placed as a lien against the real
estate. The owner, occupant or lessee shall have five days to comply with the
city’s request or the city will initiate the action.



   (E)   Collection of costs. Upon the removal of garbage, debris, yard
waste or composting operations from private property pursuant to this
section, the corporate authorities may, within 60 days after the cost
therefor is incurred, file notice of a lien in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds or with the Registrar of Deeds of the county. The notice shall consist
of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate sufficient
for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the cost
incurred or payable for the service and the date when the cost was incurred
or by the city. However, the lien of the city shall not be valid as to any
purchaser whose rights in and to the real estate have arisen subsequent to
the removal and prior to the filing of the notice, and the lien of the city
shall not be valid as to any mortgage, judgment, creditor or other lien or
whose rights in and to the real estate arise prior to the filing of the
notice. Upon payment of the cost by the owner of the property or by persons
interested in the property, after notice of the lien has been filed, the lien
shall be released by the city or the person in whose name the lien has been
filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing a
notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in
the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. A suit to foreclose a lien shall
be commenced within two years after the date of filing of the lien.



   (F)   Other prohibited acts. No person shall:



      (1)   Deposit, permit to be deposited or cause to be deposited
upon any public way or upon the property of another any garbage, debris, yard
waste or composting operation. This provision shall not prohibit the setting
out of garbage, debris or yard waste in approved containers and properly
separated upon the parkway or driveway for collection by the refuse collector;



      (2)   Place for collection any garbage or debris from which
yard waste has not been separated;



      (3)   Conceal in or mix yard waste with any garbage or debris
that has been or is to be placed for collection;



      (4)   Store, for a period of longer than ten days, yard wastes
upon one’s own property, except when the storage is part of a composting
operation as defined in division (C) of this section. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the leaving of cuttings upon one’s own property for mulching
purposes;



      (5)   Fail to maintain a composting operation by appropriate
turning, wetting and aerating in accordance with the recommendations as
specified in division (C) of this section; and/or



      (6)   Deposit, place, permit to be deposited or allow any
dumpster to remain on single-family residential property, where a certificate
of occupancy has been issued, other than by permit. For the purpose of this
division, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



         DUMPSTER.  Any covered or uncovered disposal container of
a 100-gallon capacity. Permits shall be issued, without fee, by the
appropriate licensing department upon application. No permit may be issued
for longer than one week. No resident shall be granted more than three
permits in any one calendar year.



   (G)   Violations as nuisance. Any violation of any of the provisions
of this section is hereby declared a nuisance.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.090)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.10  STORAGE OF LUMBER, CRATES AND THE LIKE, ON PRIVATE PROPERTY;
NUISANCE.



   (A)   No person shall use, keep, maintain or operate any yard, lot,
premises or part thereof for the purpose of storing lumber, metal, secondhand
material, dismantled motor vehicles or part thereof, crates, cases, boxes or
other discarded material, unless the storage is for business purposes in a
location zoned for business, for which location a business license has been
duly issued.



   (B)   Storage and accumulation of wood for burning in stoves,
furnaces or fireplaces shall be permitted only under the following
circumstances.



      (1)   The maximum volume of wood allowed to be stored shall
not exceed four face cords or its volume equivalent.



      (2)   The wood shall be kept in cut and split pieces stacked
in rows not higher than four feet from the ground.



      (3)   Breather and access rows between rows of wood shall be
no less than two feet wide.



      (4)   Wood shall be stored in rear yards and not closer than
two feet from any lot line.



      (5)   Stores of wood shall be kept free and clean from insect
nests, rodents or other animals.



   (C)   A violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is declared
to be a nuisance.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.100)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.11  JUNK VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (1)   Any vehicle which is without a current valid
license, and/or is in a wrecked, dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative,
or junked condition.



         (2)   An ABANDONED VEHICLE is also a motor vehicle from
which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels, or other
parts have been removed, or which the engine, wheels or other parts have been
altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of
being driven under its own power, or has been unmoved for a period of at
least seven days, or is in such a condition that would leave it incapable of
being licensed to be driven. However, nothing in this section shall apply to
any motor vehicle that is kept within a building nor does it apply to any
motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking
or abandoning of motor vehicles.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.



         (1)   Every vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, including but not limited to motorcycles, motor-driven
cycles, reconstructed vehicles, motor tractors, buses, semi-trailers, special
mobile equipment, specifically constructed vehicles, trailers, trucks and
truck tractors. MOTOR VEHICLES which are designed and used for the carrying
of not more than seven persons shall be classified as “MOTOR VEHICLES of
the first division”.



         (2)   Those MOTOR VEHICLES that are designed and used
for pulling and carrying freight or are used for the carrying of more than
seven persons, shall be called “MOTOR VEHICLES of the second division”.



      MOTORCYCLE.  A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.



      PROPERTY.  Real property within the city which is not a street
or highway.



   (B)   Vehicle declared a nuisance. All abandoned vehicles, whether
on public or private property, are declared a nuisance, and any person who
violates a provision of this chapter pertaining thereto or who fails to obey
a notice which states that the person is to dispose of that vehicle under his
or her control shall be subject to the fines and penalties provided in §
10.99 of this code.



   (C)   Requirement to garage certain vehicles. Unless otherwise
provided for in this chapter, all unregistered, including able or abandoned
vehicles, shall be garaged in a residential district.



   (D)   Depositing, storing abandoned vehicles prohibited. It is
unlawful for any person to deposit, store, park or abandon any abandoned
vehicle or parts of any abandoned vehicle upon any street or other public or
private property within the city, and in view of the public, for more than a
period of seven days.



   (E)   Repair or demolition of vehicles. Unless otherwise provided
for, no motor vehicle which is in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or
which is being stripped or dismantled shall be permitted on any property
located within a residential district for more than seven days. Commercial
repairs are not allowed within a residential zone. Any vehicle being repaired
must be licensed to the property owner or family member.



   (F)   Sale of vehicles. The offering for sale of two or more
vehicles at the same time on private property located within a residential
district is prohibited. At no time and under no circumstances is the offering
for sale of an abandoned vehicle, or sale of vehicle parts, permitted in open
areas on private property in residential districts, or nonresidential
districts unless the property is zoned and licensed for that use.



   (G)   Parking of vehicles in residential district. All vehicles
parked in a residential district shall be parked on a street, clearly
delineated driveway or within a garage. At no time shall a motor vehicle be
parked, stored or in any manner be placed on the front, side or rear yards or
otherwise allowed to create a nuisance to adjoining property owners by
placing the vehicle in areas other than herein provided. Vehicles as defined
in this section shall not apply to boat or RV-type vehicles which are
elsewhere regulated.



   (H)   Removal and impoundment of vehicles. After seven days from the
issuance of a warning, a member of the Police Department may enter upon
public or private property and remove any abandoned vehicle, or parts
thereof, for the purpose of disposing of same. The cost for the removal shall
be paid by the owner of the property. However, nothing in this section shall
apply to any vehicle that is kept within a building, nor does this section
apply to properly licensed operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age,
or to vehicles on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking
or storing of abandoned vehicles.



   (I)   Redemption after impoundment. Before the owner or any person
entitled to the possession of a legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted
to remove the same from the pound, the person shall furnish evidence of
ownership or right to possession and shall pay for costs of towing or removal
to the pound and the cost of storage.



   (J)   Trailers and able vehicles. This section shall apply to
trailers and to able vehicles where they meet the definition in division (A)
of this section.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.110)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.12  OPEN BURNING.



   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, rubbish fire or any
other kind of fire, or knowingly authorize or permit the same to be done,
within the jurisdiction of the city or the fire district.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.120)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.13  SNOW REMOVAL FROM MULTI-FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL PARKING FACILITIES.



   No person who owns an apartment building, condominium development or
commercial property in the city shall fail to maintain a snow free access
route across its parking facilities. This route shall be no less than 16 feet
in width adjacent to the structure or nearest curb to the improvement and be
fully cleared within 24 hours after any three-inch snow fall.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.130)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.14  PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS.



   No person shall play ball or engage in any sport or exercise in such a
manner or place as to obstruct the passing of vehicles or otherwise injure
the person or property of others.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.140)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.15  OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS.



   (A)   No person shall place a box, post, sign, bicycle, motor
vehicle or other article that may interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians over any sidewalk, or that may interfere with or obstruct the
passing of vehicles upon any street, on any sidewalk or street in the city,
without authority from the city to do so.



   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle, trailer or other
motorized device within ten feet of a freestanding mail box.



   (C)   No person shall place or maintain any obstruction on any
public street or parkway or other public place.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      OBSTRUCTION.  A structure, device or object, other than a
freestanding mail box having a height prescribed by the U.S. Postal Service
and a stand of not more than one foot in area.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.150)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.16  OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump
any snow or ice onto or within 12 inches of any fire hydrant.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any
waste or debris or otherwise obstruct any fire hydrant.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.160)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.17  THEFT OF CABLE SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix, or to cause to
be attached or affixed, any equipment or device which allows access to or use
of the cable television system without payment to the grantee for same.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.170)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (C)   Any person who violates or fails to comply with § 132.16
shall be fined in an amount as allowed by § 10.99 or any successor statutes.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.160)



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of § 132.17 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500. Each
day a violation continues or occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit such other legal remedies
as may be available to the city as otherwise provided by law.



(2000 Code, § 9.12.170)



CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS



Section



   133.01   Minors’ curfew



   133.02   Truancy



   133.03   Parental responsibility



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  MINORS’ CURFEW.



   (A)   Definitions.  In this section:



      CURFEW HOURS  means:



         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;



         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and



         (c)   Between 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following
day, Sunday to Thursday, inclusive.



      EMERGENCY means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT means any privately-owned place of business
operated for a profit to which the public is invited including but not
limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 



      GUARDIAN  means:



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR  means any person under 18 years of age.



      PARENT  means a person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent
of another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE  means any place to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to
streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



      REMAIN  means to:



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY  means bodily injury that creates a
substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in
custody or control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly
permits the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)
that the minor was:



         (a)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or
other person in custody or control of the minor;



         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



         (e)   Involved in an emergency;



         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence;



         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from,
without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;



         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



         (i)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated
minor under the Emancipation of Minors Act.



   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation
or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in division (C) is present.



   (E)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



(Ord. 2010-06-0296O, passed 6-8-2010)



§ 133.02  TRUANCY.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LEGAL GUARDIAN. Any foster parent, person appointed guardian or
given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state or person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the State Juvenile Court Act, but
shall not include any person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor.



      MINOR, MINOR CHILD or WARD.  Any person over five years but not
yet 18 years of age.



      PARENT.  The father and/or the mother of a minor child, whether
by birth or adoption, or the PARENT having legal custody of the minor if the
PARENTS are divorced or separated. PARENT, as used in this section, also
means legal guardian.



   (B)   Truancy prohibited. No minor enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school within the city shall absent himself or herself from
attendance at school without permission of his or her parent or legal
guardian. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes
beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or herself from school
without permission of his or her parent or legal guardian shall not
constitute truancy if permission for the absence has in substance been
obtained from the parent or legal guardian and the permission is confirmed,
in writing and/or by a personal telephone call to the proper school
authorities, within 24 hours after the absence.



   (C)   Parental responsibility. No parent or legal guardian shall
suffer or permit his or her minor child or ward to violate division (B) of
this section.



(2000 Code, § 9.16.020)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.03  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACTS WHICH CAUSE INJURY.  Acts that directly or proximately
bring about or are the reason for the damage or harm.



      LEGAL GUARDIAN.  A person appointed guardian or given custody of
a minor by a court, but does not include a person appointed guardian or given
custody to a minor under the Juvenile Court Act (ILCS Ch. 705, Act 405, §
1-1), as amended. The term LEGAL GUARDIAN does not include a guardian ad
litem.



      MINOR.  Any person above the age of 11 but not 18 years of age.



      PARENT.  The father and/or the mother of a minor child, whether
by birth or adoption, or the PARENT having legal custody of the minor if the
PARENTS are divorced or separated. PARENT, as used in this section, also
means legal guardian.



      WILLFUL OR MALICIOUS CONDUCT. Conduct that involves the same mens
rea as required for criminal conduct. WILLFUL OR MALICIOUS CONDUCT consists
of the intentional commission of a wrongful and illegal act with an intent to
cause damage or harm.



   (B)   Illegal acts. It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal
guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian
to fail to exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing, failing to
supervise, or permitting the minor to commit any violation of a city
ordinance or state statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing
injury to a person or property, including, but not limited to, assault,
battery, disorderly conduct resulting in injury or property damage, theft,
damage or defacing public or private property, graffiti, and vandalism. The
parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with the parent
or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and the
minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the
knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this
section, upon the occurrence of the events described in division (C) of this
section.



   (C)   Violation.  A parent or legal guardian shall be in violation
of this section if an unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal
guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law
or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person
or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency, peace officer, police officer or conservator of the peace
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property.



   (D)   Damage to persons or property.



      (1)   Liability of parent.  The parent or legal guardian of
an unemancipated minor who resides with that parent or legal guardian is
liable for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of the minor
which cause injury to a person or property, up to $20,000 for each person or
entity for each occurrence of the willful or malicious acts by the minor
causing injury, in addition to court costs and attorney’s fees incurred in
enforcement of this section, and any attorney costs and fees, court costs or
administrative fees, if any, incurred by the city in the prosecution of the
minor for a violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting willful
and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, if the minor is
convicted of violating such a law.



      (2)   Common law damages.  Nothing in this section shall
affect the recovery of damages in any other cause of action where the
liability of the parent or legal guardian is predicated on a common law basis.



(Ord. 2007-08-0120O, passed 8-28-2007; Ord. 2010-06-0296O, passed 6-8-2010) 
Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribes shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   In addition to or in lieu of the penalty set forth in §
10.99, a period of community service not to exceed 160 hours may be imposed
upon a minor who violates any of the provisions of § 133.02.



(2000 Code, § 9.16.020)



   (C)   Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of §
133.03 shall be fined an amount equal to the damages or pecuniary loss
resulting from each violation described in §§ 133.03(C), and in addition
may be sentenced to probation or conditional discharge with the conditions
being that the parent or legal guardian make restitution or reparation up to
$20,000, but not to exceed actual loss or damage to property or pecuniary
loss. The court or administrative adjudication process shall determine the
amount and conditions of payment. Where the conditions or payment have not
been satisfied, the court may, at any time prior to the expiration or
termination of the period of probation or of conditional discharge, impose an
additional fine. The City Attorney, at his or her discretion, shall seek to
nonsuit and ask for dismissal of charge upon satisfactory termination of the
conditions of conditional discharge as set forth by the trial judge.



(Ord. 2007-08-0120O, passed 8-28-2007)



CHAPTER 134:  WEAPONS



Section



   134.01   Possession and discharge of firearms and other weapons



   134.02   Sale and possession of knives and other weapons



   134.03   Air rifles



   134.99   Penalty



§ 134.01  POSSESSION AND DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall have or carry any shotgun, rifle, pistol,
revolver, air gun or any other firearm, unless the same is unloaded and in a
case if carried.



   (B)   No person shall discharge any shotgun, rifle, pistol,
revolver, air gun or any other firearm in the city, and the Chief of Police
may confiscate the unlawfully discharged firearms.



   (C)   No person shall discharge any arrow from a bow except at an
inanimate archery target.



   (D)   This section does not apply to any officer of the law while in
the performance of his or her duty, or to persons lawfully summoned by an
officer to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while so engaged
in assisting the officer, or to any resident discharging a firearm when
lawfully defending his or her person or property.



(2000 Code, § 9.24.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.02  SALE AND POSSESSION OF KNIVES AND OTHER WEAPONS.



   (A)   Sale or transfer.



      (1)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, loan or give to
any person any knife, the blade of which is released by a spring mechanism,
including knives known as switch-blades, any blackjack, slungshot, sand-club,
sand-bag, metal knuckles or bludgeon.



      (2)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, loan or give to
any person 18 years or under any type or kind of knife, any blade of which is
two inches in length or longer.



   (B)   Possession.



      (1)   No person shall carry or possess any knife, the blade of
which is released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as
switch-blades, any blackjack, slungshot, sand-club, sand-bags, metal knuckles
or bludgeon.



      (2)   No person shall carry or possess any knife, the blade of
which is in excess of two and one-half inches in length.



      (3)   No person 18 years of age or under shall carry or
possess any knife, the blade of which is two inches in length or longer.



   (C)   Concealment.



      (1)   No person shall carry concealed on or about his or her
person a dagger, stiletto, bowie knife, commando knife, razor, or any blade
which is released by a spring mechanism, including knives known as
switchblades, or any other type or kind of knife, any blade of which is more
than two and one-half inches in length.



      (2)   No person 18 years of age or under shall carry concealed
on or about his or her person any knife, the blade of which is two inches in
length or longer.



   (D)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section as to the
possession of knives in excess of two and one-half inches shall not apply to
officers while engaged in the discharge of their official duties or to
sheriffs, police officers duly constituted police officers; nor to the
following employees or agents while engaged in the discharge of the duties of
their employment: traders, baggage handlers, messengers, drivers,
watchpersons, special agents and police officers employed by railroads or
express companies; nor to persons lawfully summoned by an officer to assist
in making an arrest or preserving the peace, while so engaged in assisting
the officer.



   (E)   Confiscation. In addition to the penalty provided in §
134.99, weapons used in violation of this section shall be forfeited to and
confiscated by the city. The city shall thereafter destroy the weapons.



(2000 Code, § 9.24.020)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.03  AIR RIFLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      AIR RIFLE.  Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol,
BB gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm
which impels a breakable paint ball containing washable marking colors or a
pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with
a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm.



      DEALER.  Any person, copartnership, association or corporation
engaged in the business of selling, at retail, or renting any of the articles
included in the definition of “air rifle” as provided in this division.



   (B)   Selling, renting or transferring prohibited. It is unlawful
for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer an air rifle
to any person in the city.



   (C)   Carrying or discharging on public streets. It is unlawful for
any person to carry on his or her person or within the passenger portion of a
motor vehicle any air rifle on the public streets, roads or highways or on
public lands within the city. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any
air rifle from or across any street, sidewalk, road, highway, public land or
public place, except on a safely constructed target range.



   (D)   Permitted uses. Notwithstanding any provision of this section,
it is lawful for any person to have in his or her possession any air rifle if
it is:



      (1)   Kept within his or her house of residence or other
private enclosure;



      (2)   Used by the person and he or she is a duly enrolled
member of any club, team or society organized for educational purposes and
maintaining, as part of its facilities, or having written permission to use,
an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and
instruction of a responsible adult, and then only if the air rifle is
actually being used in connection with the activities of the team or society
under the supervision of a reasonable adult; and/or



      (3)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under
circumstances where the air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in such a
manner as not to endanger any person or property, and then only if the air
rifle is used in such a manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over
any grounds or space outside the limits of the  grounds or residence.



   (E)   Sales. The provisions of this section do not prohibit sales of
air rifles:



      (1)   By wholesale dealers or jobbers;



      (2)   To be shipped out of the city; or



      (3)   To be used at a target range operated in accordance with
division (D) of this section or by members of the Armed Services of the
United States or veterans’ organizations.



   (F)   Seizure and removal. The police shall seize, take, remove or
cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or used
in any manner in violation of this section.



(2000 Code, § 9.24.030)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 134.02 shall be
subject to a fine of $500 for each offense, or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both a fine and imprisonment.



(2000 Code, § 9.24.020)



CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   135.01   Public intoxication; commitment to detoxification facility



   135.02   Open containers prohibited; exception



   135.03   Possession or consumption by minors



   135.04   Furnishing alcohol to underage persons



   135.99   Penalty



§ 135.01 PUBLIC INTOXICATION; COMMITMENT TO DETOXIFICATION FACILITY.



   (A)   No person shall be upon any public street or public place if
he or she is intoxicated.



   (B)   If a person who appears to be intoxicated upon a public street
or public place consents, he or she may be assisted to his or her home or to
a detoxification, public treatment, private treatment or other health
facility, either directly by the police or through an intermediary person.



   (C)   A person who appears to be incapacitated by alcohol while upon
a public street or public place, and who shows symptoms of the physical,
emotional or social disabilities associated with alcoholism, shall, on
probable cause shown, be taken into protective custody by the police and
forthwith brought to a detoxification facility or other facility customarily
available for detoxification. If no detoxification facility is readily
available, he or she shall be taken to an emergency medical service
customarily used for incapacitated persons. The police, in detaining the
person and in taking the person to a detoxification facility, are taking him
or her into protective custody and shall make every reasonable effort to
protect his or her health and safety. In taking the person into protective
custody, the detaining officer may take reasonable steps to protect himself
or herself. A taking into protective custody under this section alone is not
an arrest. No entry or other record shall be made to indicate that the person
has been arrested or charged with a crime, unless there has been an arrest
for another incident unrelated to the person’s status as an alcoholic.



   (D)   An intoxicated person who, as a direct result of his or her
excessive use of alcohol, has threatened, attempted or inflicted physical
harm on another and is likely to inflict physical harm on another unless
omitted, or is incapacitated by alcohol and shows symptoms of the physical,
emotional or social disabilities indicative of alcoholism, may be committed
to a detoxification facility for emergency treatment. A refusal to undergo
treatment does not constitute evidence of lack of judgment as to the need for
treatment.



   (E)   No authorized person acting in good faith and without
negligence in connection with the preparation of petitions, applications,
certificates or other documents for the apprehension, taking into protective
custody, transportation, examination, treatment, detention or discharge of an
individual under this section shall incur any liability, civil or criminal,
by reason of his or her actions under this section.



(2000 Code, § 9.20.010)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.02  OPEN CONTAINERS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   No person shall carry or otherwise have in his or her possession any
alcoholic beverage on any public street, highway or place, or in any motor
vehicle, if the can, bottle or container is not in its original package and
the seal unbroken. This prohibition may be waived by Council for certain
social gatherings, upon submission of an application by a city resident  21
years of age or older. The application shall contain the date time and place
of the social gathering and a guarantee by the applicant that alcoholic
beverages will not be served to or provided for persons under the age of 21.



(2000 Code, § 9.20.020)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.03  POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION BY MINORS.



   (A)   No person under 21 years of age shall consume, purchase or
accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession, unless one of the following is true:



      (1)   The possession and dispensing or consumption by the
person is in the performance of a religious service or ceremony;



      (2)   The consumption by the person is under the direct
supervision and approval of the parent or guardian of the person and in the
privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s home; and/or



      (3)   The possession and delivery is pursuant to the
person’s employment by a licensee as allowed by state law.



   (B)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor shall sell, give or deliver the alcoholic liquor to another person
under 21 years of age, except as allowed in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   No parent or guardian shall knowingly suffer or permit his or
her child or ward under 21 years of age to violate any of the provisions of
this section.



   (D)   No owner or occupant of any premises located within the city
shall knowingly allow any person under 21 years of age to remain on the
premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming
alcoholic liquor in violation of any of the provisions of this section.



   (E)   All statutes of the state, or any parts thereof, which are in
conflict with any of the provisions of this section are superseded by this
section, which is enacted under the home rule power of the city.



(2000 Code, § 9.20.030)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.04  FURNISHING ALCOHOL TO UNDERAGE PERSONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to, in the city:



      (1)   Sell, give, deliver or dispense alcoholic liquor to an
underage person;



      (2)   Knowingly permit or knowingly or negligently fail to
prevent, on premises under his or her control, the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by an underage person;



      (3)   Knowingly permit or knowingly or negligently fail to
prevent the operation of a motor vehicle in his or her control by an underage
person when the person knows or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should
have known that the underage persons had consumed any amount of alcoholic
liquor within two hours prior to when the permission was granted or prior to
the operation;



      (4)   Sell, give or furnish to an underage person a false or
fraudulent identification card of the underage person;



      (5)   Sell, give or furnish to an underage person an
identification card of any other person; and/or



      (6)   Pay for or rent a hotel or motel room or facility for
the purpose of or knowing that the room or facility is to be used by an
underage person for the unlawful consumption of alcoholic liquor.



   (B)   Divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   The giving, delivering or dispensing of alcoholic liquor
to an underage person, or the permitting of the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by an underage person, in the performance of a religious service or
ceremony; or



      (2)   The giving, delivering or dispensing of alcoholic liquor
to an underage person, or the permitting of the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by an underage person, under the direct supervision and approval of
that underage person’s parent in the privacy of a home.



   (C)   The following shall apply to division (B)(2) of this section:
In any prosecution of a person for the commission of any state or local
offense when the person was an underage person, the prosecutor, upon
reasonable grounds to so believe, may request a ruling as to whether the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, as permitted by the person’s parent,
caused the commission of the offense. If it is so determined in the
affirmative, then divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section shall apply.



(2000 Code, § 9.20.040)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 135.03 shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(2000 Code, § 9.20.030)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter



         150.   CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



         151.   BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION



         152.   EROSION, DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER



         153.   BURGLARY PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS



         154.   CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS



         155.   FIRE LIMITS



         156.   BROADCASTING EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES



         157.   SWIMMING POOLS



         158.   MOBILE HOME PARKS



         159.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



         160.   ZONING



         161.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 150:  CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



City Comprehensive Plan



   150.01   Adoption



CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



§ 150.01  ADOPTION.



   The corporate authorities hereby approve the Comprehensive Plan and
declare it to be the Official Comprehensive Plan of the City of Oak Forest.



(Ord. 2008-02-0153O, passed 2-12-2008)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION



Section



Adoption of Codes



   151.001   International Building Code



   151.002   International Residential Code



   151.003   Construction requirements



   151.004   Decks, additions, patios, porches, gazebos or other
accessory structures



   151.005   International Energy Conservation Code



   151.006   Plumbing codes adopted



   151.007   National Electrical Code



   151.008   International Fuel Gas Code



   151.009   International Mechanical Code



   151.010   Occupancy permits



   151.011   Permits on file with township assessor



   151.012   Fees and deposits



   151.013   Damage to public improvements



   151.014   Compliance required



   151.015   Plat of survey



   151.016   Razing buildings



   151.017   Paved areas



   151.018   Sidewalk required



   151.019   Individual lot grading plan requirements



   151.020   Safety and work requirements



   151.021   Exterior wall construction



   151.022   Retaining walls



New Residential Buildings or Structures and Other Related Activities;
Construction



   151.035   Fees and deposits



Nonresidential Buildings or Structures and Other Related Activities;
Construction



   151.050   Fees and deposits



Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way; Construction



   151.065   Preambles



   151.066   Purpose and scope



   151.067   Definitions



   151.068   Annual registration required



   151.069   Permit required; applications and fees



   151.070   Action on permit applications



   151.071   Effect of permit



   151.072   Revised permit drawings



   151.073   Insurance



   151.074   Indemnification



   151.075   Security



   151.076   Permit suspension and revocation



   151.077   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status



   151.078   General construction standards



   151.079   Traffic control



   151.080   Location of facilities



   151.081   Construction methods and materials



   151.082   Vegetation control



   151.083   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities



   151.084   Clean-up and restoration



   151.085   Maintenance and emergency maintenance



   151.086   Variances



   151.087   Enforcement



   151.088   Severability



Burial of Cables



   151.100   Burial of cables and pipes required



Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators and Moving Walks



   151.115   National Standard Safety Code



   151.116   Conflict of laws



Fallout Shelters



   151.130   Construction standards



   151.131   Permit fees



Multiple-Owner Complexes



   151.145   Preambles



   151.146   Definitions



   151.147   Multiple ownership/multiple unit inspection review board



   151.148   Registration/conversion of structures constructed prior to
1996



   151.149   Multiple ownership/multiple unit development registration
requirements



   151.150   Dwelling unit registration requirements



   151.151   Additional inspections



   151.152   Suspension or revocation of certificates of registration



   151.153   Failure to register



   151.154   Guarantees



Rental Multi-Family Dwelling Structures



   151.165   Definitions



   151.166   Fees, penalties and other charges



   151.167   Certificate of housing inspection prerequisite to
operation, lease or sale; term



   151.168   Application procedures for certificates of registration



   151.169   Certificate of registration



   151.170   Consent to inspection; scope of inspection; limitations;
warrants



   151.171   Building inspection review board



   151.172   Building inspection review board procedures; appeals



Sewer System Connection Charge



   151.185   Preambles



   151.186   Connection charge



Signs



   151.200   Mobile signs



   151.201   Signs at the rear of shopping centers



Storage of Construction Materials



   151.215   Permit required; application and deposit



   151.216   Time limits for removal of debris



   151.217   Notice of hearing



   151.218   Extension of time limits



   151.219   Use of deposit for removal by city



   151.220   Appeals



   151.221   Excess or deficiency in deposit; liens



   151.222   Inspection; refund of deposit



   151.223   Liability for damages



Small Cell Antennas and Towers



   151.300   Definitions



   151.301   Standards and regulations



   151.302   Permits and application fees and procedures



   151.303   Conflict of laws



 



   151.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building Department, see §§ 32.590 through 32.593



   Use of groundwater as potable water supply prohibited, see § 50.08



ADOPTION OF CODES



§ 151.001  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Adopted.



      (1)   For the purposes of supplementing the provisions and
regulations contained in this title, and for setting forth minimum standards
for buildings and structures, there shall be and hereby is adopted by
reference that certain building code known as the 2006 edition of the
International Building Code, and referenced standards and appendices A, C, E,
F, G, H and I.



      (2)   There shall be one copy of the International Building
Code kept on file for public inspection in the City Clerk’s office.



      (3)   In this chapter, all references to the “Department”
shall mean the City of Oak Forest.



   (B)   Applicability of provisions or regulations.



      (1)   The adoption of these regulations shall not be construed
as preventing the enforcement of, or repealing the provisions of any
ordinance, regulation, standard or code adopted by the city which is more
restrictive than the provisions of this subchapter.



      (2)   In the event any provisions of this subchapter shall be
in conflict with any applicable ordinance, regulation, standard or code
adopted by the city, the more restrictive shall be applicable.



   (C)   Amendments to International Building Code. The various
sections and tables of the International Building Code 2006 adopted by this
subchapter shall be revised as follows:



      (1)   Section 103.1 Department of Building Safety: Change to
read:



         The Building Commissioner shall serve as the Code Official
for the City of Oak Forest. The Code Official shall serve under the
administrative direction of the City Administrator or a duly authorized
designee.



      (2)   Section 103.2 Appointment: Delete in its entirety.



      (3)   Section 103.3 Deputies: Change to read:



         The Code Official, with the approval of the City
Administrator or a duly authorized designee, is authorized to designate one
or more employees who shall exercise all powers of the Code Official during
any temporary absence or disability of the Code Official.



      (4)   Section 104.10 Modifications: Add the following:



         Such modifications shall not have the effect of waiving any
provisions of the Oak Forest Municipal Code.



      (5)   Section 105 Permits: Add the following:



         Section 105.8 Condition of Permit:



            No permit shall be issued to allow the construction,
alteration, or remodeling of any building or structure unless:



            (1)   The lot or parcel of real estate upon which
the building or structure is located or is to be constructed is fully
improved in accordance with The City of Oak Forest Building Code.



            (2)   The owner of the lot or parcel of real
estate upon which the building or structure is located or is to be
constructed shall agree, in writing, to fully comply with all of the
requirements of The City of Oak Forest.



            (3)   That any such lot or parcel of real estate
or any construction thereon shall be directly adjacent to and accessible from
a hard surface roadway at a location approved by the Public Works Director or
the City Engineer and the Fire Department.



            (4)   Said roadway shall be hard surface of
sufficient width, strength, and composition to permit reasonably unimpaired
access to such lot or parcel of real estate by emergency, utility service,
snow removal, and waste removal vehicles in all weather conditions.



            (5)   Sidewalks: A permittee shall construct
public sidewalks within all adjacent right-of-way abutting such lot or tract
in accordance with provisions of the City of Oak Forest Municipal Code.



            (6)   Upon completion of the foundation walls and
any structural elements which are a necessary part of the construction of the
foundation walls, or are necessary for the completion of the foundation
walls, and before proceeding with further construction, he or she shall file
with the Department, a survey, prepared and signed by a registered Illinois
land surveyor, showing the location of the structure perpendicularly to lot
lines and the elevation of the top of the foundation walls at all four (4)
corners for which a foundation permit has been issued.



      (6)   Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit: Delete Nos. 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12.



      (7)   Section 106.1.1 Information on Construction Documents:
Add the following:



         Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn on
36” x 24” paper and have any architectural stamp on all pages. One
complete electronic version (PDF format) of the final construction “as
built” dimensions as approved by the Building Official shall be submitted
to the City of Oak Forest prior to the issuance of the final occupancy.
Deviations from the size requirement may be approved by the code official.



      (8)   Section 107 Temporary Structures and Uses: Delete in its
entirety.



      (9)   Section 108.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance:
Change to read:



         Any person who commences any work on a building, structure,
electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law and/or subject to
permit fees, including double the cost for inspections and administrative
fees as outlined in Fees for Construction, in the City of Oak Forest
Municipal Code, and shall be subject to a stop work order until such time a
permit is obtained.



      (10)   Section 108.6 Refunds: Delete in its entirety.



      (11)   Section 109.4 Inspection Agencies: Add the following:



         A written request to use a third party inspection agency
must be submitted to and approved by the Building Official prior to the
commencement of the inspection.



      (12)   Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Change to read:



         Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law and/or subject to permit fees, including
double the cost for inspections and administrative fees as outlined, in the
City of Oak Forest Municipal Code, and shall be subject to a stop work order
until such time a permit is obtained.



      (13)   CHAPTER 7 FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED CONSTRUCTION



         Add a new sub-section to read as follows: 721.6.3.5



            1.   For all multifamily dwelling units
(condominium, townhouses, apartments, mixed use) exterior and load bearing
wall construction shall be masonry. All floors shall be of the pre-cast
concrete type having at least a two (2) hour fire resistance rating. All such
divisions shall be subject to the approval of the plans and the inspection of
the Fire Chief and the Code Official, or a duly authorized designee.



            2.   There shall not be any living quarters below
grade allowed in any multifamily structures as described in the above section.



            3.   All buildings and structures and additions to
existing buildings located in zoning districts (B-1, B2, B3, PMU, Ml, M2)
shall be of Type 1A construction.



      (14)   Section 907.2: Add the following sub-sections:



         Section 907.2.10.5 Single and Multiple Station Carbon
Monoxide Detectors: All carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of manufacturer’s installation instructions
and the household fire-warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.



         Section 907.2.10.5.1 Carbon Monoxide Detectors and
Notification: Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in the following
location.



         Within 15 feet (15’) of each bedroom or sleeping room.



         Section 907.2.10.5.2 Power source: In new construction,
required carbon monoxide detectors shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring where such wiring is served from the commercial source and
shall be equipped with a battery backup. Carbon monoxide detectors shall emit
a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for over-current protection.



      (15)   Section 1405.5 Anchored Masonry Veneer: Add the
following sentence: Masonry ties shall be a minimum 22 gauge steel.



      (16)   Table 1607.1 Minimum Uniformly Distributed Live Loads
and Minimum Concentrated Live Loads: Change to read as follows:



         Decks: Uniform (psf) = 100.



      (17)   Section 2308.8.5 Lateral Support: Change to read:



         Floor, attic, and roof framing, with a nominal depth to
thickness ratio greater than or equal to 5:1 shall require one line of
bridging for each eight feet (8’) of span.



         The bridging shall consist of not less than one inch by
three inch lumber, double nailed at each end, or equivalent metal bracing of
equal rigidity, full depth solid blocking or other approved means. A line of
bridging shall also be required at supports where equivalent lateral support
is not otherwise provided.



      (18)   Section 3002.4 Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance
Stretcher: Change to read:



         Where elevators are required per the IBC in buildings of
two or more stories in height, at least one elevator shall be provided for
Fire Department emergency access to all floors. Said elevator car shall be of
such size and arrangement to accommodate a 24” x 84” ambulance stretcher
in the horizontal, open position, and shall be identified by the
international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The
symbol shall not be less than three inches (3”) high and shall be placed on
both sides of the hoist way door frame. Exception: For existing buildings, in
other than H and I occupancies, where all required exit stairways comply with
Section 1003.2.13.2, and do not serve floors more than one story above or
below the level of exit and discharge.



      (19)   Section 3306.5 Barriers: Change to read:



         Barriers shall consist of a chain link fence, six feet in
height, and shall be placed on the side of the walkway nearest the
construction. Barriers shall extend the entire length of the construction
site. Openings in such barriers shall be protected by doors or gates which
are normally kept closed.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.002  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   (A)   Adopted. The 2006 edition of the International Residential
Code (hereinafter IRC), and referenced standards and appendices A, B, C, D,
G, I, J and K, regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, demolition, addition to, use or maintenance of one-
and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height
with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures, as amended in
this subchapter, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though
fully set forth.



   (B)   Amendments to the International Residential Code.  The
following requirements shall be applicable to one and two-family dwellings
and townhouses as stated above:



      (1)   CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION



         R101.1 Title: Change to read:



         These provisions shall be known as the residential code for
one and two-family dwellings of the City of Oak Forest, and shall be cited as
such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”



         Add a new section as follows: R101.2.1 Current PUD
Developments:



         Townhouse and duplex developments which have been approved
by the City Council prior to the adoption of the 2006 IRC shall be allowed to
continue to use the 1996 BOCA building code, or any code permitted by City
Council agreement, until the development is completed in its entirety.



         R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit: Delete: Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 9.



         R105.3 Application for Permit: Change to read:



         Where applicable, describe the land in which the proposed
work is to be done by legal description, street address, and signed sealed
copy of Plat of Survey.



         R105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application: Change to read:



         An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be
deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing unless such
application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued;
except that the Code Official is authorized to grant one 30 day extension.
The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause must be
demonstrated.



         R105.5 Expiration: Change to read:



         Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or
if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period
of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Every permit shall become
invalid after a period of one year from the date of its issuance. Expired
permits shall be subjected to additional plan review including new fees for
such review as well as administrative fees for issuing said permit. The
building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions
of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.



         R106.1 Submittal Documents: Change to read:



         Construction documents, special inspection and structural
observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets
with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional. The construction documents
shall be signed and wet stamped on the first sheet and wet stamped on all
other sheets. Where special conditions exist, the Code Official is authorized
to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered
design professional.



         R106.1.1 Information on Construction Documents: Add the
following:



         Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn on
36” x 24” paper and an architectural stamp on all pages. One complete
electronic version (PDF Format) of the final construction “as built”
dimensions as approved by the Code Official shall be submitted to the City of
Oak Forest prior to the issuance of the final occupancy.



         R106.1.3 Information for Construction in Areas Prone to
Flooding: Change to read:



         For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas as
established on local flood insurance rate maps, locally adopted floodplain
ordinances shall apply.



         R106.3.3 Phased Approval: Delete in its entirety.



         R109.1.6 Final Inspection: Add the following:



         For final inspections the structure shall be accessible.
The building official has the right to deny inspection if the structure is
not accessible.



         R110.4 Temporary Occupancy: Change to read:



         The Code Official is authorized to issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by
the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely.



         R113.4 Section Violation Penalties: Change to read:



         Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to
penalties as prescribed by law and/or subject to permit fees, including
double the cost for inspections and administrative fees as outlined in Fees
for Construction, in the City of Oak Forest Municipal Code, and shall be
subject to a stop work order until such time a permit is obtained.



      (2)   CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS



         Add the following:



         Bedrooms: A private room planned and intended for sleeping,
separated from other rooms by a door. A bedroom will have windows, closet and
is physically separate from other rooms.



         Large Room Addition: A building addition that increases the
existing gross floor area as defined in Chapter 10 of the 2006 International
Building Code of the principal structure by 50% or more.



         Partial Razing - New Construction: When 50% or more of a
dwelling unit is razed, for which a razing permit is required, the owner
shall be required to obtain a new construction permit for any replacement
work done and shall cause the entire building to conform to the requirements
set forth in this code.



         Registered Design Professional: A duly licensed architect
or structural engineer in the State of Illinois.



         Change the following:



         Solid Masonry: Load-bearing or non-load-bearing
construction using masonry units where the net cross-sectional area of each
unit in any plane parallel to the bearing surface is not less than 95% of its
gross cross-sectional area. Solid masonry units shall conform to ASTM C55,
C62, C73, C145, or C216.



      (3)   CHAPTER 3 BUILDING PLANNING



         R301.2.4 Floodplain Construction: Delete in its entirety.



         R309.3 Floor Surface: Add the following:



         If a door opening occurs between garage and dwelling,
provide 6 inch curb at the service door, or construct garage floor six inches
(6”) lower than adjoining floor. If a stairwell occurs in garage a six inch
(6”) gas curb shall be provided around stairwell. The foundation wall can
serve as the gas curb provided the highest elevation of the garage floor is
six inches (6”) below the top of foundation.



         Add a new Section to read as follows:



         R309.2.1 Floor Drains: An oil interceptor shall be required
if a floor drain is installed in the floor of a garage.



         R309.5 Flood hazard areas: Delete in its entirety.



         R313 Smoke Alarms: Add a new Section to read as follows:



         Section R313.5 Single and Multiple Station Carbon Monoxide
Detectors: All carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in accordance
with the provisions of manufacturer’s installation instructions and the
household fire-warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.



         Section R313.5.1 Carbon Monoxide Detectors and
Notification: Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in the following
location:



         Within 15 feet of each bedroom or sleeping room.



         Section R313.5.2 Power source: In new construction,
required carbon monoxide detectors shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring where such wiring is served from the commercial source and
shall be equipped with a battery backup. Carbon monoxide detectors shall emit
a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for over-current protection.



         R321.1 Premises Identification: Add the following:



         Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for all
buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall be of a contrasting
color to the building’s exterior. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals
only and shall be a minimum of 4” high. All multi-tenant commercial
buildings and multi-family residential dwelling units shall have additional
address numbering placed on the rear door, if appropriate, with the same
requirements noted above. Exception: detached residential garages.



         Add a new Section to read as follows:



         R322.2 Handicap Accessibility Requirements:



            (1)   Wall Reinforcement: One first floor bath
shall be provided with wood blocking installed within wall framing, to
support grab bars as needed. The wood blocking, when measured to the center,
shall be located between thirty-three inches (33”) and thirty-six inches
(36”) above the finished floor. The wood blocking shall be located in all
walls adjacent to a toilet, shower stall or bathtub.



            (2)   Interior Doors: All accessible first floor
doorways shall provide a minimum clear opening of thirty-two inches (32”)
with the door open ninety degrees, (90°) measured between the face of the
door and the opposite stop.



            (3)   Switch and Outlet Requirements All first
floor wall switches controlling light fixtures and fans, shall be located at
a height not to exceed forty-eight inches (48”) above the finished floor.
Height shall be determined by measuring from the finished floor to the center
of the switch.



            All first floor receptacles shall be located at a
height not less than fifteen inches (15”) above the finished floor. Height
shall be determined by measuring from the finished floor to the center of the
receptacle. When the receptacle placement is prohibited by the height of a
window or design feature, an alternate location can be approved by the Code
Official or a duly authorized designee.



      (4)   CHAPTER 4 FOUNDATIONS



         R402.1 Wood Foundations: Delete in its entirety, also
delete all references to wood foundations throughout the Code.



         R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection: Delete exception #3.



      (5)   CHAPTER 5 FLOORS



         R504 Pressure Preservatively Treated-Wood Floors (on
ground): Delete in its entirety.



      (6)   CHAPTER 6 WALL CONSTRUCTION



         R602.10.3 (5) Braced Wall Panel Construction Methods:
Delete in its entirety.



         R602.10.3 (7) Braced Wall Panel Construction Methods:
Delete in its entirety.



         R606.1.1 Professional Registration Not Required: Delete in
its entirety.



         Table R703.4: Change portion of table:  Weather-Resistant
Siding Attachment and Minimum Thickness: Change “sheathing paper
required” to “Yes” for all siding material.



         Add a new Section to read as follows:



         R703.9.3 Exterior Insulation Finish System (EIFS): If any
exterior insulation finish system (EIFS) is installed on any portion of a
dwelling unit for an exterior covering, a certification of proper
installation shall be required to be submitted as a special inspection.
Before permit issuance, a statement of special inspections prepared by the
registered design professional shall be submitted detailing the individuals
and approved agencies intended to be retained for conducting these
inspections. This report and signed certification shall be submitted to the
City before any occupancy will be granted.



      (7)   CHAPTER 8 ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION



         R802.3.2 Ceiling Joists Lapped: Delete all references to
butted joists.



         R802.8.1 Bridging: Change to read:



         Rafters that are carrying finish material on the interior
side and ceiling joists shall be supported laterally by solid blocking,
diagonal bridging (wood or metal) wood strip nailed across the rafters at
intervals not exceeding 8 feet (8’).



         Add a new Section as follows:



         R802.11.2 Roof Tie-Down:



         Rafter ties shall be required on tray and cathedral
ceilings or calculations must be submitted signed and sealed by the design
professional for the wind uplift forces.



      (8)   CHAPTER 9 ROOF ASSEMBLIES



         Add a new Section as follows:



         R903.6 Gutters and Downspouts: All structures shall be
provided with gutters and downspouts unless omission is specifically
permitted by the Building Official.



      (9)   CHAPTER 10 CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES



         R1006.1 Exterior Air: Delete: “unless the room is
mechanically ventilated and controlled so that the indoor pressure is neutral
or positive.”



         Add a new Section as follows:



         R1006.1.1 Factory Built Fireplaces: Factory-built or
masonry fireplaces covered in this chapter shall be equipped with an exterior
air supply to assure proper fuel combustion.



   (10)   CHAPTER 11 ENERGY EFFICIENCY



         Table N1102.1 shall be replaced with the following Table:



 


Heating Degree Days

 

Minimum Value of Insulation only





 

Ceiling R-value

 

Exterior wall R-value

 

Floor R-value

 

Habitable Basement R-value

 

Non- habitable Basement R-value

 

Slab Perimeter R-value 7 depth

 

Crawl Space R-value




6500

 

R-30

 

R-13

 

R-19

 

R-8

 

R-0

 

R-5, 2 FT.

 

R-11




 



      (11)   CHAPTER 24 FUEL GAS



         G2422.1 Connecting Appliances: Change first sentence to
read:



         Furnaces, water heaters and boilers, (unless specifically
required by the manufacturer), shall be connected to the piping system by
only rigid metallic pipe and fittings. Appliances, except furnaces, water
heaters and boilers, (unless specifically required by the manufacturer),
shall be connected to the piping system by one of the following:



      (12)   CHAPTERS 25-32 PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS



         Add a new Section to read as follows:



         P2501.1.1



         All plumbing work shall conform to the current edition of
the Illinois State Plumbing Code.



      (13)   CHAPTERS 33-39 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS



         Add a new Section to read as follows:



         E3301.1



         All electrical work shall conform to the 2008 edition of
the National Electric Code, the ICC Electrical Code and the provisions of
this code, whichever is more restrictive.



      (14)   CHAPTER 41 SWIMMING POOLS



         Add a new Section to read as follows:



         E4110



            1.   A pool or pool deck may not be located closer
than ten percent (10%) of the width of lot and in no instance closer than six
feet (6’) from the property lines.



            2.   No portion of the pool shall be located at a
distance less than ten feet (10’) away from the main structure and or any
accessory structure and or building.



            3.   No portion of the pool shall be located at a
distance less than ten feet (10’) away from any overhead power lines and
five feet (5’) away from underground power lines.



            4.   All pumps and filters, and pool water
disinfection equipment installations shall not be less than six feet (6’)
from any property line, are not permitted in the side yard, and may not be
located less than ten feet (10’) away from any structure.



            5.   All pools must be enclosed by a fence and all
entries must be enclosed with gates not having a height less than four feet
(4’). The fence enclosures shall not have openings in excess of four inches
(4”) in length. All gates shall be a self closing and self latching type.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.003  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction,
alteration or repairs, other than ordinary repairs, using application forms
furnished by the Building Official.



   (B)   (1)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter
for new construction before a certified final plat of subdivision, assessment
or planned unit development, as required by this code, for the lot or parcel
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in
which the lot or parcel is situated.



      (2)   Upon completion of the foundation walls and any
structural elements which are necessarily part of the construction of the
foundation walls, and before proceeding with further construction, the
applicant shall file a survey prepared, signed and sealed by an Illinois
professional land surveyor, showing the location of the structure and the
elevation of the top of the foundation walls at all four corners, or the
average top of foundation for which a permit has been issued. This survey
shall also include a (plus or minus one inch) lowest basement floor elevation.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.004  DECKS, ADDITIONS, PATIOS, PORCHES, GAZEBOS OR OTHER ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES.



   The following requirements shall be applicable to all attached and
detached single-family, townhouse, duplex and multi-family construction
within the city:



   (A)   Applications for a building permit for a deck, room addition,
patio, porch, gazebo or any other accessory structure added to a residential
structure shall be accompanied by:



      (1)   The proposed structure drawn on a full sized copy of a
registered plat of survey of the property (usual scale 1:20 or 1:30) also
showing the location of any electric meter; location of any electric service
line; location of all basement escape windows; and any additional accessory
structures not shown on that recorded plat of survey; and



      (2)   A construction plan of the proposed deck, addition,
patio and the like, as specified in the application package.



   (B)   No portion of the structure shall obstruct any electric
facility, including access to the meter or the underground service line.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.005  INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.



   (A)   Adopted. The 2006 International Energy Conservation Code
(hereafter referred to as the IEC) as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the City of Oak Forest for
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and
power systems in the City of Oak Forest as amended. Three copies of the code
shall be kept on file in the City Clerk’s office for public inspection.



   (B)   Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code. 
Section 101.1 Change to read: This Code shall be known as the International
Energy Conservation Code of the City of Oak Forest and shall be cited as
such. It is referred to herein as “this Code.”



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.006  PLUMBING CODES ADOPTED.



   That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
Office of the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois
Plumbing Code, be and is adopted as the Plumbing Code of the city, providing
for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees thereof; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, collections and terms of the
Plumbing Code on file in the Office of the City Clerk are referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, as found in Ord.
2015-11-0569O.



(Ord. 2015-11-0569O, passed 11-24-2015)  Penalty, § 151.999



§ 151.007  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.



   (A)   Adopted. For the purposes of supplementing the provisions and
regulations contained in this chapter, and for setting forth minimum
standards for the installation of electrical wiring, the city hereby adopts
by reference the standards, specifications, rules and regulations of the
National Fire Protection Association as compiled and published as the
National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, (NFPA No. 70 – 2008) (hereinafter
referred to as the NEC), three copies of each shall be kept on file in the
City Clerk’s office for public inspection.



   (B)   Amendments to the National Electrical Code.



      (1)   Section 603, Alternative Engineered Design: Delete in
its entirety.



      (2)   Chapter 11, Means of Appeal: Delete in its entirety.



   (C)   Approved equipment and installation methods.



      (1)   (a)   All electrical wiring shall be copper. No
aluminum or copper-clad aluminum wire shall be installed in any electrical
installation without written permission from the chief electrical inspector
prior to installation.



         (b)   Exception: service feeders owned and maintained by
Commonwealth Edison.



      (2)   The rework or rewiring of any building or structure is
50% or more, then all wiring in the entire building shall be as per code.



      (3)   A conduit shall be installed with pull wire for the
outside water meter read out. The conduit shall be installed within six feet
of the water meter and run to the area by the gas meter, and flush with the
outside finished wall. No pull box(es) or pulling type fittings shall be
installed in this conduit system without the approval of the Public Works
Department.



      (4)   It is the expressed intent of this code that NEC Article
320 to and including Article 343, Article 347, 351 Part B, 352 Part B, 362
Part B, and 363 not be adopted. All conductors shall be installed in an
approved metal raceway.



      (5)   Electrical metallic tubing shall not be installed
outside, underground or in concrete that is in contact with earth.



      (6)   All services shall be ridged metal conduit or
intermediate conduit.



      (7)   It is the expressed intent of this code that NEC Article
347-2(a) not be adopted. Ridged non-metallic conduit may be used only
underground or in concrete. Note: Schedule 80 is required when installed
under any vehicular traffic.



      (8)   NEC Article 210-4(D) shall be amended to read as: All
three Phase 208v or 240v system shall have phases marked black for A Phase,
red for B Phase, and blue for C Phase. All three Phase 277v or 480v system
shall have the phases marked brown for A Phase, orange for B Phase, and
yellow for C Phase.



      (9)   NEC 210-8 shall be amended to apply to all structures.



      (10)   NEC 210-8A (5) shall be amended to read:  All general
use receptacles installed within 6 feet of plumbing fixtures shall be GFIC
protected.



      (11)   It is the expressed intent of this code that NEC
Article 300-4 (A-I) (Exception) not be adopted. All holes will be drilled.



      (12)   NEC Article 300-13B shall be amended to read:  In
branch circuits the continuity of a conductor shall not be dependant upon
device connections, such as Vamp holders, receptacles and the like, where
removal of the device would interrupt continuity.



      (13)   NEC Article 450-21A shall be amended to read: 
Dry-type transformers installed indoors shall be installed at a minimum of 7
feet above the finished floor, (or) Dry-type transformer installed indoors
shall have a physical separation of 2 feet vertically in all directions and 4
feet horizontally.



      (14)   It is the expressed intent of this code that NEC
Articles 604 and 605 be deleted.



      (15)   All motor of ½ horsepower or larger, or any heating
system, sump pumps and or ejector pumps shall be on its own circuit.



      (16)   Each tenant space shall have direct access to the
breakers or fuses that protect all electrical devices in that tenant unit.
(Direct access means a common area that has no locks or the tenant can get to
the panel or switchboard without going through another tenant space.)



      (17)   When a sump pump or ejector pump is installed in an
area not illuminated, a light shall be provided.



      (18)   All fire alarm systems shall have a lock out device on
the over-current device.



      (19)   In buildings over two floors a special purpose,
non-energized inlet (No. HUBBLE 47CM16 or equal) shall be installed outside
the main entrance two feet above finished grade and no more than five feet
from the front entrance. This outlet shall be visible from the entrance (no
obstruction shall be located in front of this inlet as bushes, decorations
and the like). This special purpose inlet shall be wired with a minimum wire
size of #12 copper wire to opening(s) with outlet (No. HUBBLE 4710 or equal).
Install outlets at each floor level so as to provide at least one outlet in
all stairwells at each floor level and no more than 100 feet of travel
distance from any point at each floor level to at least one outlet.



      (20)   If a low voltage fire alarm system is used, wiring
shall be piped in walls only.



      (21)   Wiring.



         (a)   All wiring, fittings and electrical materials not
in use shall be removed.



         (b)   All electrical service must have grounding
bushings on both ends.



         (c)   All service feeds for new residential and
nonresidential shall be underground.



      (22)   GFCI receptacles.



         (a)   GFCI protection is required on recessed can lights
over tubs and showers.



         (b)   Double basin bathroom sinks require GFCI
receptacles on both ends and within 36 inches of a basin.



         (c)   All bathroom GFCI outlets must be on a separate
circuit.



         (d)   GFCI type outlets must be used on all countertop
height outlets.



      (23)   All electrical piping on the inside is required to be
in rigid conduit in slab. PVC Schedule 80 can be used on the outside.



      (24)   Any electrical equipment installed in the public
right-of-way will require a permit and a signed waiver prior to installation.



   (D)   Single-family and multi-family dwellings.



      (1)   Stairways, halls, passageways, corridors, garages and
rooms accessible by more then one entry or exit shall be lit by a ceiling
light or lights controlled by three-way or four-way switch.



      (2)   Storage space of five square feet or more shall be
illuminated.



      (3)   In dwelling unit over 2,200 square feet or larger a 200
amp service shall be required. All dwelling units under 2,200 square feet
shall have a minimum of a 100-amp service.



      (4)   Service upgrades and/or service changes will require:



         (a)   A minimum of 100 amp service;



         (b)   GFCI protected receptacles shall be required as
per NEC 2005;



         (c)   115V smoke detectors shall be installed as per
code; and



         (d)   No panel shall be more than 80% full.



      (5)   All attic fixtures shall be installed before rough
inspection.



      (6)   All light fixtures shall have at least one light bulb
installed for final inspection.



      (7)   All single-family dwelling units shall have front and
rear electrically-operated doorbells.



      (8)   Multi-family dwelling units shall have an
electrically-operated remote door latch switching system.



      (9)   All garages shall be required to be on its own circuits
(attached or unattached).



   (E)   Emergency lighting.



      (1)   In multi-story buildings of over two floors a special
purpose, non-energized, inlet Hubble # 47CM16 or equal shall be installed
outside the main entrance no more than three feet above grade and no more
than five feet from the main entrance. There shall be no obstructions in
front of this inlet such as bushes, decorations or the like. This inlet shall
have an identifying water-proof cover. This special purpose inlet shall be
wired with No. 12 copper wire in a 1/2-inch conduit to an opening with
outlet, Hubble # 4710 or equal. Install outlets at each floor level so as to
provide at least one outlet in all stairwells at each floor level and no more
than 100 feet of travel distance from any point at each floor level to at
least one outlet.



      (2)   All provisions of this code apply to single- and
multi-family residence.



   (F)   Residential storage garage and similar buildings.



      (1)   Private or residential garages shall have not less than
one ceiling light, one switch and one receptacle. The garage or building
shall be on a separate circuit.



      (2)   The electrical feeder or branch circuit to garage shall
be underground (in threaded galvanized conduit not less than six inches below
finished grade). If direct burial cable is used a non-current carrying
bonding conductor shall be connected between the supply cabinet and the first
junction box in the garage, and shall be not less than 24 inches below
finished grade. Conduit and/or cable run underground shall not be covered
until inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. If direct burial
cable is used it shall be enclosed in threaded galvanized conduit where it
bends to come up out of the trench. Bushings shall be used at the conduit end
where the cable enters or exits the conduit.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.008  INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.



   (A)   Adoption. The 2006 International Fuel Gas Code, and referenced
standards and Appendices A, B, C and D, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted, for the control of building and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the fuel gas code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part of this code with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, prescribed in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Amendments to the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code. 



      (1)   Section 101.1 Title: Insert: the City of Oak Forest.



      (2)   Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Delete in its entirety.



      (3)   Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds: Delete in its entirety.



      (4)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Change to read:



Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any
of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by
law and/or subject to permit fees, including double the cost for inspections
and administrative fees as outlined in Title 1, Chapter 9, Article H, Fees
for Construction, in the City of Oak Forest Municipal Code, and shall be
subject to a stop work order until such time a permit is obtained.



      (5)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Insert amounts to read:
not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.009  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.



   (A)   Adoption. The 2006 International Mechanical Code (hereafter
referred to as the IMC) and reference standards and Appendix A, regulating
and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to use, or maintenance of mechanical systems for all structures other than
one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in
height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures,
providing for the issuance of permits is hereby adopted with the following
amendments.



   (B)   Amendments to the 2006 International Mechanical Code.



      (1)   Section 101.1 Title: Insert: The City of Oak Forest.



      (2)   Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Delete in its entirety.



      (3)   Section 106.5.3 Fee Schedule: Delete in its entirety.



      (4)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Change to read:



Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any
of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by
law and/or subject to permit fees, including double the cost for inspections
and administrative fees as outlined Fees for Construction, in the City of Oak
Forest Code, and shall be subject to a stop work order until such time a
permit is obtained.



      (5)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Insert amounts to read:
not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.010  OCCUPANCY PERMITS.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   No new, remodeled or moved building or structure shall
be occupied until a permit for the occupancy has been issued by the Building
Commissioner or his or her designee as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   No builder, developer, carpenter, contractor or other
tradesman shall deliver possession of a new, remodeled or moved building or
structure to the proposed occupants of the building or structure until an
occupancy permit has been issued by the Building Commissioner or his or her
designee.



   (B)   Facilities required for occupancy permit. Unless authorized by
the City Council and except as may be otherwise provided in an applicable
S.1.A., annexation agreement or permit agreement, no occupancy permit for any
new, remodeled or relocated building or structure, including, but not limited
to, a residential, commercial and office buildings and structures shall be
issued unless:



      (1)   All plumbing and electric wiring has been completely
installed for permanent service; water supply service presently exists
through a permanent connection with the city’s water supply system in
accordance with this code; and sanitary sewer service presently exists
through a permanent connection with the city’s sanitary sewage disposal
system in accordance with this code; and



      (2)   All improvements required by this code have been
installed and accepted by the City Council; provided, however, that required
street improvements may be in the process of installation if the building or
structure to be occupied is directly adjacent to and accessible from a hard
surface roadway of sufficient width, strength and composition to permit
reasonably unimpaired access by authorized emergency, utility service, snow
removal and waste removal vehicles in all weather conditions.



   (C)   Compliance with engineering plans.  “As-built” drawings
and engineer’s and land surveyor’s statements required: Not less than
five days prior to the filing of the application required by the applicant
shall file with the Building Commissioner “as-built” drawings for all
structures, which drawings shall include:



      (1)   Drawing, Type 2 lots. For Type 2 lots, as defined in
this section, in addition to the registered professional engineer shall also
submit a written drawing or sketch prepared by or under his or her direction
which shall have denoted thereon:



         (a)   The location of the principal structures located
on the site;



         (b)   The grade elevations designed for the site as
shown on the final approved engineering plans; and



         (c)   The measured field elevations which demonstrate
that the site, as finally graded, is in substantial conformance with the
final approved engineering plans.



      (2)   Optional Type 2 lot certificate. The applicant may
obtain a final occupancy certificate pursuant to the terms of this division
by filing with the Building Commissioner not less than five days prior to the
filing of the application:



         (a)   “As built” drawings;



         (b)   Statements from a registered professional
engineer; and



         (c)   A Type 2 lot certificate signed and sealed by both
a registered professional engineer and a registered professional land
surveyor.



      (3)   Topographical survey, Type 1 lots. For Type 1 lots, as
defined in this section, in addition to the “as built” drawings and the
statements required by the registered professional engineer shall also submit
a topographical survey of the construction site, as finally graded which
demonstrates that the site, as finally graded, is in substantial conformance
with the final approved engineering plans by having denoted thereon:



         (a)   The location of the principal structures located
on the site; and



         (b)   The grade elevations designed for the site as
shown on the final approved engineering plans.



      (4)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   TYPE 1 LOTS.  Any lot which is adjacent to a flood route or a drainage
swale, which transports water runoff to or from a detention facility, which
drains from the rear of the lot to the front of the lot, which is adjacent to
a storm water facility, floodplain or floodway, or which is determined by the
City Engineer to present a substantial likelihood of flooding, erosion or
damage to other property in the vicinity if not graded in accordance with
generally accepted engineering principles.



   TYPE 2 LOTS.  Any lot other than a Type 1 lot.



      (5)   Proof of compliance. No occupancy permit shall be issued
for any structure unless the survey or statement required shows full
compliance with the intent of the final engineering plans approved for the
construction site. The applicant shall be responsible for procuring and
paying for any required topographical survey and professional registered
engineer’s statement.



   (D)   Temporary occupancy; merchandising/ employee training.



      (1)   A temporary occupancy permit may be issued in accordance
with the provisions of this division for the specific purposes of allowing
proposed occupants to stock shelves, train employees and move in furniture
needed to conduct business. The temporary permit shall under no circumstances
be construed to allow occupancy of the structure by the general public.



      (2)   A temporary occupancy permit for merchandising or
training may be issued by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee
only after approval of the appropriate fire/life safety requirements,
including, without limitation, sprinkler systems, alarm systems, and exit
requirements, and the Chief Building Official has determined that any
non-fire/life safety deficiencies remaining with the structure can be
corrected within 15 days of the date of issuance of this permit.



      (3)   A temporary occupancy permit for merchandising or
training shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 days, at which time the
applicant must either obtain a final occupancy permit or immediately cease
any activities within the building conducted pursuant to the permit. The
permit can be renewed for one additional period of 15 days, if the Building
Commissioner or his or her designee agrees that weather or other
uncontrollable circumstances prohibited the completion of the remaining
deficiencies.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.011  PERMITS ON FILE WITH TOWNSHIP ASSESSOR.



   (A)   The Building Department shall file copies of all building
permits with the Township Assessor of the township in which the proposed
construction is to be located within 30 days of the issuance thereof. The
Building Department shall keep on file a receipt from the Township Assessor
of the township in which the proposed construction is to be located showing
that the building permit has been filed and that the property is subject to
increased assessment.



   (B)   The Building Department shall file copies of all occupancy
permits with the appropriate Township Assessor within 30 days of the issuance
thereof.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.012  FEES AND DEPOSITS.



   The fees for building and plan review pursuant to this subchapter shall
be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.013  DAMAGE TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   The owner of any lot or parcel of real estate upon which a building or
structure is to be constructed shall, as a condition to issuance of a
building or occupancy permit in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall perform preconstruction videotaping and be strictly liable
for the cost of repairing, replacing or restoring any public improvement,
including, but not limited to, public sidewalks, sewers, water mains, curbs
or gutters, streetlights and related improvements, which are located on the
lot or parcel of property or within a dedicated right-of-way abutting the
property but only from the edge of the lot or parcel to the edge of pavement
of the abutting roadway and which are damaged or destroyed after the issuance
of a building permit for the property and before the issuance of a final
occupancy permit.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.014  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any building or structure
without complying with the regulations set forth in this title and/or in
violation of the terms of the permit for the building or structure.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.015  PLAT OF SURVEY.



   (A)   A plat of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor shall
be filed after the footings and the foundation wall have been poured. The
plat of survey shall locate and spot the foundation wall.



   (B)   No construction shall be continued on any building until the
Building Department approves the location of the proposed structure as being
in conformance with all setback requirements provided for in the zoning
regulations of this code.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.016  RAZING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Permit required. No building or structure, or major portion of
any building or structure, located in the city shall be razed without a
permit therefore having been obtained from the Building Commissioner or his
or her designee.



   (B)   Application for permit; fee. Application for the permit shall
be made in writing to the Building Commissioner or his or her designee upon a
form provided by the Building Commissioner. The applicant shall state on the
application, in addition to all other information required, the portion or
portions of any street, alley or other public place, if any, that will be
required to be closed to public use while the razing work is being done if
any closing is required. If any closing is required, no permit shall be
issued without the approval of the Building Commissioner or his or her
designee and notice of the proposed street closing is given to the City
Administrator.



   (C)   Fee.  The applicant shall pay a permit fee determined by the
Building Commissioner or his or her designee as being sufficient to pay the
costs of necessary and appropriate services provided by city departments to
ensure the safe and orderly demolition of buildings, including, but not
limited to, the cost of closing a portion of any public street, alley or
place to traffic and the posting of a satisfactory bond for public liability
and damages to city property.



   (D)   Requirements of applicant.



      (1)   Guarding site. The applicant shall take or cause to be
taken all steps necessary to properly guard the work and the site of the
work, to protect the public from damage of or injury to property or persons.



      (2)   Disconnection of utilities. The Building Commissioner or
his or her designee shall require the applicant to furnish to the Building
Commissioner written statements by the persons having authority to make the
statements, respectively, that the electric, water, sanitary sewer and gas
services to the building or structure have been properly disconnected.



      (3)   Insurance. The applicant shall have in force and effect
insurance coverage in the amount of not less than the sum determined by the
Building Commissioner or his or her designee, taking into consideration the
size, location and type of construction of the building or structure to be
razed; the method that will be used for the razing and moving of materials
from the site, to protect the city and the public generally for payment in
full for all damages sustained by the city or any person, arising out of
injury to property or persons, without any deduction whatever under any
provisions contained in the policy of insurance. Proof of the insurance shall
be filed with the Building Commissioner or his or her designee before
issuance of the permit.



      (4)   Notice to adjacent property owners. Except where damage
to a structure results from fire or storm, upon filing an application for
demolition of any principal residential structure on any lot or parcel within
the city, the applicant shall notify the owners of the surrounding properties
in accordance with this division (D)(4).



         (a)   The applicant shall give written notice to the
owners of record, as determined by the records of the local real estate tax
collector, for all lots lying within 250 feet of the subject property,
exclusive of public rights-of-way.



            1.   The written notices shall be properly
addressed, delivered personally or sent by first class, postage prepaid, U.S.
mail.



            2.   All required written notices shall include
the number assigned to the application; the place, the nature and the purpose
of the demolition, the date and time of the scheduled demolition; the common
address or location of the subject property; the name and address of the
applicant and owner of the subject property; and the office address of the
Building Department where full information concerning the application,
including a legal description, may be obtained.



            3.   All required written notices shall be
personally served or postmarked not more than 15 days nor less than seven
days in advance of a scheduled demolition.



         (b)   The applicant shall file a sworn affidavit
including copies of the notices with the City Clerk, showing the names and
addresses of the persons to whom the written notices have been sent. The
affidavit shall create a presumption that the notices were properly given.



         (c)   The applicant shall also request the temporary
license or permission from those owners of the properties immediately
adjacent to the site where the demolition will take place. The license shall
grant authority to enter onto those adjacent properties or structures which
may potentially be affected by the proposed demolition, both before the
demolition work begins and at reasonable intervals during the work, to
inspect and preserve the adjacent lots, buildings or structures from damage.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.017  PAVED AREAS.



   (A)   Drainage requirement. Every motor vehicle driveway area, motor
vehicle parking area, patio or other area designed for recreational or
similar use, hereafter constructed upon private property, which is
constructed and surfaced with materials rendering the same practically
impervious to surface waters, shall be properly and sufficiently graded and
drained so as to prevent causing an increased burden upon adjoining property
by reason of runoff water.



   (B)   Plans required. No area containing an excess of 1,000 square
feet shall be constructed without filing with the Building Commissioner or
his or her designee complete detailed plans and specifications by a licensed
professional engineer showing the location thereof upon the lot or tract,
dimensions, materials to be used, the finished surface grade and the surface
water drainage facilities that will be provided. Construction of the
improvement shall not be commenced without the prior approval of the plans
and specifications of the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner or
his or her designee shall not approve the plans and specifications without
the prior approval thereof by the City Engineer as to the data and
information shown on the plans and specifications pertaining to the drainage
of surface water being sufficient when constructed.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.018  SIDEWALK REQUIRED.



   (A)   Unless designated as a “no build” area in the
comprehensive sidewalk policy, construction of a sidewalk, or payment of a
fee in lieu of the construction as provided herein, shall be required for the
construction of any new building or any addition to an existing building that
increases the square footage of the building by greater than 50%. Except as
provided in this section, sidewalks shall be constructed whenever 30% or more
of the total number of lots on the block fronting upon the same street side
within that property’s subdivision or development have sidewalks. For
purposes of this section, BLOCK is defined as a geographic area within the
city enclosed by streets or by a combination of streets, or by other
demarcations, including, but not limited to, public parks, cemeteries,
subdivision boundaries and railroad rights-of-way. Where there are
cul-de-sacs, a block shall include all lots having an address facing the
cul-de-sac and bounded by the next cross street. When required as provided
herein, sidewalks shall be constructed upon the public street or streets
adjacent to the land described in the building permit application, according
to the specifications required by the city applicable thereto. The location
of the sidewalk shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer or his or
her designee.



   (B)   Except as provided in this section, whenever construction of a
sidewalk is not required, in whole or part, a fee in lieu of construction of
sidewalks shall be paid. The fee shall be established by the City Engineer
based upon estimated cost of construction of the sidewalk at the time of
permit issuance. This fee shall be paid before permit issuance. Fees paid
shall be utilized as authorized by the City Council for construction and
maintenance of sidewalks, bike paths and other non-motorized vehicle paths
within the city.



   (C)   The City Engineer may direct that a sidewalk be constructed
for any property described in division (A) of this section whenever the City
Engineer determines that the sidewalk is needed to connect other existing
sidewalk segments, or is otherwise necessary pursuant to the city’s
sidewalk plans for the affected area. In that case, no fee in lieu of
construction shall be required to the extent sidewalks are constructed. The
City Engineer may direct that a sidewalk not be constructed for any property
described in division (A) of this section whenever the City Engineer
determines that the sidewalk is not needed to connect other existing sidewalk
segments, or is otherwise contrary to the city’s sidewalk plans for the
affected area. In such case, a fee in lieu of construction shall be required
to the extent sidewalks are not constructed.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.019  INDIVIDUAL LOT GRADING PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A detailed grading plan shall be submitted to the city for any
lot within a subdivision without a master grading plan prior to the issuance
of a building permit for a new home or addition. The detailed grading plan
shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered to practice
in the State of Illinois. The plan shall show the site plan requirements on
file at the Building Department.



   (B)   The detailed grading plan shall comply with the following.



      (1)   Unless easements are granted for work on adjacent
property, the new grading must meet the existing grades at the side and rear
property lines.



      (2)   There shall be a drainage swale along the side yard that
has a slope of at least 1½%. A SWALE is defined as a shallow ditch with
slide slopes formed by the grading away from the building foundation. If a
drainage swale is not present, one must be constructed as part of the
engineering improvements for the lot. Unless permission is granted by an
adjacent property owner, the new swale shall be built entirely on the lot for
which there has been an application for a building permit.



      (3)   All yards shall have a design drainage pattern with a
minimum slope of 1½%.



      (4)   If the minimum slope requirements cannot be met for
yards, drainage inlets shall be constructed. The inlet(s) shall be connected
to a public storm sewer or outlet to a public drainage facility.



   (C)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a new single-
or two-family home or large room addition, as defined in § 151.002(B), the
individual lot grading plan shall show the following requirements unless
otherwise waived by the City Engineer:



      (1)   There shall be dedicated public utility and drainage
easements of not less than ten feet in width for poles, wires, conduits,
storm or sanitary sewers, gas, cable TV, water or other utility pipes or
lines along the rear of each lot, and five feet  alongside one interior side
lot line where necessary. The easements shall be laid out so that a proper
continuity may be developed for the utilities from lot to lot and block to
block.



      (2)   Subject to the provisions of the city’s driveway
regulations, driveways may be permitted to encroach within any easement
located within any front or corner side yard building setback area parallel
to the public right-of-way or public street.



      (3)   No buildings, driveways or structures shall be
constructed within any interior side or rear lot line easements.



      (4)   At the city’s discretion, encroachments into a
dedicated public utility or any other easement granted to the city may be
permitted for the construction of buildings, driveways or structures
including brick, stone or masonry walls or fences; or structures which are
wired for electricity, where:



         (a)   A written encroachment agreement approved by the
City Administrator is executed by the owner of the property; and/or



         (b)   A building permit for the proposed construction is
issued by the city’s Building Department. Those permits shall be issued
only after approval of complete plans for the construction by the Department
of Public Works.



      (5)   At the city’s discretion, encroachments into a
dedicated public utility or any other easement granted to the city may be
permitted for the construction and installation of a fence that provides
clearance in the direction of flow for drainage of the width of the easement
in the amount of 50% opaque to the height of 12 inches or 100% at a height of
six inches, provided a fence permit for the proposed construction is issued
and all required fees are paid to the city. Where any easement is designated
for drainage or storm water purposes, a fence permit shall be issued only
after approval by the Building Department.



      (6)   Any encroachment permitted by this section shall not be
construed as a waiver of any of the other requirements of this code,
including, without limitation, the zoning code, the subdivision regulations
or the building codes.



      (7)   Under no circumstances shall the city be liable to any
property owner or third party for any damage to real or personal property or
personal injury that may result from or arise out of the construction of any
encroachment permitted by this section. The permitted encroachments shall be
subject to the conditions that:



         (a)   The encroaching structure shall not abrogate or
nullify the city’s rights and interests in and to the easement of record;



         (b)   The property owners shall retain all of the risks
and liability associated with the encroaching structure on a dedicated public
utility and drainage easement or any other easement granted to the city,
including, without limitation, the risk that in an emergency the city may
remove the encroaching structure without any prior notice to the property
owners;



         (c)   The property owners shall be solely responsible
for the city’s cost to remove the encroaching structure to gain access to
any of its public utilities in the easement for any purpose;



         (d)   The city shall not be responsible for any costs
incurred by the property owner to repair or replace the encroaching structure
if it is damaged or destroyed by the city for public utility purposes; and



         (e)   The property owners shall hold harmless, indemnify
and defend the city from and against any and all liability, claims, demands
and causes of action arising out of or related to any loss or injury, death,
or loss or damage to property resulting from the city’s use of any easement
for any of its intended purposes or the property owner’s construction of or
use of the encroaching structure.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-02-0329O, passed
2-22-2011)



§ 151.020  SAFETY AND WORK REQUIREMENTS.



   The following safety and work requirements shall apply whenever a
razing permit or a large room addition permit (as defined in § 151.002(B))
is required as set forth in this title, or whenever there is new construction
where 80% of the lots within a 90- foot radius of the limits of the subject
property are improved with dwelling units:



   (A)   Fencing. The applicant shall install a six foot chain link
fence around the perimeter of either the excavation, the structure under
construction, or the entire construction area in a location and manner
approved by the development services team. The fencing shall be installed
before commencement of any work on the subject property pursuant to any
permit issued by the city.



   (B)   Litter control and cleanup. Litter and debris at the subject
property shall be controlled within an enclosed container at all times. The
applicant shall designate a person as having responsibility to assure
compliance with this provision. The permit shall specify the location of the
container as approved by the development services team.



   (C)   Construction traffic and parking management. All construction
parking shall be in compliance with this code in addition to the requirements
of this section. The applicant shall acknowledge receipt of these regulations
by signing and dating a copy to be kept on file. Prior to and as a condition
of the issuance of a building permit, the builder or owner shall provide the
city a written summary of a proposed parking plan that will be reviewed and
approved by the city. The parking plan shall provide adequate flow of
traffic, minimize disruption to existing homeowners to the extent reasonably
possible and shall take into account any other construction projects within a
two-block area. Once approved, the parking plan shall be included in the
notice to adjacent property owners, and a copy shall be posted on the
construction site so that the information can be made available to
contractors and individuals associated with the permit and the construction
activity. The builder and/or owner shall be responsible for compliance with
the approved parking plan and shall be subject to the penalties provided in
§ 151.999 for violations of the parking plan.



   (D)   Construction sanitation facilities. A minimum of one portable
toilet shall be provided at the subject property. The permit shall specify
the location of any portable toilet as approved by the development services
team. The portable toilet shall be installed before commencement of any work
on the subject property pursuant to any permit issued by the city and shall
remain on site for the duration of the project through final inspection.
Toilet facilities must be serviced regularly.



   (E)   Construction hours. It shall be unlawful to allow or permit
any building or construction operations (including construction-related
noises, such as the delivery of equipment or material or the operation of
tools, machinery, or apparatus) on private property from the hours of 7:00
p.m. to 7:00a.m. Monday thru Friday, and 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. Saturday and
Sunday.



   (F)   Construction site signage. The permit applicant shall post a
sign in a visible location on the subject property before commencement of any
work on the subject property pursuant to any permit issued by the city. The
sign must be purchased from the city and shall:



      (1)   Be a minimum size of three feet by four feet.



      (2)   Include a title (for example, “Construction Site
Regulations”); address of the subject property, date of demolition, the
applicable permit numbers; general construction site regulations, including
construction hours, litter control and cleanup regulations, construction
parking regulations, a statement indicating penalties (as listed in division
(G) of this section); petitioner and city contact information.



      (3)   Include lettering to a minimum of four inches high in
the title, and a minimum of two inches high for all other lettering.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.021  EXTERIOR WALL CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   A minimum of 50% of the exterior wall construction for all
multiple-family dwellings, and single-family attached dwellings, two-family
dwellings and any other principal building or structures containing the
residential dwelling units (as those terms are defined in this code) shall be
constructed of solid masonry, face brick, manufactured concrete stone veneer
(1½-inch average thickness) set individually into mortar bed, or other
masonry products as approved by the City Council. In no instance shall EIFS,
corrugated or channeled metal, unfinished/smooth face concrete block, be
construed as sufficient material to comply with this section.



   (B)   The 50% coverage requirement shall be calculated by measuring
all facades of the structure, excluding the openings for windows and doors,
and dividing that figure by two. The builder of the structure shall be
authorized to satisfy the 50% requirement by placing the masonry or brick on
one or more facades of the structure, provided that the facade that faces the
public street or private road that services the structure shall have a
minimum of 50% ofthat facade constructed of solid masonry, face brick,
manufactured concrete stone veneer (1½-inch average thickness), or other
masonry products approved by the City Council. The requirements of this
section shall apply to new multiple-family dwellings, single-family attached
dwellings, two-family dwellings, and any other building or structures
containing residential dwelling units, or to additions that comprise more
than 50% of the total gross square footage of the existing building or
structure.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



§ 151.022  RETAINING WALLS.



   (A)   General. Walls built to retain the lateral pressure of earth
or water or other superimposed loads shall be designed and constructed of
approved masonry, reinforced concrete, steel sheet piling or other approved
materials within the allowable stresses specified in this code.



   (B)   Design. Retaining walls shall be designed to resist the
pressure of retained material, including both dead and live load surcharges
to which the walls are subjected, and to insure stability against
overturning, sliding, excessive foundation pressure and water uplift.



   (C)   Hydrostatic pressure. Unless drainage is provided the
hydrostatic head of the water pressure shall be assumed to be equal to the
height of the wall.



   (D)   Coping. All masonry retaining walls, other than reinforced
concrete walls, shall be protected with an approved coping.



(Ord. 2008-02-0158O, passed 3-11-2008)



NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES AND OTHER RELATED ACTIVITIES;
CONSTRUCTION



§ 151.035  FEES AND DEPOSITS.



   The fees for residential construction, fees for major repairs or
remodeling, additional fees and miscellaneous fees regarding same pursuant to
this subchapter shall be established by the City Council from time to time by
resolution.



(Ord. 2011-02-033O, passed 2-22-2011)



NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES AND OTHER RELATED ACTIVITIES;
CONSTRUCTION



§ 151.050  FEES AND DEPOSITS.



   The fees for nonresidential construction, fees for major repairs or
remodeling, additional fees and miscellaneous fees regarding same pursuant to
this subchapter shall be established by the City Council from time to time by
resolution.



(Ord. 2011-02-033O, passed 2-22-2011)



UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY; CONSTRUCTION



§ 151.065  PREAMBLES.



   The facts and statements contained in the preambles to this subchapter
are found to be true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.066  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish
policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within
the city’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
city rights-of-way and the city as a whole.



   (B)   Intent. In enacting this subchapter, the city intends to
exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular,
the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including
without limitation:



      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions
and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations
of the city’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in
rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage
to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the city’s residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this subchapter. This subchapter applies
to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.



   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the city
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into an
agreement may request that the city enter into an agreement. In an agreement,
the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
subchapter.



   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.



      (1)   Utilities. In the event that a utility provider has
entered into a franchise, license or similar agreement with the city, the
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of the agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this subchapter
and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of the franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of the
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This subchapter supersedes all
chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of the conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this subchapter, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this subchapter to the maximum extent possible without
violating federal or state laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The city shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this subchapter and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this subchapter when the
city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of
the city to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed
10-24-2017)



§ 151.067 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in
92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO.  The American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI.  The American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT.  A person applying for a permit under this subchapter.



   ASTM.  The American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL.  The methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING.  To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CABLE OPERATOR.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).



   CABLE SERVICE.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).



   CABLE SYSTEM.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).



   CARRIER PIPE.  The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING.  A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE.  The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of
the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.



   COATING.  Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe
for protection against external corrosion.



   CONDUCTOR.  Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT.  A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT.  The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER.  The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY.  A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines,
cable, fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes located either above or
below ground that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.  The City Director of Public Works or his or
her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.  For the purposes of this subchapter, any
work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on
the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. The work may include,
without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or
structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that
does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY.  Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT.  Provision of a protective casing.



   ENGINEER.  The City Engineer or his or her designee.



   EQUIPMENT.  Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION.  The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE.  Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.



   FACILITY.  All structures, devices, objects and materials (including,
but not limited to, track and rails, wires, lines, ducts, fiber optic cable,
antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles,
conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under
this subchapter. For purposes of this subchapter, the term FACILITY shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the city.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY.  A facility that is not a crossing facility or
a parallel facility, such as an antenna, pole, transformer, pump or meter
station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD.  Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.



   GRANTEE. A person who is granted a permit under the provisions of this
subchapter.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is
determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY.  A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   HIGHWAY CODE.  The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§
1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   HOLDER.  A person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   ICC.  Illinois Commerce Commission.



   IDOT.  Illinois Department of Transportation.



   JACKING.  Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   JETTING.  Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure
to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE.  The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E.  The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION.  The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY.  The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY.  A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines,
cable, fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes either above or below
ground, that generally are located parallel or longitudinal to the centerline
of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY.  Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT.  The removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE.  That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 151.069 and 151.070 of this subchapter.



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES.  Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PRACTICABLE.  That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE.  The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PROMPT.  That which is done within a period of time specified by the
city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY.  A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION.  The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  Any street, alley, other land or
waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall
not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically
described in the previous two sentences and shall not include city buildings,
fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the right-of way.



   ROADWAY.  That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL.  The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one corporation to another corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and
not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND.  That amount of security required pursuant to §
151.075.



   SHOULDER.  A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT.  A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. PRIVATE
LINE means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one
or more other specified locations. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on
the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. TELE- COMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by the provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
§§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming
services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an
open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER.  Every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH.  A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of
an underground facility.



   UTILITY.  Any individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this subchapter, within the right-of-way. The term includes any
public utility defined in the Public Utility Act, Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105,
any telecommunications retailer or provider, and any public entity other than
the city.



   VENT.  A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE.  That term as defined in § 21-201 (v) of the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v).



   WATER LINES.  Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING.  Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed
10-24-2017)



§ 151.068 ANNUAL REGISTRATION  REQUIRED.



   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the
utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities
in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each person, and
evidence of insurance as required in § 151.073 of this subchapter, in the
form of a certificate of insurance.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.069 PERMIT REQUIRED;  APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
subchapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within any city right-of-way which changes the location of the facility, adds
a new facility, disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this subchapter), or
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a
permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
subchapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’  premises where there will be no
disruption of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to
this subchapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be
filed in the number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
“proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of the
materials accordingly.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than
the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest
in the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and email addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of the description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
city:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
city and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the city finds that
additional information or assurances are needed.



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that the drawings, plans
and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 151.073 of this
subchapter;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in
§ 151.075 of this subchapter;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter (§ 151.086); and



      (10)   Additional information as may be reasonably required by
the city.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to
the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service
or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to
obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District (other local or state entities with jurisdiction),
have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within
30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $50. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.070  ACTION ON PERMIT  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   City review of permit applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Director of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject
the application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of
Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this subchapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as
soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant
to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Additional city review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS Ch.
220, Act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that
it intends to commence work governed by this subchapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. The notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten days prior to the
commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior
to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public
Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility
may be placed, used and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to
provide the specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either ten days after service of notice to the city by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit
under this subchapter.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the city,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 151.069 of this subchapter
the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. The application shall be subject to
the requirements of division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the
utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in
the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and email addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of the description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
city:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
city and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the city finds that
additional information or assurances are needed.



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that the drawings, plans
and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 151.073;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in
§ 151.075;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter (§ 151.086); and



      (10)   Additional information as may be reasonably required by
the city.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to
the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service
or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to
obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District (other local or state entities with jurisdiction),
have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire
permit application review period and the construction period authorized by
the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application
shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after
the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $50. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any telecommunications
retailer that is paving the municipal telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed
10-24-2017)



§ 151.071  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest
created. A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this subchapter on city rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be
valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually
begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this subchapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with
city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting
shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will
occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility
facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of
other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and
access and egress by adjacent property owners.



   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by
the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements
of the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.072  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   (A)   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities
deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans,
drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the
permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within
90 days after the completion of the permitted work.



   (B)   The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify
where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations
approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from
the requirements of this subchapter, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with § 151.086 of this subchapter.



   (C)   If the city denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.073  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming
the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in divisions
(A)(1)(a) and (b) below:



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as “X,” “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed
operations coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or
death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability.



         (b)    Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;



         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and



         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



      (2)   If the utility is not providing the insurance to protect
the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then the contractors
and subcontractors shall comply with this section.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following form basis so that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover the loss.



   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the city within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement:



“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the
city, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.”



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the city of the notice,
and in no event later than ten days prior to the cancellation, the utility
shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance
policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of
this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of
the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under division (A), or the requirements of division (B),
(C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability
to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
division (A) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a
“private self insurer” under the Workers Compensation Act.



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s
liability. The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for
any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. All
insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or
better and of a class size “X” or higher by A. M. Best Company.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.074  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend indemnify and hold the city and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether the acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this subchapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the
utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this subchapter by the
city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.075  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this subchapter;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the city
occasioned by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant
to this subchapter; and



      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this subchapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this subchapter to perform that the city
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
city from the permittee pursuant to this subchapter or any other applicable
law.



   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the
city in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant
to this division shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the city and the permittee;



      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and



      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and
within the state at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works,
and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform the
restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with each
phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related
group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which
shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The
amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this
division for any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals. The city, upon 14 days’ advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this division, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for the amount within
the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:



      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      (3)   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason
of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or



      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter
that the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in
the Security Fund.



   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice
from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) of this section.



   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by
the city, upon written request for the withdrawal to the city, provided that
any withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance
required in division (C) of this section.



   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the Security Fund, or the portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this subchapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the city to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the city as a result
of the revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of the costs, loss or
damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with
respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the city,
whether reserved by this subchapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no
action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the Security Fund
shall affect any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with
respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.076  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND  REVOCATION.



   (A)   City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter for one or more of the following
reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Noncompliance with this subchapter;



      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of
permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public
health, safety or welfare; or



      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this subchapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the city, the permittee shall have the following options:



         (a)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no
cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof
of the correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or



         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written
proof of the removal to the city within ten days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation.



      (2)   The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown,
extend the time periods provided in this division.



   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) of this section.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this
section, the city or its designee may, at the option of the city: correct the
deficiencies; upon not less than 20-days notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or after not less than 30-days notice to the
permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.077  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.



   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no
less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this subchapter, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
city’s right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.078  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill. Adm. Code § 545);



      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this subchapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in
the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and the
decision shall be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall
state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance
or operation of a facility in the future.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.079  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The city’s minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and this Code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notes the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of the
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant
to § 151.085 of this subchapter, the utility shall provide the notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the city.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.080  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this division.



      (1)   No interference with public ways. No facilities shall be
placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
city’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with use of the
right-of- way by the general public or the operation or maintenance of any of
the city’s facilities, or any other existing facilities. The city may
require any facilities causing such interference to be moved, as determined
by the city engineer.



      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin the right-of-way. Underground telecommunications facilities shall
be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess
capacity exists within such duct or conduit.



      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on the
right-of way.



      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of- way.



      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



      (6)   Facilities to be located underground. All new facilities
shall be located underground unless not technically practicable.



      (7)   Whenever new telecommunication facilities will exhaust
capacity of a right-of-way or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future facilities, a grantee may be required to provide additional ducts,
conduits, manholes and other facilities for non-discriminatory access to
future grantees.



      (8)   No interference with drainage. No facility shall be
placed in any location that interferes with stormwater drainage, storage or
conveyance or blocks overland flow routes.



   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Wires, lines, or cable are located as near as
practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the
right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind
the face of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear
zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of-way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other underground locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (such as, a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
telecommunications wires, lines or cable, the facility shall be located as
near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m)
from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be
located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as
practicable.



   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city
highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as
encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the
roadbed resulting from the installation of the crossing facilities.



      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage
facilities.



      (3)   90-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall
cross at or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable.



      (4)   Overhead power or telecommunication facility. An
overhead power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground power or telecommunication facility. An
underground power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance free service life; and



         (b)   Capacity for the grantee’s foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)   Markers. The city may require the grantee to provide a
marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or telecommunication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall
identify the type of facility, the grantee, and an emergency phone number.
Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations,
(49 C.F.R. § 1 92.707 (1989)).



   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The
city may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way
that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The city may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above-ground facilities may
be installed only if:



      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and the
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   An applicant shall include in its request to accommodate
a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of
the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (H)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property
owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being
traversed.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed
10-24-2017)



§ 151.081  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND  MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits
for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches.
Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).



         (d)   Borings with diameters six  inches or less.
Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either
jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform  Traffic Control Devices. Where
practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway
and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed
to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does
not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
subsection is permitted under § 151.086, the following requirements shall
apply:



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
city.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless the
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the city.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent
pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
city approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted
only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is
continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and
spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance
or repair and cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance
or repair and cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 


Type of Facility

 

Minimum Cover



Electric lines
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Communication, cable or video service lines
 
18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by city)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches (0.8 m)


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular  types of
facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or telecommunication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or
telecommunications facilities within city rights-of-way shall be constructed,
operated and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm.
Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce
Commission) entitled Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines,
and the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or
telecommunication facilities shall use single pole construction and joint use
of poles shall be used unless not practicable. Applicants shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities.



            1. Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing,
provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if the crossing is installed by the use of
“moles,” “whip augers” or other approved method which compress the
earth to make the opening for cable installation or the installation is by
the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.



            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops
placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year,
also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops,
within ten business days after placement.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; or



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation
is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated
in a city-approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192
– Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal
Safety Standards (49 C.F.R. §192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and
regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum



Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer
lines or  drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.



      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one
foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Director of Public
Works. With the approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area.
The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color
to blend with the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be
stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director
of Public Works. When the storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire,
poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the city.



      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility
to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the
discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations
would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare.
These operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when
conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the
right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of
Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility or
telecommunications services.



      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of
construction are those set forth in this code.



   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the
presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city
will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of
identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the city or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically
mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and
holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Utility Facilities
Damage Prevention Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed
10-24-2017) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.082  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and
regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with the local
franchise or other agreement with the city as permitted by law.



   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming
that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations
specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of a
permit, in addition to any other permit required under this subchapter.



      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may
require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (D)   Chemical use.



      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no
utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees,
shrubs or vegetation in the city for any purpose, including the control of
growth, insects or disease.



      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.083  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city,
a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that the removal, relocation, change or
alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance
or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the
city in or upon, the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of the facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject
to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this subchapter; or



      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the
utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify
the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility
within the rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city
within 90 days. Following receipt of the notice the city may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of
Public Works determines that the removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct
the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to
the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.084  CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.



   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Director
of Public Works. The cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period
provided in this section may be extended by the Director of Public Works for
good cause shown.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.085  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the city and at the utility’s expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.



      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible,
notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of
the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the
city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48
hours after an emergency repair.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.086  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the
Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this subchapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Director of Public Works
shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
subchapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Director of Public
Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance
has demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may
require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this subchapter
but which carry out the purposes of this subchapter.



   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made
by the Director of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall
have the right to appeal to the City Council, or other board or commission as
it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to
the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of the order, requirement,
decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration
of the appeal at the Council’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring
at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall
timely decide the appeal.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



§ 151.087  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.088  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
subchapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and the holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



BURIAL OF CABLES



§ 151.100  BURIAL OF CABLES AND PIPES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every contractor, installer or other company or individual who
places any cable, pipe or similar tubing on or across streets or municipal or
private property within the city shall with 72 hours of the placement bury
the cable, pipe or tubing.



   (B)   The burial shall be at a level of 12 inches or more below the
ground surface.



(2000 Code, § 15.26.010)  (Ord. 2479, § 1, passed - - 2000)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



ELEVATORS, DUMBWAITERS, ESCALATORS AND MOVING WALKS



§ 151.115  NATIONAL STANDARD SAFETY CODE.



   (A)   There is adopted by and for the city the American National
Standard Safety Code for Elevators, Dumbwaiters, Escalators and Moving Walks
(ANSI A-17.11978), as amended.



   (B)   The code is made an addendum to and part of the International
Building Code adopted in § 151.001.



(2000 Code, § 15.40.010)



§ 151.116  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of any other code, law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind conflict with the
provisions of the standard adopted in § 151.115, the regulations which are
more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.



(2000 Code, § 15.40.020)



FALLOUT SHELTERS



§ 151.130  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   All fallout shelters shall comply with the minimum
construction standards established by the Emergency Services and Disaster
Administration in the following publications:



      (1)   MP-15 The Family Fallout Shelter, June, 1959 (reprinted
November, 1960); and



      (2)   NP-10-2 National Plan Appendix Series Fallout Shelter
Surveys Guide for Architects and Engineers, May, 1960 (reprinted July, 1960).



   (B)   In addition, minimum construction standards shall be the same
as set forth in the International Building Code adopted in § 151.001.



(2000 Code, § 15.48.010)



§ 151.131  PERMIT FEES.



   The city waives any building permit fee that it may be entitled to
collect under this chapter when application is made to construct a fallout
shelter under this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.48.020)



MULTIPLE-OWNER COMPLEXES



§ 151.145  PREAMBLES.



   The preambles recited in this ordinance codified in this chapter are
expressly incorporated within and made a part of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.010)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 1, passed - - 1999)



§ 151.146  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMON ELEMENTS.  All portions of the multi-ownership, multiple-unit
development property except the individual living units.



   CONDOMINIUM.  Any property submitted or included as part of a
development registered under the Condominium Property Act, ILCS Ch. 765, Act
605, §§ 1 et seq.



   CONVERSION.  Any property which has changed ownership from a
multi-family dwelling structure to individual condominium units.



   CONVERSION/DWELLING UNIT.  Any individual condominium unit created by
the conversion of a multi-family dwelling structure to individual condominium
units.



   COOPERATIVE.  Any multi-unit real estate development operated by means
of a voluntary association, corporation, land trust or otherwise.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any property consisting of three or more parts intended
for any type of independent use whether contained in one or more multiple
structures. It shall include, but not be limited to, any association,
condominium development, cooperative, planned unit development or other
entity which includes as part of the development the maintenance and joint
ownership of common elements.



   OWNERSHIP INTEREST.  Any legal title where an estate or interest
individually or collectively aggregates a fee simple absolute ownership of
the unit.  OWNERSHIP INTEREST shall include shareholders, holders of
beneficial interest in land trusts, as well as holders of other common
ownership interests. Ownership shall not include any individual or entity
whose interest is as mortgagee or holder of a security interest.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.030)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 3, passed - -1999; Ord. 2603, §
1, passed - -2002)



§ 151.147  MULTIPLE OWNERSHIP/MULTIPLE UNIT INSPECTION REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   There is established an Inspection Review Board.



   (B)   The Board shall consist of three members, who shall be the
City Administrator or his or her designee, the Superintendent of Public Works
and the Fire Chief.



   (C)   No official business shall be transacted by the Board unless a
quorum of members is present. The Board is empowered to enact its rules of
procedures.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.020)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 2, passed - -1999)



§ 151.148  REGISTRATION/CONVERSION OF STRUCTURES CONSTRUCTED PRIOR TO 1996.



   All multi-family rental dwelling structures intended to be converted to
condominium units shall be registered with the Building Department.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.035)  (Ord. 2603, § 2, passed - -2002)



§ 151.149  MULTIPLE OWNERSHIP/MULTIPLE UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGISTRATION
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No multiple-ownership/multiple unit development shall be in
compliance with city ordinances unless the development holds and maintains a
current, unrevoked certificate of registration issued by the city in its name
for the specifically named development.



   (B)   Every certificate of registration shall be issued for a period
of one year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be
renewed for successive annual periods.



   (C)   (1)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or
renewed unless the completed application form is accompanied by payment of an
annual registration fee. The annual registration fee for an operating license
for multi-family dwellings shall be $5 per dwelling unit.



      (2)   The annual registration shall be due by May 31. If not
paid by May 31 of each year, a late charge of $5 per unit shall be imposed.



      (3)   In the event that all registration and any late fees are
not fully paid by the end of June 30, the Building Commissioner shall suspend
the certificate(s) of occupancy until all payments are fully made.



      (4)   This provision shall become effective for the
registration year 2000.



   (D)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to investigate and to
issue new certificates of registration upon application therefor or renewal
therefor, in the name of the development. No certificate shall be issued
unless the development for which the certificate is sought is found, after
inspection by the Building Commissioner or his or designee, to meet all
requirements of these codified ordinances and of applicable rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. Each applicant shall be notified by
the Building Commissioner in advance of the date and time of the inspection.



   (E)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to inspect the common
elements of the development. Nothing is intended to nor grants the power to
the Building Commissioner to inspect any individual living unit.



   (F)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed
unless the completed application is accompanied by payment of an annual
registration fee. The annual registration fee for an operating license for a
development shall be $5 per dwelling unit.



   (G)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed for
an application unless the applicant has first designated an agent for the
receipt of service of complaints for violations of any of the provisions of
these codified ordinances and for service of process pursuant thereto. The
designation shall be made in writing and shall accompany each application
form.



   (H)   An application for renewal of a certificate of registration
shall be made 30 days prior to the expiration of the present certificate.



   (I)   Each certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
within the common ways of the development. Every person holding a certificate
shall give notice in writing to the Building Commissioner within five days
after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any
development. The notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the control of the development.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.040)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 4, passed - -1999; Ord. 2411, §
2, passed - -1999; Ord. 2414, § 2, passed - -1999; Ord. 2423, § 2, passed -
-1999;



Ord. 2603, § 3, passed - -2002)



§ 151.150  DWELLING UNIT REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No dwelling conversion unit in a converted structure built
prior to 1996 shall be in compliance unless the unit holds and maintains a
current unrevoked certificate of registration issued by the city in the name
of the current owner.



   (B)   Every certificate of registration shall be issued for a period
of one year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be
renewed for successive annual periods.



   (C)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed
unless the completed application form is accompanied by payment of an annual
registration fee. The annual registration fee shall be $5.



   (D)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to investigate and to
issue new certificates of registration upon application therefor or renewal
therefor, in the name of the owner. No certificate shall be issued unless the
dwelling unit for which the certificate is sought is found, after inspection
by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee, to meet all requirements
of these codified ordinances and of applicable rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. Each applicant shall be notified by the
Building Commissioner in advance of the date and time of the inspection.



   (E)   An application for renewal of a certificate of registration
shall be made 30 days prior to the expiration of the present certificate.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.045)  (Ord. 2603, § 4, passed - -2002)



§ 151.151  ADDITIONAL INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner is authorized to inspect the common
elements of any development to determine whether the development remains in
full compliance with city ordinances.



   (B)   If upon inspection the Building Commissioner determines the
development is not in full compliance with city ordinances, the Building
Commissioner may proceed with the suspension or revocation of the certificate
of registration as outlined in § 151.152.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.050)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 5, passed - -1999)



§ 151.152  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Whenever, upon inspection of a development or
conversion/dwelling unit for initial registration or renewal of a certificate
of registration, the Building Commissioner finds that conditions or practices
exist which are in violation of this subchapter, or of any applicable
provision of these codified ordinances or an applicable rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant thereto, the Building Commissioner shall serve the
designated agent or owner of the dwelling unit with notice of the violation.
The notice shall state that unless the violation cited is corrected within
not less than five days, except for emergency situations, the certificate of
registration may be suspended.



   (B)   At the end of the time, the Building Commissioner has allowed
for correction of any violation cited, the Building Commissioner or his or
her duly authorized designee shall reinspect the development or
conversion/dwelling unit and, if he or she determines that the violation has
not been corrected, he or she may issue an order suspending the certificate.
The order shall take effect five days following service upon the designated
agent or owner of the dwelling unit unless, in the interim, the development
or unit owner requests, in writing, a hearing.



   (C)   Any person whose certificate of registration is subject to
suspension pursuant to a suspension order shall be entitled to a hearing on
the suspension action by filing with the City Clerk a written receipt for a
hearing before the Building Inspection Review Board within two business days
following the receipt of the suspension order. Upon receipt of the request, a
hearing shall be scheduled to be held before the Board not more ten business
days thereafter. Upon completion of the hearing, the Board may either:



      (1)   Confirm the suspension;



      (2)   Suspend the suspension and allow additional compliance
time; or



      (3)   Rescind the suspension.



   (D)   If no petition for reconsideration of a suspension order is
filed as provided herein, the suspension order shall remain in effect until
the violation in question has been corrected, as determined by the Building
Commissioner upon inspection of the development or conversion/dwelling unit.



   (E)   If a certificate of registration is suspended, and the
suspension is affirmed after hearing, if any, during the period of suspension
the following apply:



      (1)   The city may seek enforcement of any applicable law; and



      (2)   The city may seek the imposition of penalties as
provided by this code.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.060)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 6, passed - -1999; Ord. 2603, §
5 (part), passed - -2002)



§ 151.153  FAILURE TO REGISTER.



   In the event of a failure by any development or conversion/dwelling
unit to register as required under this chapter, each individual or entity
which possesses an ownership interest in the development or
conversion/dwelling unit shall be responsible for the responsibilities and
penalties as outlined in this subchapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.070)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 7, passed - -1999; Ord. 2603, §
5 (part), passed - -2002)



§ 151.154  GUARANTEES.



   The city does not guarantee the condition of any property which is the
subject matter of this subchapter, and the city is not responsible for any
claim arising out of the subject property or the conditions thereof. The city
does not warrant that all deficiencies are listed in a certificate of housing
inspection and does not warrant anything as to the condition of the property
or the habitability thereof.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.080)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 8, passed - -1999)



RENTAL MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURES



§ 151.165  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING INSPECTION REVIEW BOARD.  The review panel consisting of the
Community Development Director or his or her designee, the Police Chief and
the Fire Chief.



   CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.  The certificate issued to a landlord or
owner by the Community Development Director that demonstrates that the
landlord’s or owner’s multi-family dwelling structure complies with the
standards set forth in this subchapter.



   CITY CODES.  All applicable city building construction, maintenance,
life safety and zoning codes, ordinances, rules and regulations including,
without limitation, all applicable codes adopted and established in this
Title XV.



   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.  The currently appointed Community
Development Director and his or her designee.



   DWELLING UNIT.  An individual dwelling unit in a multi-family dwelling
structure arranged, designed and used as a rental residence or living
quarters by one or more persons.



   LANDLORD.  The person who is in charge of the day to day management of
a multi-family dwelling structure and may include the owner.



   LESSEE.  The person and any person claiming under that person, such as
sub-lessees, who enters into a rental contract for a dwelling unit within a
multi- family dwelling structure.



   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE.  A building containing three or more
dwelling units.



   OWNER.  The person, people or entity who are the legal title holders
of a multi-family dwelling structure or a dwelling unit.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)



§ 151.166  FEES, PENALTIES AND OTHER  CHARGES.



   Unless otherwise provided, all references to fees, penalties and other
charges in this subchapter are those established from time to time by the
city and a schedule of all current fees, penalties and other charges,
including copies, is on file with the Community Development Department at all
times.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.167  CERTIFICATE OF HOUSING INSPECTION PREREQUISITE TO OPERATION,
LEASE OR SALE; TERM.



   (A)   No multi-family dwelling structure shall be operated as rental
housing unless the owner or landlord of the structure applies for and obtains
a current and enforceable certificate of registration issued by the Community
Development Director. The certificate of registration will be issued in the
name of the owner and landlord for the specifically identified multi-family
dwelling structure.



   (B)   No owner or landlord of a multi-family dwelling structure will
contract for the sale of the structure, or lease a dwelling unit, without
having first provided the buyer or lessee with a current and enforceable
certificate of registration for the property made within one month prior to
the date of the conveyance of the structure or lease of a dwelling unit.



   (C)   Every certificate of registration shall be issued for a period
of one year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be
renewed for successive one-year periods.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)



§ 151.168  APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR  CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   All applications for a certificate of housing inspection shall
be made on forms prescribed by the Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director will issue a certificate of registration
within 14 business days after an inspection of the multi-family dwelling
structure.



   (B)   The owner’s or landlord’s consent to the inspection will
be given by the owner’s or landlord’s filing of an application for a
certificate of registration together with the applicable inspection fee. The
Community Development Department will inspect the multi-family dwelling
structure for compliance with all applicable city codes.



   (C)   In the event that the Community Development Director finds any
violations of any city codes, he or she will provide the landlord or owner
with an itemized list of the violations. No certificate will be issued unless
and until all violations have been corrected to the satisfaction of the
Community Development Director. In the event a reinspection is necessary to
inspect any cited violations, the landlord or owner will be responsible for
and pay a reinspection fee. Payment of the reinspection fee will be due prior
to the reinspection. No person who is the owner or landlord of a multi-family
dwelling structure will permit the occupancy of any dwelling unit in the
structure until all violations have been remedied and the structure has been
brought into compliance with all city codes.



   (D)   All multi-family dwelling structure owners and landlords must
apply for an initial application for registration within 30 days after the
effective date of this subchapter.



   (E)   (1)   An application for renewal of a certificate of
registration shall be made not less than 45 days prior to the expiration of
the present certificate of registration. No application for a certificate of
registration will be processed unless the application is accompanied by
payment of an annual registration fee. Failure to file a completed
application by December 15 of the year preceding the renewal year may result
in a delay of processing the application and issuance of a certificate of
registration beyond January 1 of the renewal year. In the event that an
application is filed beyond December 15 of the year preceding the renewal
year, the applicant may request in writing that the Community Development
Director issue a provisional certificate of registration pending inspection.
Any request for a provisional certificate of registration will be granted by
the Community Development Director in his or her discretion based upon the
following factors:



         (a)   History of code, ordinance, rule or regulation
enforcement actions taken against the owner or landlord or the subject
multi-family dwelling structure;



         (b)   History of applicant in filing timely renewal
applications; and



         (c)   Any currently known city code, ordinance, rule or
regulation violations, including any outside the scope of this subchapter.



      (2)   Any application completed on or after January 1 of the
renewal year shall be assessed a late fee.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)



§ 151.169  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   No certificate of registration will be issued or renewed for
an applicant unless and until the applicant has first designated an agent for
the receipt of service of complaints for violations of any city code and for
service of process when the applicant is absent from the city for 30 or more
days. The designation must be made in writing and accompany each application
form.



   (B)   A current and enforceable certificate of registration must be
displayed in a conspicuous place within the common areas of the multi-family
dwelling structure at all times. Every owner or landlord holding a
certificate of registration must give notice in writing to the Community
Development Director within ten days of closing on a transaction that conveys
legal title, in whole or in part, to another party. The notice must include
the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of
the multi- family dwelling structure.



   (C)   Certificates of registration in no way warrant or guarantee
the condition of the multi-family dwelling structure or any individual
dwelling unit and the city will have no responsibility for any claim arising
out of the multi-family dwelling structure or the condition thereof. Each
certificate of registration will have the following statement printed on its
face:



      The holder of this certificate of registration acknowledges and
agrees that the city is not and will not be, in any way, liable for any
damages or injuries that may be sustained as a result of the city’s
inspection of these premises and that the city’s inspection and approval of
these premises does not, and will not, in any way, be deemed to insure the
holder of this certificate of registration against any damage or injury of
any kind and at any time.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)



§ 151.170  CONSENT TO INSPECTION; SCOPE OF INSPECTION; LIMITATIONS;
WARRANTS.



   (A)   Any application made under this subchapter shall constitute an
acknowledgment and consent on the part of the applicant to authorize the city
to make inspection of the multi-family dwelling structure in accordance with
the requirements of this subchapter. The landlord or owner will provide
access to the multi-family dwelling structure and dwelling units, as
appropriate, to the Community Development Director during reasonable business
hours. Inspections for renewal certificates of registration must be permitted
by the multi-family dwelling structure owner or landlord prior to December 31
of each preceding year.



   (B)   All inspections made under this subchapter are limited to
inspecting the condition of the multi- family dwelling structure and dwelling
units, as appropriate, to ensure compliance with all city codes.



   (C)   No inspection made under this chapter will be used to
prosecute any other type of city code, ordinance, rule or regulation except
as established in this subchapter, nor will any visual or physical evidence
collected during an inspection made under this subchapter be admissible in or
used for any other city code, ordinance, rule or regulation enforcement
action, including any actions normally undertaken by the Police Department.



   (D)   (1)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect a
multi-family dwelling structure or dwelling unit, as appropriate no entry or
inspection will be made without the city first obtaining a warrant from the
circuit court. The court may consider any of the following factors, along
with other matters as it deems pertinent, in its decision as to whether or
not to issue a warrant:



         (a)   An eyewitness account of a violation;



         (b)   Citizens’ complaints;



         (c)   Tenant complaints;



         (d)   Plain view violations;



         (e)   Violations apparent from city records;



         (f)   Property deterioration;



         (g)   The age of the property;



         (h)   The nature of the alleged violation;



         (i)   Similar properties in the area;



         (j)   Documented violations of similar properties in the
area;



         (k)   The passage of time since the last inspection; and



         (l)   A previous violation on the property.



      (2)   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist
when, based on reasonable legislative and administrative standards, there is
reason to believe that a violation of a city code exists with respect to a
particular multi-family dwelling structure.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)



§ 151.171  BUILDING INSPECTION REVIEW  BOARD.



   There is established a Building Inspection Review Board. The Building
Inspection Review Board will hear all appeals from any actions taken by the
Community Development Director under this subchapter. The Board will consist
of the Community Development Director, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief.
No official business will be transacted by the Board unless a quorum of
members is present. The Board is empowered to enact its own rules of
procedure.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)



§ 151.172  BUILDING INSPECTION REVIEW BOARD PROCEDURES; APPEALS.



   (A)   Whenever the Community Development Director finds that
conditions or practices exist which are in violation of this subchapter, the
Community Development Director shall serve the owner or landlord with written
notice of any violation. The notice will state that unless each violation is
corrected within five days, or a longer time as may be determined by the
Community Development Director, except for emergency situations, the
certificate of registration may be suspended.



   (B)   At the end of the time, the Community Development Director has
allowed for correction of any violation cited, the Community Development
Director, will reinspect the multi-family dwelling structure and, if he or
she determines that any violation has not been corrected, he or she may issue
an order suspending the certificate. The order will take effect five days
following service upon the landlord or owner unless, in the interim, the
landlord or owner requests, in writing, a hearing.



   (C)   (1)   Any person whose certificate of registration for a
multi-family dwelling is subject to a suspension order is entitled to a
hearing on the suspension action by filing with the City Clerk a written
petition for a hearing before the Building Inspection Review Board within two
business days following the receipt of the suspension order. Upon receipt of
a request, a hearing will be scheduled not more than ten business days
thereafter. Upon completion of the hearing, the Board may either:



         (a)   Confirm the suspension;



         (b)   Delay the suspension and allow additional
compliance time; or



         (c)   Rescind the suspension.



      (2)   All final decisions of the Building Review Board will be
made in writing and specify the reasons for its decision. A copy of the final
decision will be delivered to the owner or landlord and placed on file with
the Community Development Director.



   (D)   If no petition for reconsideration of a suspension order is
filed as provided herein, the suspension order will remain in effect until
the violation in question has been corrected, as determined by the Community
Development Director upon inspection of the multi-family dwelling structure
or individual dwelling unit.



   (E)   If a certificate of registration is suspended, and the
suspension is affirmed after hearing:



      (1)   No existing rental agreement can be renewed and no new
rental agreement can be entered into with respect to any rental unit located
within the structure; and



      (2)   The city may seek enforcement of its order in the
circuit court in law or in equity.



   (F)   Any appeal from a final decision of the Building Review Board
will be heard at a regular meeting of the City Council. All appeals from a
decision of the Building Review Board must be made in writing to the
Community Development Director within 15 business days after a final decision
of the Building Review Board. The Community Development Director will
schedule the date of an appeal hearing in front of the City Council not more
than 30 days after the filing of an appeal. At the appeal hearing, the City
Council may:



      (1)   Confirm the suspension;



      (2)   Delay the suspension and allow additional compliance
time; or



      (3)   Rescind the suspension.



(Ord. 2008-02-160O, passed 3-25-2008)



SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTION CHARGE



§ 151.185  PREAMBLES.



   The preambles are expressly incorporated into and made part of this
chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.70.010)  (Ord. 2597, § 1, passed - -2002)



§ 151.186  CONNECTION CHARGE.



   (A)   The city enacts a connection charge upon the enactment and
publication of this chapter.



   (B)   Every dwelling unit constructed after the date of this chapter
within any area of Oak Forest’s municipal boundaries west of a location in
some places called “Boca Rio Drive” and located 6000 west shall be
assessed the amount of $3,000.



   (C)   DWELLING UNIT for purposes of this subchapter is defined as
each condominium unit, townhouse or residence. In the event any single owner,
multiple unit (apartment building) is constructed within the area this
structure shall be assessed $3,000 per rental unit.



   (D)   These amounts shall be paid at the time any building permit is
issued. This connection charge is in addition to any now existing charges and
fees.



(2000 Code, § 15.70.020)  (Ord. 2597, § 2, passed - -2002)



SIGNS



§ 151.200  MOBILE SIGNS.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.  MOBILE SIGN means any electrical sign designed for use
and display out-of-doors, which is mounted on a trailer with a locking
device, or which is otherwise capable of being easily transported or moved
from place to place, or which is a display board similar or comparable to a
portable attraction sign mounted on a light-carrying carriage capable of
being towed.



   (B)   Regulations. Specific regulations for the use of mobile signs
are as follows.



      (1)   No mobile sign shall be permitted to stand upon any
public right-of-way. All mobile signs shall be placed on private property
only.



      (2)   All mobile signs shall meet all city requirements
concerning traffic hazards and line-of-sight hazards.



      (3)   No mobile sign shall be permitted with lights that
flash, blink or vary in intensity.



      (4)   All electrical mobile signs shall comply with all
applicable code provisions.



      (5)   Each mobile sign shall have clearly and permanently
stamped, painted or affixed thereon, in a prominent and visible location, the
name and address of the owner of the sign.



      (6)   When a mobile sign is electrical, the following
regulations, in addition to all other applicable regulations, shall apply
thereto.



         (a)   The total length of the cord between the source of
power and the mobile sign unit shall be not more than 12 feet.



         (b)   The source of power shall be a weatherproof
receptacle of the grounded type. There shall not be any other connector of
any kind between the mobile sign and the source of power.



         (c)   In no case shall the cord be in a position that it
will be walked over or under by pedestrian traffic or be driven over or under
by any form of wheeled vehicle.



         (d)   No mobile sign shall be operated with any power
source unless the mobile sign unit has a U.L. label affixed thereto.



         (e)   Temporary electrical permits shall be required for
all electrical mobile signs.



      (7)   All mobile signs shall be maintained in good working
order and in a structurally safe condition, and the immediate area
surrounding the mobile signs shall be kept free from litter and debris.



      (8)   No person shall place a mobile sign within the city
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the City Clerk. The
application for the permit shall be on a form provided by the City Clerk and
shall contain such information as is required by the City Clerk.



      (9)   All mobile sign permits shall be valid for a period of
30 days and shall have set forth thereon the date of issuance and expiration.



      (10)   No mobile sign shall be allowed which is larger in size
than four feet by eight feet.



      (11)   All mobile signs shall be firmly and solidly
constructed and must be firmly and securely set in place.



      (12)   The fee for a mobile sign permit shall be $30. If a
temporary electrical permit is required, there shall be an additional fee of
$30.



      (13)   No mobile sign shall be permitted to stand at any
address within the city for a period of more than 30 consecutive days in any
year, nor more than a total of 60 days in any year. No mobile sign permit
shall be issued for consecutive 30-day periods without a period of at least
30 days intervening.



   (C)   Violations.



      (1)   Any person who places a mobile sign upon property within
the city without first having obtained and kept in full effect a permit
therefor as required above, shall be required to procure a permit for the
sign and shall pay a fee therefor equal to twice the fee which would
otherwise be charged hereunder.



      (2)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions
of this section shall, in addition to the penalty provided in § 10.99, have
his or her permit revoked, and no new permit shall be allowed to that person
or on that location for one year.



      (3)   When the person responsible for violating the provisions
of this section cannot reasonably be determined, then the person holding the
permit to place the mobile sign at such location shall be deemed to be the
person who is in violation of this section. If, at the time of the violation,
there exists no valid permit for the particular mobile sign in violation,
then the owner of the sign or the owner of the property or business where
these sign is located shall be deemed to be the person who is in violation of
this section.



   (D)   Effective date. As to new signs, this section shall be in full
force and effect from and after its adoption, approval and publication in
pamphlet form of the ordinance codified in this section as provided by law.
As to existing signs which are currently in compliance with existing codes,
this section shall be in full force and effect as of January 1, 1987.



(2000 Code, § 15.76.010)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.201  SIGNS AT THE REAR OF SHOPPING CENTERS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LETTERED SIGN.  A sign whose individual lettering is five inches
high and black on a white or otherwise contrasting background, which sign is
six feet above ground level.



      SHOPPING CENTER.  A multiple commercial structure of two or more
commercial or industrial units.



   (B)   Posting signs. The owner of a shopping center shall post,
permanently affix and maintain on each rear door of each unit of the shopping
center a lettered sign identifying the present occupant and the unit address.
The sign shall also include the designation of the storage or meter room if
the rooms are accessible from the rear door.



   (C)   Declaration of nuisance; injunction. Any violation of this
section is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief
provided by this chapter, the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of such
violation. The application for relief may include a request for a temporary
restraining order, a temporary injunction or a permanent injunction.



(2000 Code, § 15.76.020)



STORAGE OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS



§ 151.215  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND DEPOSIT.



   (A)   The owner of a new building under construction, or of an
existing building that is being repaired or remodeled, may apply to the
Director of Public Works for a permit to allow stone, sand, dirt, building
material, debris or material of any kind to accumulate on city property
adjacent to construction premises for the period required for such work and a
reasonable period after the termination thereof to allow for the removal
thereof.



   (B)   The permit application shall be on a form supplied by the
Director. It shall contain the name of the owner; the name of the contractor;
the street address or other identification of the location of the work; a
brief description of the work to be performed; a brief description of the
debris to be accumulated; the length of time the work will take to be
completed; and a statement that if at the end of the period described in §
151.216(B), the owner has not cleared the debris from the property, the city
may apply the deposit required in division (C) of this section to the cost of
removing the debris. The application may contain such other information as
the Director may reasonably require.



   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit to
secure the promise of the owner that the debris will be removed from the
property as required in this section.



   (D)   The amount of the cash deposit required in division (C) of
this section hereof shall be as follows:



      (1)   Nonresidential main buildings and accessory buildings:
$250;



      (2)   Residential main buildings: $100; and



      (3)   Residential accessory buildings, including garages: $50.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.010)



§ 151.216  TIME LIMITS FOR REMOVAL OF DEBRIS.



   (A)   The owner shall make every effort to remove debris from time
to time during the term of the project. Upon completion or abandonment of the
project, the owner shall remove all debris from the city property adjacent to
the construction premises within five days thereof. For purposes of this
chapter, PROJECT means each main building, and its accessory building, if
any, if the owner or contractor is engaged in constructing more than one main
building or accessory building.



   (B)   Subject to § 151.218, no person shall permit, allow or suffer
debris to be accumulated on any city property adjacent to construction
premises upon which new construction is or has been erected for one year from
the date the permit was issued, or on any city property adjacent to
construction premises upon which existing buildings or accessory buildings
are or have been remodeled or repaired for one and one-half years from the
date the permit was issued.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.020)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.217  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   If, at the end of the periods set forth in § 151.216(B), there remains
debris on city property adjacent to construction premises, the Director of
Public Works shall serve written notice upon the owner of the premises that
he or she will conduct a hearing in which the owner is to show cause why the
city should not apply the cash deposit to the cost of removing the debris
from the property. The notice shall be served not less than ten days prior to
the hearing and shall state the date, time and place of the hearing.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.030)



§ 151.218  EXTENSION OF TIME LIMITS.



   At the hearing provided for in § 151.217, the Director of Public Works
shall take evidence concerning the nature and extent of the debris remaining
and the reasons why the owner cannot remove the same forthwith. If the
Director finds that there is good cause to extend the time for removal of the
debris, he or she may enter a written order in the record of the proceedings
extending the time. In no event may the time be extended for longer than 30
days.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.040)



§ 151.219  USE OF DEPOSIT FOR REMOVAL BY CITY.



   If the Director of Public Works finds that there is no good cause to
extend the time for removal of the debris, he or she shall enter an order
finding the fact and further finding that the cash deposit may be used by the
city to defray the cost of the removal.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.050)



§ 151.220  APPEALS.



   (A)   The owner may appeal the decision of the Director of Public
Works to Council.



   (B)   The appeal shall be made by serving upon the City Clerk
written notice stating the portions of the decision of the Director appealed
from.



   (C)   The notice shall be served upon the City Clerk within two
working days from the date of the decision of the Director.



   (D)   Council shall not consider an appeal unless the notice thereof
is served as required in this section. The decision of Council on the appeal
is final.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.060)



§ 151.221  EXCESS OR DEFICIENCY IN DEPOSIT; LIENS.



   (A)   If, upon completion of the removal of the debris by the city,
the reasonable cost thereof is less than the amount of the cash deposit the
city shall refund to the owner the excess. If, upon completion of the removal
of the debris by the city, the reasonable cost thereof exceeds the amount of
the cash deposit, the owner shall, upon demand, pay to the city the
deficiency.



   (B)   If the owner fails to pay the deficiency, the city may place a
lien upon the premises for the amount of the deficiency and may take other
action as is permitted by law to recover the deficiency from the owner.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.070)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.222  INSPECTION; REFUND OF DEPOSIT.



   Upon completion of the project and removal of debris by the owner, the
owner shall apply to the city for an inspection of the premises. If upon the
inspection, the city finds that all debris has been removed by the owner and
that the city property is free from damage, the city shall refund to the
owner the amount of the cash deposit.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.080)



§ 151.223  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   Deposits made under this subchapter shall in no way limit the liability
of any person for damage to city property.



(2000 Code, § 15.80.090)



SMALL CELL ANTENNAS AND TOWERS



§ 151.300  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section.



   ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. An existing pole or other structure
within the public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is
not a utility pole or a city owned infrastructure.



   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services.



   APPLICANT. Any person or entity submitting an application to install
personal wireless telecommunication facilities or structures to support the
facilities within a public right-of-way.



   CITY OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE. Infrastructure in public rights-of-way
within the boundaries of the city, including, but not limited to,
streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned,
operated or maintained by the city.



   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS). A type of personal wireless
telecommunication facility consisting of a network of spatially separated
antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that
provides wireless service within a geographic area. Generally serves multiple
carriers.



   LANDSCAPE SCREENING. The installation at grade of plantings, shrubbery,
bushes or other foliage intended to screen the base of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility from public view.



   MONOPOLE. A tower composed of a single spire or pole designed and used
to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a utility pole, an
alternative antenna structure, or a city owned infrastructure.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA. An antenna that is part of
a personal wireless telecommunications facility.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT. Equipment, exclusive of
an antenna, that is part of a personal wireless telecommunications facility.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. An antenna, equipment,
and related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless
transmission of voice, data, video streams, images, or other information
including, but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication
service, paging, and Wi-fi antenna service.



   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   SMALL CELL FACILITIES. A personal wireless telecommunications facility
consisting of an antenna and related equipment either installed singly or as
part of a network to provide coverage or enhance capacity in a limited
defined area. Generally single-service provider installation.



   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, and that is not a utility pole, an
alternative antenna structure, or a city owned infrastructure. Except as
otherwise provided for by this subchapter, the requirements for a tower and
associated antenna facilities shall be those required in this subchapter.



   UTILITY POLE. An upright pole designed and used to support electric
cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables,
which are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar
function.



   VARIANCE orVARIATION. A grant of relief by the city, either by the City
Administrator or his or her designee, in the case of an administrative
variance or by the City Council pursuant to the provisions of § 151.086.



   WI-FI ANTENNA. An antenna used to support Wi-Fi broadband internet
access service based on the IEEE 802.11 standard that typically uses
unlicensed spectrum to enable communication between devices.



(Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-2017)



§ 151.301  STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.



   Personal wireless telecommunication facilities will be permitted to be
placed in rights-of-way within the city as attachments to existing utility
poles, alternative antenna structures, towers or city owned infrastructure
subject to the following regulations:



   (A)   Number limitation and co-location. The City Administrator or
his/her designee may regulate the number of personal wireless
telecommunications facilities allowed on each utility pole alternative
antenna structure or unit of city owned infrastructure. No more than two
personal wireless telecommunications facilities will be permitted on a
utility pole, alternative antenna structure or city owned infrastructure of
90 feet or less. No more than three  personal wireless telecommunications
facilities will be permitted on a utility pole, alternative antenna structure
or city owned infrastructure in excess of 90 feet and less than 120 feet.
This subchapter does not preclude or prohibit co-location of personal
wireless telecommunication facilities on towers or monopoles that meet the
requirements as set forth elsewhere in this section or as required by federal
law.



   (B)   Separation and clearance requirements. Personal wireless
telecommunication facilities may be attached to a utility pole, alternative
antenna structure, tower, or city owned infrastructure only where such pole,
structure or infrastructure is located no closer than 100 feet from any
residential building and no closer than 500 feet from any other personal
wireless telecommunications facility in a residentially zoned area and 300
feet from any other personal wireless telecommunication facility in any other
zoning district. A separation or lesser clearance may be allowed by the City
Administrator or his/her designee as an administrative variance to this
chapter when the applicant establishes that the lesser separation or
clearance is necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity in the
applicant's services or to otherwise provide adequate services to customers,
and no other viable alternative location or locations are available.



   (C)   City owned infrastructure. Personal wireless telecommunication
facilities can only be mounted to city owned infrastructure including, but
not limited to, streetlights, traffic signal, towers or buildings, if
authorized by a license or other agreement between the owner and the city.



   (D)   New towers. No new monopole or other tower to support personal
wireless telecommunication facilities is permitted to be installed on
right-of-ways within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city unless the
Mayor and City Council find, based on clear and convincing evidence provided
by the applicant, that locating the personal wireless telecommunications
facilities on a new monopole or tower in the right-of-way is necessary to
close a significant coverage or capacity gap in the applicant's services and
there are no other viable alternatives to the installation of new monopole or
tower, including but not limited to multiple pole collocation.



   (E)   Attachment limitations. No personal wireless telecommunication
antenna or facility within the right-of-way will be attached to a utility
pole, alternative antenna structure, tower or city owned infrastructure
unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   Surface area of antenna. The personal wireless
telecommunication antenna, including antenna panels, whip antennas or
dish-shaped antennas, cannot have a surface area of more than seven cubic
feet in volume.



      (2)   Size of above-ground personal wireless telecommunication
facility. The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and
appurtenances comprising a personal wireless telecommunication facility,
exclusive of the antenna itself, cannot exceed 32 cubic feet.



      (3)   Personal wireless telecommunication equipment. The
operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility must, whenever
practicable, locate the base of the equipment or appurtenances at a height of
no lower than ten feet above grade.



      (4)   Personal wireless telecommunication services equipment
mounted at grade. In the event that the operator of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility proposes to install a facility where equipment or
appurtenances are to be installed at grade, screening must be installed to
minimize the visibility of the facility. Screening must be installed at least
three feet from the equipment installed at-grade and eight feet from a
roadway.



      (5)   Height. The top of the highest point of the antenna
cannot extend more than seven feet above the highest point of the utility
pole, alternative antenna support structure, tower or city owned
infrastructure. If necessary, a replacement or new utility pole, alternative
support structure or city owned infrastructure located within the public
rights-of-way may be not be higher than the average height of all existing
poles located within 500 feet of the replacement or new pole or structure, or
no more than 90 feet in height overall, whichever is less.



      (6)   Color. A personal wireless telecommunication facility,
including all related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that
blends with the surroundings of the pole, structure, tower or infrastructure
on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the
materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must
be covered with an appropriate cover.



      (7)   Antenna panel covering. A personal wireless
telecommunication antenna may include a radome, cap or other antenna panel
covering or shield, to the extent such covering would not result in a larger
or more noticeable facility and, if proposed, such covering must be of a
color that blends with the color of the pole, structure, tower or
infrastructure on which it is mounted.



      (8)   Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the
antenna to the remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with
the electrical code currently in effect. No wiring and cabling serving the
facility will be allowed to interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by
a cable television or video service operator, electric utility or telephone
utility.



      (9)   Grounding. The personal wireless telecommunication
facility must be grounded in accordance with the requirements of the
electrical code currently in effect in the city.



      (10)   Guy wires. No guy or other support wires will be used
in connection with a personal wireless telecommunication facility unless the
facility is to be attached to an existing utility pole, alternative antenna
support structure, tower or city owned infrastructure that incorporated guy
wires prior to the date that an applicant has applied for a permit.



      (11)   Pole extensions. Extensions to utility poles,
alternative support structures, towers and city owned infrastructure may be
allowed only when a personal wireless telecommunications antenna and its
related personal wireless telecommunications equipment cannot be directly
connected to the utility poles, alternative support structures, towers and
city owned infrastructure. No extension may exceed five  feet in height and
any extension must have a degree of strength capable of supporting the
antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling and capable of withstanding
wind forces and ice loads in accordance with the applicable structural
integrity standards as set forth in division (E)(12) below. An extension must
be securely bound to the utility pole, alternative antenna structure, tower
or city owned infrastructure in accordance with applicable engineering
standards for the design and attachment of such extensions.



      (12)   Structural integrity. The personal wireless
telecommunication facility, including the antenna, pole extension and all
related equipment must be designed to withstand a wind force and ice loads in
accordance with applicable standards established in Chapter 25 of the
National Electric Safety Code for utility poles, Rule 250-B and 250-C
standards governing wind, ice, and loading forces on utility poles, in the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in TIA/EIA § 222-G established
by the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and the Electronics
Industry Association (EIA) for steel wireless support structures and the
applicable industry standard for other existing structures. For any facility
attached to city owned infrastructure or, in the discretion of the city, for
a utility pole, tower or alternative antenna structure, the operator of the
facility must provide the city with a structural evaluation of each specific
location containing a recommendation that the proposed installation passes
the standards described above. The evaluation must be prepared by a
professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.



   (F)   Signage. Other than signs required by federal law or
regulations or identification and location markings, installation of signs on
a personal wireless telecommunication facility is prohibited.



   (G)   Screening. If screening is required under division (E)(4)
above, it must be natural landscaping material or a fence subject to the
approval of the city and must comply with all regulations of the city.
Appropriate landscaping must be located and maintained and must provide the
maximum achievable screening, as determined by the city, from view of
adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than nine feet in
height. Landscape screening when permitted in the right-of-way must be
provided with a clearance of three feet in all directions from the facility.
The color of housing for ground-mounted equipment must blend with the
surroundings. For a covered structure, the maximum reasonably achievable
screening must be provided between such facility and the view from adjoining
properties and public or private streets. In lieu of the operator installing
the screening, the city, at its sole discretion, may accept a fee from the
operator of the facility for the acquisition, installation, or maintenance of
landscaping material by the city.



   (H)   Permission to use utility pole or alterative antenna
structure. The operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility
must submit to the city written copies of the approval from the owner of a
utility pole, tower, or an alternative antenna structure, to mount the
personal wireless telecommunication facility on that specific pole, tower or
structure, prior to issuance of the city permit.



   (I)   Licenses and permits. The operator of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility must provide evidence to the city that any
"certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory
authorization that the operator is required by law to obtain has been issued
by the Illinois Commerce Commission or other jurisdictional authority and
that the operator has received all concurrent licenses and permits required
by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location and operation of said facility have been obtained and
will be maintained within the corporate limits of the city.



   (J)   Variance requirements. Each location of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility within a right-of-way must meet all of the
requirements of this subchapter, unless a variance has been obtained in
accordance with § 151.086.



   (K)   Abandonment and removal. Any personal wireless
telecommunication facility located within the corporate limits of the city
that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months, shall be
considered abandoned and the owner of the facility must remove same within 90
days of receipt of written notice from the city notifying the owner of such
abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return-receipt-requested, by the city to such owner at the last known address
of such owner. In the case of personal wireless telecommunication facilities
attached to city owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within
90 days of such notice, the city may remove or cause the removal of such
facility through the terms of the applicable license agreement or through
whatever actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery.



(Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-2017)



§ 151.302  PERMITS AND APPLICATION FEES AND PROCEDURES.



   Permits are required for placement of personal wireless
telecommunication facilities in rights-of-way within the city. Except as
otherwise provided for in this subchapter, the procedures for the application
for, approval of, and revocation of such a permit must be in compliance with
city permit application requirements in §§ 151.065 through 151.088. All
applications must demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this section must be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of $115 dollars. No application fee is
required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that is paying the
municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee or the optional
state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. The
application fee will reimburse the city for regulatory and administrative
costs with respect to the work being performed.



(Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-2017)



§ 151.303  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this subchapter
regarding the siting and installation of personal wireless telecommunication
facilities are more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere
in any other local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the
regulations of this subchapter will govern.



(Ord. 2017-10-0665O, passed 10-24-2017)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 151.020 shall be
fined not less than $250 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense,
and $1,000 for the third and each subsequent offense on the same property by
the same person or entity. Every day during which a violation occurs or
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the minimum
fines provided, the city may issue a stop work order or revoke the building
permit if a violation continues after warning, citation and request for
compliance.



   (C)   Any contractor, installer, company or individual who violates
§ 151.100 shall be responsible to pay a fine of at least $75 for each
offense.  Each day and each property shall be considered as a separate and
distinct offense.



(2000 Code, § 15.26.020)  (Ord. 2479, § 2, passed - -2000)



   (D)   In addition to the penalty provided for in § 10.99 for
violations of §§ 151.145 through 151.154, the city may file suit seeking
the demolition, repair or enclosure of a structure, or such other relief as
is provided for in state law.



(2000 Code, § 15.64.090)  (Ord. 2380, Art. 9, passed - -1999)



   (E)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of §§ 151.066 through 151.088 shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There
may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including third
party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under
its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation
of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility
shall bear the city’s costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions
may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.



(Ord. 2007-10-0128O, passed 10-9-2007)



CHAPTER 152:  EROSION, DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Intent and purpose



   152.02   Conflict of laws



   152.03   Definitions



   152.04   General criteria and standards



   152.05   Site development permit required; exceptions



   152.06   Application; site development plan



   152.07   Bond



   152.08   Conditions for issuance of permit



   152.09   Responsibility of permittee; nonliability of city



   152.10   Retention of plans by Director of Public Works



   152.11   Inspections



   152.12   Operation standards and requirements



   152.13   Exceptions; appeals



   152.14   Revocation of permits



   152.15   Fees and deposits



   152.16   Nuisances



   152.17   Disclaimer of liability



   152.18   Violations



Drainage Regulations



   152.30   Prohibited acts



   152.31   Permit required; review by Building Commissioner and City
Engineer



   152.32   Notice of violation; time limit for abatement



   152.33   Emergency measures



   152.34   Abatement by city; costs



   152.35   Liens for unpaid abatement charges



   152.36   Foreclosure



   152.37   Nonliability of city



Stormwater Maintenance



   152.50   Definitions



   152.51   Developments; storage and controlled release required



   152.52   Controlled release rate



   152.53   Stormwater detention



   152.54   Dry bottom stormwater storage areas



   152.55   Wet bottom stormwater storage areas



   152.56   Paved surface stormwater storage areas



   152.57   Rooftop storage



   152.58   Developments forming only a portion of a watershed



   152.59   Control plans required before plat approval or issuance of
building permits



   152.60   Flood or flash runoff hazards



   152.61   Cost of construction



   152.62   Recharge methods



   152.63   Erosion control



   152.64   Final engineering plans



   152.65   Developments of less than five acres



   152.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 152.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The intent of this chapter is to avoid the following:



      (1)   Excessive quantities of soil eroding from areas that are
undergoing development for certain nonagricultural uses, including, but not
limited to, the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and
industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, the filling of land
and the creation of recreational facilities;



      (2)   The washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across
and upon roadways endangering the health and safety of users thereof by
decreasing vision and reducing traction of road vehicles;



      (3)   Soil erosion necessitating the costly repair of gulleys,
washed-out fills and embankments;



      (4)   Sediment from soil erosion tending to clog sewers and
ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs;



      (5)   Sedimentation limiting the use of water and waterways
for the most beneficial purposes and destroying fish and other aquatic life,
and the costly and difficult removal of sediment; and



      (6)   Sedimentation reducing the channel capacity of
waterways, resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding and grave
danger to public health and safety.



   (B)   The purposes of this chapter are to provide minimum standards
to safeguard persons, to protect property, to prevent the despoilation of the
environment and to promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials and use and maintenance of any
development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or
otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the city.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.010)



§ 152.02  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be additional
requirements to minimum standards required by other ordinances of the city.
In the case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.020)



§ 152.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or require a different meaning.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  A permit issued by the city for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.



   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION.  That specific inspections and tests, where
required, have been performed and that such tests comply with applicable
requirements of this chapter.



   CUBIC YARDS.  The amount of material in excavation and/or fill
measured by the method of average end areas.



   EXCAVATION.  Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel,
rock or other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and includes conditions resulting
therefrom.



   EXISTING GRADE.  The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to excavation or filling.



   FILL.  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location, and includes conditions resulting therefrom.



   GRADING.  Excavation or fill or any combination thereof, and includes
conditions resulting therefrom.



   LAND SURVEYOR.  A registered surveyor of the state.



   PARCEL.  All contiguous land in one ownership.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.



   REMOVAL.  Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete
extraction or killing by spraying.



   SITE.  A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof,
where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



   SITE DEVELOPMENT.  Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
driveways.



   VACANT.  Land on which there are no structures or only structures
which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.030)



§ 152.04  GENERAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.



   The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth,
any sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit for
the execution of the plan as provided in this chapter:



   (A)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any
given time during development;



   (B)   The minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration
of time as is practical;



   (C)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
nonviable cover, shall be used to protect areas exposed during development;



   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from
land undergoing development;



   (E)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development;



   (F)   Permanent, final plant coverings or structures shall be
installed as soon as possible;



   (G)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and
soil of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created; and



   (H)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far
as is consistent with developing the site.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.040)



§ 152.05  SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Before land is cleared, graded, filled, transported or
otherwise disturbed by the movement of earth for purposes including, but not
limited to, the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals, including
sand and gravel, the development of golf courses, the filling of land and the
construction of roads and streets by any person within the city, a site
development permit embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained
from the city where development comes under any one or more of the following
provisions, unless the development is exempted therefrom by division (B)
below:



      (1)   The excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, will
exceed 25 cubic yards;



      (2)   The fill will exceed one foot in vertical depth at its
deepest point measured from the natural ground surface;



      (3)   The excavation will exceed one foot in vertical depth at
its deepest point;



      (4)   The excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, will
exceed an area of 500 square feet; and



      (5)   Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding 500
square feet on any vacant parcel of land or any parcel of land in excess of
one acre.



   (B)   A site development permit is not required in the following
cases:



      (1)   Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks, drain
fields, tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools, cellars
or footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit has been
issued by the city, unless part of a development which would otherwise
require such a permit;



      (2)   The excavation or removal of vegetation in public
utility easements by public utility companies for the purpose of installing
underground utilities;



      (3)   Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes; or



      (4)   Engaging in the following if, but only if, in connection
with a farming or other agricultural or conservation enterprise and upon
property zoned solely for farming or agricultural purposes and uses:



         (a)   The construction of sod waterways;



         (b)   The construction of terraces;



         (c)   The construction of surface water diversions;



         (d)   The construction of grade stabilization
structures; or



         (e)   Tilling of the soil.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.050)



§ 152.06  APPLICATION; SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   (A)   No site development permit or building permit shall be issued
until the developer submits a site development plan, together with other
submissions required by this chapter, and certifies that any land clearing
construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with such plan and submissions.



   (B)   Each application for a site development permit shall be made
by the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent to the City
Engineer and the Director of Public Works for their approval. When grading or
plant cover removal is proposed as a part of a building permit application,
the site development permit application and the building permit application
may be combined, and one plot plan, in the number of copies required by the
City Engineer and the Director, may be submitted showing building plans and
site development plans. In such instances, a registered land surveyor shall
certify as to the accuracy of the existing and proposed contour lines. Each
application shall be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   With respect to site development, a vicinity sketch
showing acreage of the site, a boundary line survey, zoning, the type of
proposed sewer and water facilities and the location of existing utilities,
buildings and drains on and within 100 feet of the site, together with a
legend and scale. There shall be included on or with the vicinity sketch:



         (a)   A soil map of the subject property showing the
predominant soil types on the site;



         (b)   Enough information on those areas abutting or
adjacent to the site to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage
course that may affect or be affected by the development of the site;



         (c)   The name and address of the developer or owner;



         (d)   The name and address of any consulting firm
retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant’s
principal contact at the firm;



         (e)   Limits of natural floodplains, if any;



         (f)   Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved;



         (g)   Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if
any; and



         (h)   Areas to be left undisturbed.



      (2)   With respect to site grading, existing topography of the
site and a 100-foot adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final
grades and street profiles, together with an indication as to what measures
will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff;



      (3)   Storm drainage by means of a plan based upon a competent
storm drainage study, including a drainage area map and computations, and
indicating what conditions now prevail at proposed and natural outlets such
as:



         (a)   Whether the drainage course is bare earth or
vegetated;



         (b)   Whether the constructed outlet will be in open
sun, open shade or dense shade;



         (c)   Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject
to long-term or continuous flow;



         (d)   Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding;



         (e)   Whether there is evidence of a high-water table
(permanent or seasonal);



         (f)   Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring
flow;



         (g)   The elevation of normal water level in all
proposed and natural outlets;



         (h)   A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance
to indicate the natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or
stream channel;



         (i)   A cross-section and profile of existing stream
channels, where applicable; and



         (j)   A ditch design and computations for all seeded,
sodded or bare earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.



      (4)   An estimated schedule and phasing of development of the
site, as follows:



         (a)   The phasing of the development of the site shall
be as follows:



            1.   Phase I — Stripping and/or clearing;



            2.   Phase II — Rough grading and construction;



            3.   Phase III — Final grading and vegetative
establishment; and



            4.   Phase IV — Maintenance.



         (b)   All erosion and sediment control plans submitted
to the City Engineer and the Director of Public Works for approval shall show
all erosion and sediment control measures needed to provide protection
throughout all phases of construction listed in division (B)(4)(a) of this
section. These plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil areas,
sewer lines, utility lines and haul and access roads, and shall further
indicate:



            1.   The start of clearing date;



            2.   The duration of exposure of disturbed areas;



            3.   The installation of temporary sediment
control measures (vegetative and structural) by phase and date;



            4.   The installation of storm drainage by phase
and date;



            5.   The establishment of permanent vegetative
cover (plans will show what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure
of disturbed areas as soon after grading as possible), including seeding
mixes and rates, type of sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, lime and
fertilizer application, temporary seedlings, if needed, mulching or similar
stabilization procedures;



            6.   Details of all structural sediment control
measures; and



            7.   Computations for sediment basins, if any.



   (C)   The standards and requirements of the Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook, Will-So. Cook County, Illinois, First Edition, as compiled
by the Will-So. Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District and approved
by the Seven County Regional Planning Commission, are incorporated into this
section and made a part of this section by reference for the purpose of
exemplifying the considerations and factors which should enter into the
preparation or a site development plan.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.060)



§ 152.07  BOND.



   (A)   The applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall file
with the City Clerk a faithful performance bond or other improvement security
in an amount equal to 125% of the City Engineer’s estimate of costs for
improvements, landscaping and maintenance of landscaping for that period as
specified by the city and to secure all engineering, inspection fees and
incidental expenses.



   (B)   If the applicant has entered into a contract for any of the
foregoing, then the bond shall be in an amount equal to 100% of the cost of
the contract.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.070)



§ 152.08  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building
site unless:



   (A)   The permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the city; or



   (B)   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall plan
previously approved by the city for the area in which the site is situated.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.080)



§ 152.09  RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMITTEE; NONLIABILITY OF CITY.



   Failure of a city official to observe or recognize hazardous or
unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit
shall not relieve a permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage
resulting therefrom and shall not fix the responsibility on the city, its
officers or agents.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.090)



§ 152.10  RETENTION OF PLANS BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be
retained in original form by the Director of Public Works.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.100)



§ 152.11  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Engineer and the Director of Public Works
shall make inspections as required in this section and shall either approve
the portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the
same fails to comply with the site development plan.



      (2)   Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not
substantially as stated or shown in the plan, they may stop further work
until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the
existing conditions.



      (3)   Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of
the City Engineer and the Director, shall be maintained at the site during
progress of the grading.



      (4)   Until the final inspection is made, a sign issued by the
city indicating that permission to grade has been granted by the city shall
be prominently displayed on the front property line of the property involved
so as to be visible from the street on which the property fronts.



   (B)   In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the
following schedule, the permittee shall notify the City Engineer and the
Director at least two full working days before the inspection is to be made:



      (1)   Rough grading. When all rough grading has been
completed; and



      (2)   Final inspection. When all work, including the
installation of all drainage and other structures and required planting, has
been completed.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.110)



§ 152.12  OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Compliance required. All earth moving grading and grading
operations not specifically exempted by this chapter shall comply with the
applicable standards and requirements set forth in this section, in addition
to the other requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Handbook adopted by reference. The standards and
specifications of the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, Will-So. Cook
County, Illinois, First Edition, as compiled by the Will-So. Cook County Soil
and Water Conservation District and approved by the Seven County Regional
Planning Commission, are incorporated into this section and made a part of
this section by this reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and
methods of operation under development plans approved in § 152.06 above. In
the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the handbook and any
of the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.



   (C)   Special precautions.



      (1)   If, at any stage of the grading, the City Engineer or
the Director of Public Works determines, by inspection, that the nature of
the formation is such that further work as authorized by an existing permit
is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage
structure, he or she may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be
done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as he or she considers
advisable to avoid the likelihood of the peril. Special precautions may
include, but are not limited to, specifying a more level exposed slope,
construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction,
leveling or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control and
reports of a registered engineering geologist whose recommendations may be
made requirements for further work.



      (2)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because
the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required
to install temporary planting to control erosion, to install temporary
structures or to take such other measures as may be required to protect
adjoining property or the public safety. On large operations, or where
unusual site conditions prevail, the City Engineer or the Director may
specify the time of starting grading and the time of completion or may
require that the operation be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure
completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal
rains.



   (D)   Expiration of permit. Every site development permit shall
expire by limitation and shall become null and void if the work authorized by
the permit has not been commenced within 180 days or is not completed within
one year from the date of issuance. However, the Mayor and Council may, if
the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties
have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time
limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made
before the expiration date of the permit.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.120)



§ 152.13  EXCEPTIONS; APPEALS.



   (A)   Exceptions. The Mayor and Council may authorize exceptions to
any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Application for exception. An application for an exception
shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant, stating fully the
grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The
petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In
order for the land referred to in the petition to come within the provisions
of this section, it shall be necessary that the Mayor and Council find all of
the following facts with respect thereto:



      (1)   The land is of such a shape or size, is affected by the
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it
is impossible or impractical for the subdivider or property owner to comply
with all of the regulations of this chapter;



      (2)   The exception is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner; and



      (3)   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the
subject property.



   (C)   Referral of proposed exception. Each proposed exception shall
be referred to the City Engineer and the Director of Public Works and they
shall transmit to the Mayor and Council their recommendations, which
recommendations shall be reviewed prior to the granting of any exception.



   (D)   Appeals. After review thereon, the Mayor and Council, by
resolution, may approve the site development permit application with the
exceptions and conditions he, she or it deems necessary, may disapprove the
site development permit application and exception application or may take
such other action as is appropriate.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.130)



§ 152.14  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Authority. If any person holding a site development permit
pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, conducts or
carries on the site development in such a manner as to materially adversely
affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the property of the permittee, or conducts or carries on such
site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare
or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Mayor and
Council shall revoke or suspend the site development permit.



   (B)   Procedure. No site development permit shall be permanently
revoked or suspended until a review is held by the Mayor and Council. Written
notice of the review shall be served upon the permittee, either personally or
by registered mail, and shall state:



      (1)   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation
or suspension, in clear and concise language; and



      (2)   The time and place of the review.



   (C)   (1)   The notice shall be served by registered mail or
personal service on the permittee at least five days prior to the date set
for the review.



      (2)   At the review, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and he or she may call witnesses and present evidence
on his or her behalf. Upon conclusion of the review, the Mayor and Council
shall determine whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked.



   (D)   The Mayor and Council shall hold the hearing to consider a
recommendation for revocation or suspension of a permit which has been
temporarily suspended at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor
and Council, at which all conditions of this division can be fulfilled.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.140)



§ 152.15  FEES AND DEPOSITS.



   Filing fees and deposits for services shall be as set forth by Council
or as deemed necessary for specific projects.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.150)



§ 152.16  NUISANCES.



   This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance upon his or her property, and
compliance with this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate a
nuisance.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.160)



§ 152.17  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of erosion and sedimentation protection required by
this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
engineering and scientific methods of study.



   (B)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city
or any officer or employee thereof for any damage that results from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this
chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.170)



§ 152.18  VIOLATIONS.



   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.44.180)  Penalty, see § 152.99




DRAINAGE REGULATIONS




§ 152.30  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   No person shall:



   (A)   Construct or erect or cause to be constructed or erected any
garage, fence, wall or other structure which interferes with any drainage
easement or natural drainage in such a manner that the easement or natural
drain fills or becomes obstructed with any matter which impedes or interferes
with the flow of water;



   (B)   Alter or cause to be altered the grade of any soil, drainage
easement or natural drain; or



   (C)   Plant or cause to be planted any grass, shrubbery or other
vegetation which affects the drainage or grading of any soil.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.010)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.31  PERMIT REQUIRED; REVIEW BY BUILDING COMMISSIONER AND CITY
ENGINEER.



   (A)   No person shall construct or erect or cause to be constructed
or erected any garage, fence, wall or other structure; alter or cause to be
altered the grade of any soil; or plant or cause to be planted any grass,
shrubbery or other vegetation which affects the drainage or grading of any
soil, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building
Commissioner, who shall inspect the proposed construction site, change of
grade or planting prior to the issuance of such a permit. The Building
Commissioner and/or the City Engineer shall render his or her opinion
regarding any potential drainage problem.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued if, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner and/or the City Engineer, the proposed construction, change of
grade or planting will cause, create or increase any drainage problem of the
surrounding or adjacent land or area. Upon completion, the person securing
the permit shall notify the Building Commissioner who shall then reinspect
the construction, change of grade or planting to determine whether or not it
has interfered with any drainage easement or natural drainage.



   (C)   If the drainage easement or natural drainage has been
interfered with, the person who secured the permit shall correct the
situation.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.020)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.32  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; TIME LIMIT FOR ABATEMENT.



   The City Clerk’s office or its duly authorized agent shall serve or
cause to be served an official notice upon the owner or occupant of any
premises on which a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter exists
and shall demand the abatement of the violation within ten working days.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.030)



§ 152.33  EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   If the City Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent deems the
obstruction of a dedicated drainage easement or natural drainage an immediate
danger to property or to the health and welfare of the community, he or she
may immediately remove or cause to be removed the obstruction. The City Clerk
or his or her duly authorized agent shall serve or cause to be served notice
to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which a violation exists of the
action taken by the City Engineer and bill the owner or occupant in
accordance with § 152.34 below.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.040)



§ 152.34  ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS.



   If the person served a notice provided for in § 152.32 above does not
abate the violation within ten working days, the city may proceed to abate
such violation, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and all
administrative and legal fees incurred by the city. All the expenses and fees
shall be billed to and paid by the owner or occupant of premises upon which
the violation exists.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.050)



§ 152.35  LIENS FOR UNPAID ABATEMENT CHARGES.



   Charges for the abatement of a violation shall be a lien upon the
premises. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after
it has been rendered, the City Clerk may file with the County Recorder of
Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal
description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred, the date of
abatement and a notice that the city claims a lien for such amount. Notice of
the lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her
address is known. However, failure of the City Clerk to record the lien claim
or to mail the notice, or the failure of the owner to receive the notice,
shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for the charges as provided
in § 152.36 below.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.060)



§ 152.36  FORECLOSURE.



   (A)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid abatement charges shall
be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. The foreclosure shall be in equity in the
name of the city.



   (B)   The City Attorney is authorized and directed to institute the
proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matter, against any property for which a bill has remained unpaid 60
days after it has been rendered.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.070)



§ 152.37  NONLIABILITY OF CITY.



   Neither the city nor its agents shall be liable for any damage to
property that occurs while they are enforcing this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.36.080)




STORMWATER MAINTENANCE




§ 152.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BY-PASS CHANNEL.  A channel formed in the topography of the earth’s
surface to carry stormwater runoff through a specific area.



   CONTROL STRUCTURE.  A structure designed to control the volume of
stormwater runoff that passes through it during a specific period of time.



   DRY BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREA.  A facility that is designed to be
normally dry and that contains water only when excess stormwater runoff
occurs.



   EXCESS STORMWATER.  That portion of stormwater runoff which exceeds
the transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels
serving a specific watershed.



   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE.  The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.



   GROUNDWATER RECHARGE CAPACITY.  The amount of water absorbed into the
ground as determined by a percolation test.



   LOW FLOW.  Any amount of runoff less than design conditions.



   NATURAL DRAINAGE.  Channels formed in the existing surface topography
of the earth by natural causes prior to changes made by unnatural causes.



   POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET.  The drainage of an area by means of natural
gravity so that it lowers the free water surface to a point below the
existing grade or invert of storm drains within the area.



   RECOGNIZED AGENCY.  An agency or governmental unit that has
statistically and consistently examined local, climatic and geologic
conditions and has maintained records as they apply to stormwater runoff,
e.g. the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago, the United States
Weather Bureau, the University of Illinois Engineering Experiment Station,
the Illinois State Water Survey and the like.



   RUNOFF RATE COEFFICIENT.  A numerical factor used to determine the
percentage of stormwater that will not be absorbed by the ground.



   SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY.  The quantity of stormwater runoff that
can be transported by a channel or conduit without having the water surface
rise above the level of the earth’s surface over the conduit or adjacent to
the waterway.



   STILLING BASIN.  An artificially enclosed area to collect stormwater
which will permit soil and debris to settle out.



   STORMWATER RELEASE RATE.  The volume of water in gallons per minute at
which stormwater runoff is released from a control structure.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF.  Water that results from precipitation which is not
absorbed by the soil or plant material.



   STORMWATER STORAGE AREA.  An area designated to store excess
stormwater.



   TRIBUTARY WATERSHED.  All of the area that contributes stormwater
runoff to a given point.



   WET BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREA.  A facility that is designed to be
maintained as a free water surface or a pond.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.010)



§ 152.51  DEVELOPMENTS; STORAGE AND CONTROLLED RELEASE REQUIRED.



   The storage and controlled release of excess stormwater runoff shall be
required, in combinations for all new commercial and industrial developments,
and for all new residential developments that contain an area in excess of
one-half acre.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.020)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.52  CONTROLLED RELEASE RATE.



   The controlled release rate of stormwater runoff from a development
shall not exceed the existing runoff from the area in its undeveloped and
unimproved state. The release rate shall be calculated from a storm of
three-year frequency with a runoff rate coefficient of 0.15 of an inch.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.030)



§ 152.53  STORMWATER DETENTION.



   The required volume for stormwater detention shall be calculated on the
basis of the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainfall of any duration as
published by the United States Weather Bureau for the county. The stormwater
release rate shall be considered when calculating the stormwater storage
capacity. The control structure shall be designed to maintain a relatively
uniform rate of flow regardless of the depth of stormwater in the storage
area.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.040)



§ 152.54  DRY BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREAS.



   (A)   Dry bottom stormwater storage areas shall be designed as
recreation or open areas or other types of uses that will not be adversely
affected by occasional or intermittent flooding. A method of carrying the low
flow through these areas shall be provided, in addition to a system of
drains, and both shall be provided with a positive gravity outlet to a
natural channel or storm sewer with adequate capacity.



   (B)   The combination of storage of the water from a 100-year storm
and the design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess
of 72 hours. The maximum depth of planned stormwater storage shall not exceed
four feet, unless existing natural ground contours and other conditions lend
to a greater storage depth, which shall be approved by the City Engineer.
Minimum grades for turf areas shall be two percent and maximum slopes shall
be ten percent. Storage area side slopes shall be kept as close to the
natural land contours as practical. If slopes of greater than ten percent are
necessary to meet storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall
be obtained from the City Engineer and suitable erosion control shall be
provided.



   (C)   Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate
automatically. Each stormwater storage area shall be equipped with facilities
for emergency overflow in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year
frequency storm occurs. The emergency overflow facility shall be designed to
function automatically and shall become part of the natural or surface
channel system. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all
design features. Stormwater runoff velocities shall be kept at a minimum and
turbulent conditions at an outfall control structure will not be permitted
without complete protection for the public safety. No outlet control device
(restrictor) shall be less than three inches in diameter, unless required by
the City Engineer.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.050)



§ 152.55  WET BOTTOM STORMWATER STORAGE AREAS.



   Wet bottom stormwater storage areas shall be designed to incorporate
all items required for dry bottom stormwater storage areas, with the
exception of a low-flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive
gravity outlet. However, the following additional conditions shall be
complied with.



   (A)   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from
wave action.



   (B)   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet. If fish are to
be used to keep the pond clean, a minimum of one-fourth of the pond area
shall be a minimum of ten feet deep.



   (C)   Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond
level to be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline
maintenance.



   (D)   Control structures for stormwater release shall be designed to
operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface
level. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to the City Engineer to
substantiate all design features.



   (E)   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be
provided. Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of such
aeration facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans.
Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities
shall be executed, subject to approval by Council, at the recommendation of
the City Engineer.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.060)



§ 152.56  PAVED SURFACE STORMWATER STORAGE AREAS.



   (A)   A paved surface that is to serve as a stormwater storage area
shall have a minimum grade of one percent and shall be restricted to a
maximum storage depth of one foot. Release rates and storage volume
requirements for paved storage areas shall be as set forth in §§ 152.52 and
152.53 above.



   (B)   If a portion of an area within a stormwater storage area is to
be paved for parking or recreational purposes, the paved surface shall be
placed at the highest elevation within the area as possible.



   (C)   Maximum parking lot grades shall not exceed normal design
parameters of three to five percent.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.070)



§ 152.57  ROOFTOP STORAGE.



   Rooftop storage shall be designed with permanent control inlets and
parapet walls to contain runoff on the rooftop. Emergency overflow shall be
provided to ensure that the weight of water stored will not exceed the
structural capacity of the roof.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.080)



§ 152.58  DEVELOPMENTS FORMING ONLY A PORTION OF A WATERSHED.



   Where a development forms only a portion of a watershed, the storage
requirement shall be based upon the proportion of the area being developed to
the total watershed. Compensating storage will be acceptable whenever it is
justified and feasible.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.090)



§ 152.59  CONTROL PLANS REQUIRED BEFORE PLAT APPROVAL OR ISSUANCE OF
BUILDING PERMITS.



   Plans, specifications and all calculations for stormwater runoff
control required in this chapter shall be submitted to the city for review
and approval by the City Engineer prior to the approval of a final plat in
the case of a subdivision or planned unit development, or, in the case of
commercial or industrial construction, prior to the issuance of a building
permit.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.100)



§ 152.60  FLOOD OR FLASH RUNOFF HAZARDS.



   Where the development of property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash runoff to lower property, the facilities for stormwater
runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earth moving or construction
on the project site.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.110)



§ 152.61  COST OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of a stormwater control system shall be accomplished
as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage capacity
can be increased to provide benefit to the city, the city may agree to
participate in the cost of construction.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.120)



§ 152.62  RECHARGE METHODS.



   The ability to retain and maximize the groundwater recharge capacity of
an area being developed is encouraged. Design of the stormwater runoff
control system shall give consideration to providing groundwater recharge to
compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground
surface is paved and roofed over. The flattening of drainage slopes and the
retention of existing topography are examples of possible recharge methods.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.130)



§ 152.63  EROSION CONTROL.



   During the construction phases of land development, facilities shall be
provided to prevent the erosion and washing away of the earth. Silting of
downstream areas and existing sewers shall be prevented through the strategic
use of stilling basins, sodding of runoff channels and by limiting the period
of time during which the area is stripped of vegetation.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.140)



§ 152.64  FINAL ENGINEERING PLANS.



   Final engineering plans shall set forth, in detail, each item covered
in this chapter and shall be submitted for review and approval by Council
prior to the start of construction.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.150)



§ 152.65  DEVELOPMENTS OF LESS THAN FIVE ACRES.



   Under the provisions of this subchapter, stormwater detention
facilities are not required for developments of less than five acres,
provided that the City Engineer determines that the available outlet capacity
and/or existing storm sewer system is adequate. If the outlet capacity or
storm sewer system is not adequate, detention of stormwater, as required by
this chapter, will be required to store that portion of the runoff exceeding
the system capacity.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.160)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of §§ 152.50 through 152.65 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$2,000 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.



(2000 Code, § 15.84.170)



CHAPTER 153:  BURGLARY PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS



Section



   153.01   Application of chapter



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   Conflict of laws; controlling provisions



   153.04   Enforcement by Building Department



   153.05   Board of Appeals



   153.06   Compliance requirements for existing buildings



   153.07   Maintenance by owner



   153.08   Alternate materials and methods of construction



   153.09   Tests



   153.10   Doors generally



   153.11   Swinging doors



   153.12   Sliding glass doors



   153.13   Overhead and sliding doors



   153.14   Metal accordion grate or grille-type doors



   153.15   Windows and skylights



   153.16   Openings



   153.17   Locking devices for openable windows



   153.18   Construction of other openings



   153.19   Hatchways, scuttles and similar openings



   153.20   Ladders



   153.21   Security measures for commercial establishments and office
buildings



   153.22   Intrusion detection devices



   153.23   Security for residential structures



   153.24   Lighting



   153.25   Violation



§ 153.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall apply to new construction, additions to existing
buildings and existing buildings as specifically provided in this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.010)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BURGLAR-RESISTANT MATERIAL.  Glass and glass-like materials which
comply with or exceed the Underwriters’ Laboratories Standard #UL972 for
burglary resisting glazing material.



   COMBINATION DEAD LATCH AND DEAD BOLT.  A device combining a dead latch
operable by knobs from the inside and the outside and a dead bolt operable
from the inside by a thumb turn and from the outside by a key, both of which
can be retracted from the inside by turning the knob and from the outside by
the key.



   CYLINDER GUARD.  A hardened steel ring or plate surrounding the
otherwise exposed portion of a cylinder lock to prevent cutting, drilling,
prying, pulling or wrenching with common tools.



   DEAD LATCH.  A latch which is positively held in a latched position
with a strike by an added integral bolt-type mechanism and is released by a
key from the outside and a knob or similar actuator from the inside.



   DEAD LOCK.  A locking device with a bolt, not spring loaded, which
engages and disengages a strike by the use of a key from the outside and/or
the inside.



   DOOR SCOPE.  A system of lenses encased for convenient installation in
entrance doors permitting an inside viewer to observe a 180-degree area of
the outside with the door closed.



   DOUBLE DEAD BOLT.  A dead lock actuated by a key from the inside and
the outside.



   INSERT.  A hardened steel roller inside unhardened bolts to prevent
bolt cutting with common tools.



   LATCH.  A spring-loaded device which automatically holds a swinging
door shut upon closing by engaging a strike and which is released by turning
a knob, lever or similar actuator from the inside or the outside.



   LOUVERS.  A series of removable fixed-slanted or movable slats. Glass
louvered is descriptive of jalousies. Glass, wood or metal jalousies are
considered to be louvers. Awning windows having sections more than 12 inches
in depth are not considered to be louvers.



   MULTIPLE-POINT LOCK.  A system of lever operated bolts that engage a
door opening, at least at the head and sill, operated by a single knob or
handle from the inside and, optionally, a cylinder-locked handle from the
outside.



   SINGLE DEAD BOLT.  A dead lock actuated from the outside by a key and
from the inside by a knob, thumb turn, lever or similar actuator.



   SLIDING DOOR DEAD BOLT.  A single dead bolt which, after penetration
of the strike, expands or is pivoted hook-type to resist sliding of the door
by force.



   STRIKE.  A stationary metal plate designed to momentarily depress a
moving latch for final secure engagement requiring a separate operation for
disengagement.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.020)



§ 153.03  CONFLICT OF LAWS; CONTROLLING PROVISIONS.



   This chapter shall apply to all occupancy groups. If it is determined
that there is a conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter and
the Fire Prevention Code of the city, the Fire Prevention Code shall control.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.030)



§ 153.04  ENFORCEMENT BY BUILDING DEPARTMENT.



   This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Department of the city.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.040)



§ 153.05  BOARD OF APPEALS.



   In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and
methods of construction, and to provide for reasonable interpretations of
this chapter, there is established a Board of Appeals. The Board shall be the
same Board of Appeals specified in the International Building Code adopted in
§ 151.001.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.050)



§ 153.06  COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS.



   Existing buildings shall be made to comply with reasonable conditions
of this chapter as determined by the Building Commissioner when any of the
following conditions exists:



   (A)   When additions, alterations or repairs within any 12-month
period exceed 50% of the value of the existing building; or



   (B)   When a change of occupancy or of occupant occurs. OCCUPANCY,
as used in this chapter, refers to the purpose for which a building is used
or intended to be used. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
compliance with this chapter is obtained.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.060)



§ 153.07  MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.



   (A)   All devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter
in a building when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order.



   (B)   The owner or his or her designated agent shall be responsible
for the maintenance of such devices or safeguards.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.070)



§ 153.08  ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by
this chapter, provided that the alternate has been approved.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner may approve any such alternate,
provided he or she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and that
the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least
the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength,
effectiveness, durability and safety.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.080)



§ 153.09  TESTS.



   (A)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
this chapter, whenever there is evidence that any material or construction
does not conform to this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for
alternate materials or methods of construction, the Building Commissioner may
require tests as proof of compliance.



   (B)   The tests shall be made at the expense of the owner or agent
by an approved agency.



   (C)   If there are no appropriate test methods specified in this
chapter, the Building Commissioner shall determine the test procedure.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.090)



§ 153.10  DOORS GENERALLY.



   (A)   A door forming part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit or of
an area occupied by one tenant of a building shall be constructed, installed
and secured as set forth in this chapter when such door is directly
accessible from a public way, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony,
patio, breezeway, garage or portion of the building which is available for
use by the public or other tenants or any similar area.



   (B)   A door enclosing a garage or storage facility which has an
interior opening leading directly into the building shall also comply with
this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.100)



§ 153.11  SWINGING DOORS.



   All swinging doors shall comply with the following provisions.



   (A)   Swinging wooden doors shall be solid core with a minimum
thickness of one and three-eighths inches or shall be covered on the inside
face with 16- gauge sheet metal attached with screws at six-inch spacing
around the perimeter.



   (B)   A single door, the active leaf of a pair of doors and the
bottom leaf of a Dutch door shall be equipped with either a double dead bolt
or a single dead bolt having a one-inch throw and a hardened insert. A
combination dead latch and dead bolt may also be used. The lock shall be key
operated from the exterior side of the door and may be engaged or disengaged
from the interior side of the door by a device not requiring a key, special
knowledge or effort.



   (C)   Nonremovable pins shall be used in pin-type hinges which are
accessible from the outside when the door is closed.



   (D)   Door stops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of
one-piece construction with the jamb or shall be joined to the jamb by a
rabbet.



   (E)   Cylinders shall be designed or protected to prevent their
accessibility to gripping tools.



   (F)   An interviewer or peephole shall be installed in the main
entrance door of all dwelling units.



   (G)   The inactive leaf of a pair of doors and the upper leaf of a
Dutch door shall be equipped with a dead bolt as set forth in division (B)
above, except as follows.



      (1)   The bolt need not be key operated but shall not be
otherwise activated from the exterior side of the door.



      (2)   The bolt may be engaged or disengaged automatically with
the dead bolt or by another device on the active leaf or lower leaf.



      (3)   Manually operated hardened bolts at the top and bottom
of the leaf which embed a minimum of five-eighths of an inch into the device
receiving the projected bolt may be used when not prohibited by the
International Building Code, as adopted in § 151.001, or other laws and
regulations.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.110)



§ 153.12  SLIDING GLASS DOORS.



   All sliding glass doors shall comply with the following standards:



   (A)   The movable section of a sliding glass door shall be on the
inside of the fixed portion of the door;



   (B)   A sliding glass door shall be provided with a dead bolt. The
bolt need not be key operated but shall not be otherwise activated from the
exterior side of the door;



   (C)   Cylinders shall be designed or protected to prevent their
accessibility to gripping tools; and



   (D)   Sliding glass doors shall meet or exceed the Architectural
Aluminum Manufacturer’s Association’s standard for forced-entry
resistance (AAMA #1303.3).



(2000 Code, § 15.28.120)



§ 153.13  OVERHEAD AND SLIDING DOORS.



   A metal or wooden overhead or sliding door shall be secured with a
cylinder lock, padlock with a hardened steel shackle, metal slide bar, bolt
or equivalent when not otherwise locked by electric power operation.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.130)



§ 153.14  METAL ACCORDION GRATE OR GRILLE-TYPE DOORS.



   A metal accordion grate or grille-type door shall be equipped with
metal guide tracks at the top and bottom and a cylinder lock or padlock with
a hardened steel shackle.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.140)



§ 153.15  WINDOWS AND SKYLIGHTS.



   (A)   A window, skylight or other opening forming a part of the
enclosure of a dwelling unit or an area occupied by one tenant of a building
shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in this chapter when
the bottom of the window skylight or opening is less than 16 feet above the
grade of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio
breezeway, private garage, portion or a building which is available for use
by the public or other tenants or similar area.



   (B)   A window enclosing a private garage with an interior opening
leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.150)



§ 153.16  OPENINGS.



   An opening within 40 inches of a required locking device on a door when
in the closed and locked position, and openable from the inside without the
use of a key, shall be of burglary-resistant material, or shall be covered
with iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one inch by one-fourth inch
flat steel material spaced not more than five inches apart, secured on the
inside of the glazing, or iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch
material or two-inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.160)



§ 153.17  LOCKING DEVICES FOR OPENABLE WINDOWS.



   (A)   A sliding glass window shall be constructed and installed so
that the window cannot be lifted from the frame when the window is in the
locked position.



   (B)   A sliding glass window shall meet or exceed the Architectural
Aluminum Manufacture’s Association’s standards for forced-entry
resistance (AAMA #1303.3).



   (C)   Other openable windows shall be provided with substantial
locking devices which render the building as secure as the devices required
by this section.



   (D)   A louvered window shall not be installed within eight feet of
ground level.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.170)



§ 153.18  CONSTRUCTION OF OTHER OPENINGS.



   Openings, other than doors or lights, which form a part of an
enclosure, or portion thereof, housing a single occupant and the bottom of
which is not more than 16 feet above the grade of a street, highway, yard,
court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway or similar area, or
from a private garage or a portion of the building which is occupied, used or
available for use by the public or other tenants, or an opening enclosing a
private garage attached to a dwelling unit which opens therein, shall be
constructed, installed and secured as set forth in this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.180)



§ 153.19  HATCHWAYS, SCUTTLES AND SIMILAR OPENINGS.



   (A)   Wooden hatchways less than one and three-fourths inches thick
solid wood shall be covered on the inside with 16-gauge sheet metal attached
with screws at six-inch maximum centers around the perimeter.



   (B)   The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide
bar, slide bolt and/or padlock with a hardened steel shackle.



   (C)   Outside pin-type hinges shall be provided with nonremovable
pins.



   (D)   Other openings exceeding 96 square inches with a least
dimension exceeding eight inches shall be secured by metal bars, screens or
grills in an approved manner.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.190)



§ 153.20  LADDERS.



   (A)   Any ladder, excluding a fire escape, located on the exterior
of any building which could provide access to the roof shall be protected
from such access by a continuous piece of wood or metal covering the rungs.
The wood or metal shall be locked with a padlock. The padlock shall have a
minimum of five pin tumblers and be of case-hardened steel.



   (B)   Hinges used on the covering shall be of a nonremovable
pin-type. The wood or metal barrier shall be a minimum of eight feet
continuous covering of not less than one-half inch thickness and located four
feet from the ground level or be secured in a manner approved by the Building
Commissioner.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.200)



§ 153.21  SECURITY MEASURES FOR COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND OFFICE
BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Safes. Commercial establishments having $1,000 or more in cash
on the premises after closing hours shall lock such money in at least a Class
E or higher rated safe after closing hours.



   (B)   Office buildings (multiple occupancy). All entrance doors to
individual office suites shall have a dead bolt lock with a minimum one-inch
throw bolt which can be opened from the outside.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.210)



§ 153.22  INTRUSION DETECTION DEVICES.



   If it is determined by the Building Commissioner that the security
measures and locking devices described in this chapter do not adequately
secure a building, he or she may require the installation and maintenance of
an intrusion detection device (burglar alarm system).



(2000 Code, § 15.28.220)



§ 153.23  SECURITY FOR RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set forth minimum
standards of construction for resistance to unlawful entry to residential
structures located in the city.



   (B)   Alternatives. Nothing contained in this section shall be
deemed to prohibit the use of alternate materials, devices or measures when
such alternate provisions are deemed by the Building Commissioner as
providing equivalent security.



   (C)   Doors generally. A door forming a part of the enclosure of a
dwelling unit shall be of solid core construction, installed and secured as
set forth in divisions (D) and (E) below when such door is accessible from a
street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio,
breezeway, private garage, portion of the building which is available for use
by the public or other tenants or similar area. A door leading to a dwelling
unit shall also comply with those divisions.



   (D)   Swing doors.



      (1)   A single swing door, the active leaf of a pair of doors
and the bottom leaf of a Dutch door shall be equipped with a dead bolt with a
minimum throw of one inch and a deadlocking latch. Dead bolts shall contain
hardened inserts or equivalent so as to repel cutting tool attack. The lock
shall be key operated from the exterior side of the door and engaged or
disengaged from the interior side of the door by a device not requiring a
key, special knowledge or effort.



      (2)   A flushbolt with a minimum throw of five-eighths of an
inch shall be provided at the head and foot (floor and ceiling) of the
inactive leaf of a double door and at the top and bottom of the upper leaf of
a Dutch door.



      (3)   Door stops on wooden jambs for inswing doors shall be of
one-piece construction with the jamb jointed by a rabbet.



      (4)   Nonremovable pins or interlocking stud-type hinges shall
be used in pin-type hinges which are accessible from the outside when the
door is closed.



      (5)   A cylinder guard shall be installed on a mortise or
rim-type cylinder lock whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the
door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools.



   (E)   Overhead and sliding doors.



      (1)   A metal or wooden overhead or sliding door shall be
secured with a cylinder lock, padlock with a hardened steel shackle, metal
slide bar, bolt or equivalent on the inside when not otherwise locked by
electric power operation. If this type of door provides the only entrance to
a garage, the cylinder lock or padlock may be on the outside.



      (2)   A cylinder guard shall be installed on a mortise or
rim-type cylinder lock which projects beyond the face of the door or is
otherwise accessible to gripping tools.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.230)



§ 153.24  LIGHTING.



   All commercial buildings and multi-family buildings with common
entrances to more than one unit shall be illuminated with at least a 75-watt
light. The light shall be protected by a vapor cover or a cover of equal
breaking-resistant material.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.240)



§ 153.25  VIOLATIONS.



   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or
other structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.28.250)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 154:  CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS



Section



   154.01   Definitions



   154.02   Certificate of condominium conversion required



   154.03   Conditions of structures subject to conversion



   154.04   Application for certificate; inspections and issuance of
certificate



   154.05   Transferability of certificate



   154.06   New owner acknowledgment



   154.07   Availability of certificate to tenants



   154.08   Inspection fees



   154.09   Suspension or revocation of certificate



   154.10   Use of evidence



   154.11   Lack of consent to enter or inspect; administrative search
warrants



   154.12   Guarantee by city



   154.99   Penalty



§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms in a multi-family rental dwelling
structure or portion thereof arranged, designed and used as a residence or
living quarters by one or more persons and containing therein bathroom and
kitchen facilities.



   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL DWELLING STRUCTURE.  A dwelling structure
containing three or more dwelling units which are held for rental to a
non-owner. A multi-family rental dwelling structure consists of both dwelling
units and common areas.



   OWNER.  The owner, lessor, sublessor or landlord of a dwelling unit or
the building of which it is a part. An owner can be one or more persons, a
corporation, a partnership or any other legal entity, jointly or severally,
in whom or which is vested all or part of the legal title to a multi-family
rental dwelling structure, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a
right to present use and enjoyment of a multi-family rental dwelling
structure, including a mortgage holder in possession.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.010)



§ 154.02  CERTIFICATE OF CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful to convert any real estate within the city to contain
condominium units, or to submit the conversion condominiums to the provisions
of the Condominium Property Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act 605, §§ 1 et seq.),
without first obtaining a certificate of condominium conversion from the city
at least 30 days prior to issuing any notice of intent to convert to the
tenants of the building involved.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.020)



§ 154.03  CONDITIONS OF STRUCTURES SUBJECT TO CONVERSION.



   (A)   All multi-family rental dwelling structures to be converted to
condominium units shall be free from violations of all applicable provisions
of the Building Code and all other applicable city ordinances, codes and
regulations.



   (B)   All multi-family rental dwelling structures to be converted to
condominium units shall be:



      (1)   Safe for human habitation;



      (2)   Capable of providing, or in the process of providing
under proper permits, adequate plumbing and heating facilities for the entire
building;



      (3)   In a safe and sanitary condition;



      (4)   In compliance with all current building codes and fire
safety requirements applicable to condominiums; and



      (5)   In compliance with change in use and occupancy
requirements set forth in the comprehensive building codes.



   (C)   All owners of multi-family rental dwelling structures intended
to be converted to condominium units shall submit a statement detailing the
time of construction of the structure. The owners of any structure
constructed prior to 1996 shall register each dwelling unit with the Building
Department. This registration is in addition to any existing registrations as
required under §§ 151.145 through 151.154 entitled Multiple-Owner Complexes.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.030)  (Ord. 2602, § 1, passed - -2002)



§ 154.04  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; INSPECTIONS AND ISSUANCE OF
CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   An owner of a multi-family rental dwelling structure shall
apply for a certificate of condominium conversion by submitting a completed
application form to the Building Commissioner.



   (B)   No certificate of condominium conversion shall be issued
unless the completed application form is accompanied by the payment of the
inspection fee set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   No certificate of condominium conversion shall be issued until
the Building Commissioner is presented with a statement of the building’s
year of construction and proof of registration if required under §§ 151.145
through 151.154 entitled Multiple-Owner Complexes.



   (D)   The Building Commissioner of the city shall inspect, or cause
to be inspected, the multi-family rental dwelling structure where condominium
conversion is intended to occur to determine whether the multi-family rental
dwelling structure is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   No certificate of condominium conversion shall be issued until
the Building Commissioner and/or his or her designee inspects the property
and finds the property to be in compliance with all applicable codes and
ordinances. Each applicant shall be notified by the Building Commissioner in
advance of the date and time of the inspection. Within ten days after receipt
of notification of the inspection date and time, the owner shall notify each
tenant of the date and time of the inspection and submit proof of the notice,
along with any objections by tenants, to the Building Commissioner.



   (F)   If any tenant refuses to consent to an inspection of a
dwelling unit, the Building Commissioner may either begin proceedings to
obtain an administrative search warrant for the particular dwelling unit or
waive the inspection requirement for the dwelling unit occupied by the tenant
who refuses consent.



   (G)   The Building Commissioner shall inspect, or cause to be
inspected, the subject property for compliance with the building, property
maintenance and Zoning Codes and other ordinances of the city.



   (H)   If compliance is found, a certificate of condominium
conversion shall be issued by the Building Commissioner within 14 days after
inspection of the subject property. The certificate shall constitute approval
to initiate, within one year from its date, conversion of the building to
condominiums.



   (I)   If, after inspection, the Building Commissioner determines
that the multi-family rental dwelling structure does not comply with all
applicable codes and ordinances, a list of deficiencies shall be prepared and
furnished to the applicant. A second inspection shall be scheduled at a time
after the deficiencies have been corrected. Upon reinspection and
verification of correction of the deficiencies, the Building Commissioner
shall issue a certificate of condominium conversion.



   (J)   The certificate of condominium conversion is not renewable for
additional periods.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.040)  (Ord. 2602, § 2, passed - -2002)



§ 154.05  TRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   A certificate of condominium conversion issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be transferable within the year of its validity to
succeeding owners, provided that, within seven days prior to conveyance of
the property, the owner shall provide notice of the conveyance to the city.



   (B)   The notice shall include the name and address of the person or
persons succeeding to the ownership or control of the multi-family rental
dwelling structure. Failure to provide such a notice may result in the
suspension or revocation of the certificate of condominium conversion.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.050)



§ 154.06  NEW OWNER ACKNOWLEDGMENT.



   Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for any dwelling unit
created by the condominium conversion the owner shall submit an
acknowledgment that the purchaser has been made aware of the inspection
requirement as required by city ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.055)  (Ord. 2602, § 3, passed - -2002)



§ 154.07  AVAILABILITY OF CERTIFICATE TO TENANTS.



   Upon the request of an existing or prospective tenant, the owner shall
produce the certificate of condominium conversion or a copy thereof.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.060)



§ 154.08  INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   There is established a fee of $20 per dwelling unit for the
first inspection or the first reinspection necessitated by the existence of
violations ascertained during the first inspection.



   (B)   After one reinspection, there is established a fee of $25 per
dwelling unit for each subsequent reinspection necessitated by the existence
of violations ascertained during any previous inspection.



   (C)   This fee is nonrefundable once the Building Commissioner
and/or his or her designee arrives at the site for the inspection.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.070)



§ 154.09  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Whenever, upon inspection of a multi-family rental dwelling
structure based on consent, or upon inspection pursuant to an administrative
search warrant as set forth in this chapter, the Building Commissioner and/or
his or her designee finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, any applicable provisions of the
codes and ordinances of the city, or any applicable rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, the Building Commissioner and/or his or her
designee shall serve the owner with notice of the violation or violations.
The notice shall state that, unless the violations cited are corrected within
a reasonable period of time, but not less than five days (except that in
emergency situations the time period may be reduced), any and all
certificates issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended.



   (B)   At the end of the time period allowed for correction of any
violation cited, the Building Commissioner and/or his or her designee shall
reinspect or cause the reinspection of the multi-family rental dwelling
structure, and, if it is determined that such volatile conditions have not
been corrected, an order may be issued suspending any and all certificates
issued under this chapter. The order shall take effect seven business days
following service upon the owner unless, in the interim, the owner requests,
in writing, a hearing.



   (C)   Any owner whose certificate issued pursuant to this chapter is
subject to suspension, pursuant to a suspension order, shall be entitled to a
hearing on the suspension action by filing a written request, with the City
Clerk, for a hearing before the City Building Commission within seven
business days following the receipt of the suspension order. Upon receipt of
the request, the hearing shall be scheduled to be held before the City
Building Commission at a date not more than seven business days after receipt
of the written request. At the hearing, the city administrator, or a person
as the City Administrator designates, shall present evidence in support of
the suspension, and the owner shall be permitted to rebut the evidence that
is, in the discretion of the city building commission, relevant and material.
Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City Building
Commission may either:



      (1)   Confirm the suspension;



      (2)   Allow additional compliance time for correcting the
violation cited; or



      (3)   Rescind the suspension.



   (D)   The City Building Commission’s decision shall be final and
binding. The suspension of any certificate issued pursuant to this chapter
shall not release or discharge the owner from paying any fees due, nor shall
the owner be released from prosecution for violations of this chapter.



   (E)   If no petition for a hearing before the City Building
Commission on a suspension order is filed as provided above, then such order
shall remain in effect until the violations in question have been corrected,
as determined by the Building Commissioner and/or his or her designee upon
inspection of the multi-family rental dwelling structure.



   (F)   If, after two months from the effective date of the
suspension, the violations in question are not corrected sufficiently to
bring the property into compliance with this chapter, the Building
Commissioner and/or his or her designees will issue an order revoking any and
all certificates issued pursuant to this chapter, and the owner shall be
required to submit a new application to the city in order to obtain any new
certificates, as required by this chapter. The effective date and appeals
process for a revocation order shall be the same as for a suspension order,
as set forth in this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.080)



§ 154.10  USE OF EVIDENCE.



   No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of a multi-family rental
dwelling structure made pursuant to this chapter shall be used in the
prosecution of any criminal or ordinance violation, other than for violations
of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.090)



§ 154.11  LACK OF CONSENT TO ENTER OR INSPECT; ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH
WARRANTS.



   (A)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any
multi-family rental dwelling structure or dwelling unit, no entry or
inspection shall be made without the procurement of an administrative search
warrant from the Circuit Court of Cook County. The court may consider any of
the following factors, along with such other matters as it deems pertinent,
in its decision as to whether a warrant shall be issued:



      (1)   Eyewitness accounts of violations;



      (2)   Citizen complaints;



      (3)   Tenant complaints;



      (4)   Plain-view violations;



      (5)   Violations apparent from city records;



      (6)   Property deterioration;



      (7)   Age of the property;



      (8)   Nature of alleged violations;



      (9)   Similar properties in the area;



      (10)   Documented violations for similar properties in the
area;



      (11)   Passage of time since the last inspection; and



      (12)   Previous violations on the property.



   (B)   Cause for issuance of an administrative search warrant shall
be deemed to exist in light of reasonable legislative and administrative
standards which show that there is reason to believe that a condition of
nonconformity exists with respect to a particular property in violation of
the codes and ordinances of the city.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.100)



§ 154.12  GUARANTEE BY CITY.



   The city does not guarantee the condition of any property which is the
subject matter of this chapter, and the city shall not be responsible for any
claims arising out of the subject property or the condition thereof. The city
does not warrant that all deficiencies have been corrected upon issuance of
any certificate under this chapter and does not warrant anything as to the
condition of the property or the habitability thereof.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.110)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   No person shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with, or resist or
oppose the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.32.120)



CHAPTER 155:  FIRE LIMITS



Section



   155.01   Fire districts



   155.02   Restrictions



§ 155.01  FIRE DISTRICTS.



   Fire limits shall embrace all zoning districts within the city. For the
purpose of controlling the use and construction of buildings, and for the
purpose of guarding against calamities of fire, there is established limiting
districts designated as Fire District Number 1, Fire District Number 2, Fire
District Number 3 and outside fire limits:



   (A)   Fire District Number 1. This District shall comprise the area
housing manufacturing and industrial uses;



   (B)   Fire District Number 2. This District shall comprise the area
housing business and commercial buildings. This will be the areas designated
B1, B2 and B3 in the Zoning Code;



   (C)   Fire District Number 3. This District shall comprise the area
of multi-family housing. This will be the area designated R3 in the Zoning
Code; and



   (D)   Outside fire limits. All other areas not included in Fire
District Numbers 1, 2 and 3 shall be designated as outside fire limits.



(2000 Code, § 15.56.010)



§ 155.02  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Fire District Number 1.



      (1)   All buildings and structures and all additions to
existing buildings and structures hereafter erected within the boundaries of
Fire District Number 1 shall be of fireproof Type 1 or noncombustible Types
2A, 2B or 2C construction, as regulated in the International Building Code
adopted in § 151.001, and shall be constructed within the height and area
limitations of that code. Frame (Type 4) construction shall not be erected or
placed in this district. In addition, unlimited area buildings may be erected
in this district, provided that they comply with the requirements of the
International Building Code.



      (2)   If any steel shell-type building is allowed in an
industrial district, any side facing a street shall be faced with face-brick
or stone.



   (B)   Fire District Number 2.



      (1)   All buildings and structures and all additions to
existing buildings and structures hereafter erected within the boundaries of
Fire District Number 2 shall be of Type 1, 2A, 2B or 3 construction, as
regulated in the International Building Code, and shall be constructed within
the height and area limitations of the International Building Code.



      (2)   In addition, no exterior wall of any type of building
stated in division(B)(1) of this section shall have a fire rating of less
than two hours. Frame (Type 4) construction shall not be erected or placed in
this district.



      (3)   No mansard-type roof or mansard-type decorative overhang
shall be installed on any existing building without the approval of the
Building Commissioner and the Fire Chief.



      (4)   Wood or cedar shakes shall not be allowed. However,
pressure-treated fire retardant shakes may be allowed on a decorative-type
mansard roof if such roof is installed over a noncombustible wall. Any fire
retardant pressure treated shakes must have supporting data from an approved
testing laboratory such as Underwriters Laboratories.



      (5)   Up to 30% of the exterior surface of the front masonry
wall of a building may be faced with decorative wood which is approved by
Council.



   (C)   Fire District Number 3.



      (1)   All buildings and structures and all additions to
existing buildings and structures hereafter erected within the boundaries of
Fire District Number 3 shall be of Type 1, 2, 3A or 3B construction, as
regulated in the International Building Code, and shall be constructed within
the height and area limitations of the International Building Code. Frame
(Type 4) construction shall not be erected or placed in this district without
the permission of Council. In addition to the requirements or buildings in
Fire Districts 1, 2 and 3, all buildings of use group F-1-A, F-1-B, F-2, F-3,
F-A, H-1, H-2 and L-1 shall be of Type 1, 2A, 2B, 3A or 3B construction as
specified in such code.



      (2)   All multi-family dwellings of over four floors shall be
of Type 1 or 2 construction, as regulated in the International Building Code,
and shall be constructed within the height and area limitations of the
International Building Code.



      (3)   The permission of the Mayor and Council is not required
to build single-family detached dwellings of frame construction.



      (4)   Fire divisions.



         (a)   Fire divisions between dwelling units in
apartments, townhouses and row-type houses of not more than four units shall
be of at least two-hour fire resistance requirement between living units. All
such divisions shall be subject to the approval of the plans and the
inspection of the Fire Chief and the Building Commissioner. In addition, all
townhouses or row-type houses shall have a fire wall separation between every
two living units. The fire wall shall extend out into the eaves to
effectively block the fire spread.



         (b)   For dwelling units in apartments, townhouses and
row-type houses of more than four units, exterior and load-bearing wall
construction shall be of masonry. All floors shall be of the precast concrete
type, or of the poured concrete type having at least a two-hour fire
resistance rating. All such divisions shall be subject to the approval of the
plans and the inspection of the Fire Chief and the Building Commissioner.



      (5)   No common brick shall be allowed on exterior walls. Up
to 30% of the total exterior wall surface, including doors and windows, may
be surfaced with any other type of maintenance-free material if placed over
solid masonry construction of eight inches or more in thickness. Materials
shall have a flame spread rating of not over Class DI as specified in the
International Building Code.



      (6)   No living quarters below grade shall be allowed in any
multi-family building. For clarification, a multi-family building is any
building containing over one family living unit.



   (D)   Restrictions outside fire limits. Outside the fire limits, all
types of construction shall comply with other ordinances, rules and
regulations in effect in the city.



(2000 Code, § 15.56.020)



CHAPTER 156:  BROADCASTING EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES



Section



Satellite Antenna Dishes



   156.01   Dish antenna defined



   156.02   Permit required; fee



   156.03   Permit application; plans and specifications; application
of Building and Zoning Codes



   156.04   Size and number of antennas



   156.05   Location of stations



   156.06   Support structures



   156.07   Compliance with federal law



   156.08   Screening, lettering and color of stations



   156.09   Maintenance



   156.10   Appeals from decisions of Building Commissioner



   156.11   Dismantling and removal of antennas



Telecommunications Facilities, Towers and Antennas



   156.25   Purposes



   156.26   Definitions



   156.27   Permitted uses



   156.28   General requirements



   156.29   Shared use



   156.30   Conditional use permits and variances; application
procedures and standards for telecommunications facilities, towers, antennas
and dishes



   156.31   Satellite dish regulations



   156.32   Decisions



   156.33   Appeals



   156.34   Maintenance and removal of telecommunications facilities,
towers and antennas



   156.35   Abandoned telecommunications facilities, towers or antennas



   156.36   Telecommunications facilities, antenna towers and antennas
as existing buildings or structures



   156.37   Public property



SATELLITE ANTENNA DISHES



§ 156.01  DISH ANTENNA DEFINED.



   As used in this chapter, DISHED ANTENNA, sometimes referred to as
DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING EARTH STATIONS, DISHED SATELLITES or
EARTH STATIONS, means an antenna of dish shape installed for the purpose of
receiving airborne signals related to communications from satellite
transmissions.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.010)



§ 156.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall erect or maintain a dished antenna in the city
obtaining a building permit therefor and without conforming to except as
otherwise permitted by Council.



   (B)   The fee for such a permit is $50, which shall include the cost
of inspections.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.020)



§ 156.03  PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; APPLICATION OF
BUILDING AND ZONING CODES.



   (A)   Any owner of real estate who desires to construct, erect or
maintain a dished antenna on the real estate shall apply to the Building
Commissioner for the permit required by § 156.02. A part-owner, occupant or
renter must have written permission from all owners of the lot, premises or
parcel of land within the city on which the construction, erection or
maintenance is proposed.



   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall submit the permit application
upon forms provided by the Building Commissioner, together with a plot plan
of the lot, premises or parcel of land; antenna specifications; materials;
complete dimensions; support structure details; proposed location in relation
to surrounding buildings, lot lines and utility wires and easements; and
landscape screening.



      (2)   The application shall indicate the name of the owner of
the subject property, the occupant of the subject premises, if different, and
the contractor or other person who will be permitted to construct or erect
the proposed dished antenna. A nonowner contractor is required to be a
licensed contractor.



   (C)   All other provisions of the Building Code and the Zoning Code
shall apply to this chapter, except insofar as they are in direct conflict.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.030)



§ 156.04  SIZE AND NUMBER OF ANTENNAS.



   (A)   The smallest practical size dished antenna shall be used on
residential property in general. On single-family and single-story multiple
residential property, a dished antenna shall have a diameter of not greater
than 12 feet. The maximum height of a dished antenna installation shall be
governed by safety and aesthetic considerations as determined by the Building
Commissioner. Not more than one dished antenna may be installed on a
single-family or single-story multiple residential building.



   (B)   The maximum diameter of a dished antenna located on a multiple
residential building with two or more stories, a commercial building, a
church building or a school building shall be 12 feet.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.040)



§ 156.05  LOCATION OF STATIONS.



   (A)   No dished antenna shall be erected on any front or side yard,
or within ten feet of any lot line, unless approved by Council.



   (B)   No dished antenna shall be erected on the roof top of any
single-family residential structure, unless approved by Council.



   (C)   A dished antenna may be located on the roof of a multiple
residential building with two or more stories, a commercial building a church
building, a school building, a manufacturing building or any other building,
if approval is obtained from the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.050)



§ 156.06  SUPPORT STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Only metal support, four-inch black pipe construction, or its
equivalent, shall be allowed for any dished antenna.



   (B)   Only a concrete base or caissons, depending on soil
conditions, shall be employed in line with the grade. The Building
Commissioner shall have the sole discretion to decide whether a concrete base
or caissons are appropriate.



   (C)   The structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of a
minimum of 85 mph in a manner conforming with good engineering practices, as
approved by the Commissioner.



   (D)   All outside electric wires must have a ground fault
interrupter, unless they are low voltage.



   (E)   Direct burial of cable is not permitted. A minimum of 12
inches of earth ground cover over encased material is required.



   (F)   The dished antenna must be bonded to an eight-foot grounding
rod, with a minimum of seven and one-half feet of the rod imbedded in the
ground, and must comply with the City of Chicago Electrical Code.



   (G)   The structure must be in conformity with the City of Chicago
Electrical Code.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.060)



§ 156.07  COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL LAW.



   The intended use of the dished antenna shall be authorized under
applicable federal law.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.070)



§ 156.08  SCREENING, LETTERING AND COLOR OF STATIONS.



   (A)   No lettering, numerals, symbols, pictorial signs or designs
shall be permitted on any surface of a dished antenna.



   (B)   No dished antenna shall be painted in a color other than black
or a neutral tone.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.080)



§ 156.09  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Dished antennas and support structures shall be maintained in
good repair and kept structurally sound to ensure that they will not be
damaged due to winds or structural failure.



   (B)   All surfaces shall be maintained in good condition and free of
rust or corrosion.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.090)



§ 156.10  APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   An appeal from a decision of the Building Commissioner denying a permit
to construct or maintain a dished antenna may be made to Council.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.100)



§ 156.11  DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL OF ANTENNAS.



   If the residence, commercial structure, office building or other
facility upon which a dished antenna is located is sold or otherwise
transferred, or if the dished antenna is in any way abandoned or neglected or
becomes dilapidated, the seller or transferor of the premises shall cause the
earth station to be dismantled completely, including all support structures
and appurtenances, and removed from the property. However, if the purchase
contract or other means of conveyance provides specifically for the dished
antenna to remain in place for use by the successive possessor of the
property, and the dished antenna is in acceptable condition, then this
section shall not apply.



(2000 Code, § 15.72.110)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS AND ANTENNAS



§ 156.25  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Provide for the appropriate location and development of
communication towers and antennas to serve the residents and businesses of
the city;



   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers and antennas through
careful design, sitting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques;



   (C)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful sitting of tower structures;



   (D)   Lessen traffic effects on surrounding residential areas;



   (E)   Maximize use of any new existing telecommunications facilities
and towers and minimize the total number of facilities and towers throughout
the city;



   (F)   Maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures as
a primary option and discourage the construction of additional single-use
towers; and



   (G)   Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications
facilities and towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.010)  (Ord. 2556, § 1, passed - -2001)



§ 156.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE.  Manmade structures such as clock towers,
bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles and similar
alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the
presence of towers and antennas.



   ANTENNA.  Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or
capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, video
programming, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
telecommunications signals or other communication signals. For purposes of
this chapter, ANTENNA shall include “personal wireless facilities,” as
referenced in § 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 332).
The term antenna shall not include any antenna under 12 feet in total height,
and satellite earth station antennas one meter in diameter or less located in
a residential zoning district other than R5 or R6 Districts, receive-only
home television antennas, and satellite earth station antenna two meters or
less in diameter located in an R5, R6 or nonresidential zoning district.



   CELL.  A single specified geographic area within a cellular
provider’s broad cellular geographic service area (CGSA) served by a single
antenna facility and to which a single radio frequency is assigned.



   DIRECTOR.  The Building Commissioner or his or her designee.



   FAA.  The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission.



   GUY TOWER.  A communication tower that is supported in whole or in
part by guy wires and ground anchors.



   HEIGHT or TOTAL HEIGHT.  When referring to a telecommunications
facility, tower or antenna, means the distance measured vertically from the
highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest point, which is
defined as the bottom of the base of the structure being measured at either
roof or ground level, whichever is applicable. The HEIGHT of a tower shall
include the height of any antennas positioned for operation attached or which
may be attached to the highest point on the tower. The HEIGHT of an antenna
shall include the height of any tower attached or which may be attached to
the antenna.



   INTERFERENCE.  The disruption of communications broadcast signals from
any other broadcast transmitting or receiving equipment whether located on
the site or not. For the purposes of this chapter, INTERFERENCE is defined in
the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.



   LATTICE OR SELF-SUPPORTING TOWER.  A communications tower that has
open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy
wires and ground anchors.



   MONOPOLE.  A communications tower consisting of a single-pole
constructed without guy wires or ground anchors.



   SATELLITE DISH.  A device incorporating a reflective surface that is
solid, open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow disk,
cone or horn. The device transmits and/or receives radio or electromagnetic
waves between earth based and/or orbitally based satellites. This definition
includes but is not limited to satellite dishes included as “personal
wireless facilities,” as referenced in § 704 of the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, as well as what are commonly referred to as satellite earth
stations, television reception only antennas and satellite microwave antennas.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.  Any commercial facility established for
the purpose of providing wireless voice, data and image transmission within a
designated service area. A TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY consists of one or
more antennas attached to a support structure, together with related
equipment or buildings.



   TOWER.  A structure and any support thereto, such as a self-supporting
mast, pole, lattice tower, guy tower or monopole tower, constructed as a
freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent
structure or equipment, on which one or more antennas is located.



      (1)   The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers and cellular telephone towers.



      (2)   The term excludes any towers under 12 feet in total
height.



   UNAFFILIATED USER.  A person or entity under a shared use agreement
specified in § 156.29(B) of not less than a five-year term, which person or
entity does not directly or indirectly own or control, and is not directly
owned or controlled by, or is not under common ownership or control with
another user of the same tower.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.020)  (Ord. 2556, § 2, passed - -2001)



§ 156.27  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Permits required. Upon receipt of an antenna installation
permit, telecommunications facilities, towers or antennas may be located in
the following zoning districts within the city:



      (1)   In M Limited Manufacturing Zoning Districts as a matter
of right, provided such towers comply with all of the requirements of §§
156.28 and 156.29 of this chapter;



      (2)   In B1, B2, B3 and R5 and R6 Districts, as a matter of
right, provided the towers comply with all of the conditions §§ 156.28 and
156.29 of this chapter and do not exceed the following height limitations:



         (a)   For a single unaffiliated user, no more than 60
feet in height; and



         (b)   No guy tower shall be located in the B 1, B2, B3
Central Business District or an R5 or R6 District.



      (3)   In residential districts other than R5 and R6 Districts,
as a matter of right up to 60 feet in height provided:



         (a)   The tower comply with all of the requirements in
§ 156.28 of this chapter;



         (b)   The tower are exclusively operated by the
residential occupant of the premises on which the tower is located; and



         (c)   The towers are an accessory use to the principal
permitted use(s) of the zoning district.



      (4)   In new PUD’s as approved in accordance with the PUD
process provided, however, that the standards for the underlying zoning
classification shall serve as a basic guideline for approval of all towers
exceeding 12 feet in height shall require a change to the PUD as determined
by the Director; and



      (5)   The location, construction or installation of any
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna exceeding the height
limitations permitted by this section may be allowed as a conditional use
pursuant to § 156.30 of this chapter.



   (B)   Rooftop installations. Rooftop mounted towers and antennas may
be located as a matter of right on any multiple-family dwellings and
nonresidential buildings in the city subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The building is at least 30 feet in height, and the
tower and antenna will add no more than a total of 20 feet to the height of
the building;



      (2)   The tower or antenna is set back from any existing or
planned off-site residential property line a distance of at least two times
the full height of the building and the tower and antenna, but in no event
less than 100 feet; and



      (3)   The number and location of towers, antennas or other
receiving or transmitting devices located on a single structure does not
exceed one per 200 square feet of building rooftop and does not adversely
affect adjacent properties and views.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.030)  (Ord. 2556, § 3, passed - -2001)



§ 156.28  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location,
construction and installation of all telecommunications facilities, towers
and antennas, governed by this chapter.



   (A)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   (a)   No new cell may be established if there is a
technically suitable space available at commercially reasonable terms on an
existing tower or structure within the search area that the new cell is to
serve.



         (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the search area
is defined as the grid for the placement of the antenna.



      (2)   (a)   No illumination shall be permitted on a
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna unless required by the FCC, FAA
or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction.



         (b)   Where lighting is required, the Building
Commissioner may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the
design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and
views.



      (3)   No advertising is permitted on a telecommunications
facility, tower or antenna.



   (B)   Building codes; safety standards.



      (1)   To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications
facilities, towers and antennas, the owner of a facility shall ensure that it
is maintained in compliance with applicable building and safety codes adopted
by the city and the applicable standards for tower and antennas promulgated
by the FCC and FAA from time to time.



      (2)   The owners of telecommunications facilities, towers, and
antennas shall conduct inspections of the facilities at lease once every
three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by
a structural engineer licensed to practice in Illinois.



      (3)   A report of the inspection shall be filed with the
Building Commissioner.



   (C)   Regulatory compliance. All telecommunications facilities,
towers and antennas shall comply with all applicable current standards and
regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities,
towers and antennas.



      (1)   If regulations are amended from time to time, the owners
of any communications facility, tower or antennas subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall bring the facilities into compliance with the amended
rules and regulations within six months of the effective date of the
amendment, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency.



      (2)   The owners of telecommunications facilities, towers and
antennas shall provide documentation establishing that each such facility is
in compliance with all local, state and federal requirements.



      (3)   Evidence of compliance shall be submitted to the
Building Commissioner.



   (D)   Operation of equipment. All telecommunications facilities,
towers and antennas shall be installed, operated and maintained in accordance
with all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances so as not to interfere
with or cause interference with the city’s use of its other radio or
television transmitting and/or receiving equipment whether located on the
site or not.



      (1)   In the event there is interference with radio or other
telecommunications transmissions, the owners of the facilities, towers and
antennas shall promptly take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and
eliminate the interference within a reasonable period of time; provided
however, if the transmissions materially interfere with the city’s
emergency transmitting and/or receiving equipment, such corrective steps
shall be taken immediately upon notice by the city. If the owner of the
facilities, towers or antennas fails to take immediate corrective action, the
city may do so at the owner’s expense.



      (2)   If the owner is unable to eliminate the interference in
accordance with division (D)(1), the owner shall terminate its facilities,
towers or antennas from operation.



   (E)   Security.



      (1)   All telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas,
except towers of less than 12 feet in height, and except for towers and
antennas located on rooftops or alternative tower structures, shall be
enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height
and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.



      (2)   The Building Commissioner may waive the requirements for
alternative tower structures.



   (F)   Visual effect.



      (1)   Subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other
state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction, telecommunications
facilities, towers or antennas shall be constructed of materials that will
blend with the environment to reduce visual obtrusiveness.



      (2)   At a site of such a facility, construction of equipment
buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, incorporate
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will camouflage
the tower facilities to blend with the natural setting and surrounding
environment.



      (3)   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a
tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall
be of a neutral color identical to, or blends with, the color of the
supporting structure so that the antenna and related equipment are as
visually unobtrusive as possible.



   (G)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view
of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and
residential property and shall include the following:



         (a)   For towers less than 150 feet in height, a buffer
area no less than six feet wide shall be provided at any property line which
faces a public street or way, or any residentially zoned property;



         (b)   For towers in excess of 150 feet in height, a
buffer area not less than ten feet wide shall be provided at any property
line which faces a public street or way, or any residentially zoned property;
and



         (c)   The buffer zone shall consist of plant materials
which can be expected to grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet
in height within two years after planting.



      (2)   Landscape screening forming a continuous hedge around
the base of the tower and related equipment, and which can be expected to
grow to form a continuous hedge at least six feet in height within two years
after planting, shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower
compound from all other property.



      (3)   Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall not
exceed 20 feet in height; shall not affect the stability of the guys should
they be uprooted; and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the
transmission building or security facilities.



      (4)   Native vegetation, or such other vegetation approved by
the Building Commissioner, on the site shall be preserved to the greatest
practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing
significant vegetation to be removed and vegetation to be replaced.



      (5)   For good cause shown, the city’s Building Commissioner
may permit use of an alternate detailed plan and specifications for
landscaping and screening, including plantings, fences, walls and other
features designed to screen and buffer towers and accessory uses.



         (a)   Such a plan shall accomplish the same degree of
screening achieved by the requirements may be desirable for adequate
visibility, for security purposes, or for continued operation of existing
bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms.



         (b)   In locations where the visual effect of the tower
would be minimal, including, without limitation, remote agricultural and
rural locations or heavily developed industrial areas, the Building
Commissioner may waive or reduce the landscaping requirements.



   (H)   Maintenance of telecommunications facilities, towers and
antennas.



      (1)   Equipment located on or at a tele- communications
facility, tower or antenna shall be automated to the greatest extent possible
to reduce traffic and congestion.



      (2)   Where such a facility abuts or has access to a collector
or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by
means of the collector street.



   (I)   Principal, accessory and joint uses of telecommunications
facilities, towers and antennas.



      (1)   Where a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is
the principal use, accessory structures used in direct support of such a
facility shall be allowed but shall not be used for offices, vehicle storage
or other outdoor storage. Equipment buildings housing telecommunications
facilities used in the operation of any tower, antennas or satellite dish on
the property or adjacent property shall be accessory to the towers and
antennas.



      (2)   Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support
of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower,
unless repairs, inspections or maintenance to the tower are being made.



      (3)   In nonresidential zoning districts and in R5 and R6
zoning districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter,
telecommunications facilities, towers or antennas may be located on sites
containing another principal use in the same buildable area.



         (a)   The facilities may occupy a parcel meeting the
minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.



         (b)   For a monopole or lattice tower, the minimum
distance between a tower and another tower or principal use located on the
same lot shall be the greater of 20% of the tower height or 25 feet.



         (c)   For a guyed tower, the minimum distance between a
tower and another tower or principal use located on the same lot shall be the
greater of 100% of the breakpoint or 25 feet.



         (d)   The separation is required to assure compatibility
of land uses and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of individuals
and structures occupying the same site.



      (4)   No tower may be located on a site where a proposed or
existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of
volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane,
gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals, unless the tower is set back
from any such materials or liquids by not less than the total height of the
tower.



   (J)   Lot size, setbacks and separation for telecommunications
facilities, towers and antennas.



      (1)   All telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas
shall be situated on a site of sufficient size and shape to provide an
adequate setback from the based of the tower to any property line abutting a
residential district. The size of the site shall be sufficient where the
required setbacks are satisfied. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot
shall control, even through the antennas or towers may be located on leased
parcels within the lot.



      (2)   All freestanding antennas and towers shall be set
sufficiently back from property lines to:



         (a)   Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or
other buffer required by division (G) of this section;



         (b)   Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential
property; and



         (c)   Protect adjoining property from the potential
adverse effect of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such
failure on the site, based on the engineer’s analysis.



      (3)   A freestanding antenna or tower is presumed to be
sufficiently set back where it:



         (a)   Meets the requirements of divisions (J)(1) and (2);



         (b)   For non-guyed structures, provides a setback from
a property line within, abutting or across a public right-of-way from a
residential district of at least two feet for every foot of tower height; and



         (c)   For non-guyed structures, provides a setback equal
to or exceeding the rear yard setback required for the adjoining property
where the adjoining property is not in a residential district.



         (d)   Guyed structures within or abutting a residential
district shall comply with the requirements of division (J)(2) and shall be
situated on a site of sufficient size and shape to provide a setback equal to
the height of the tower from a guy anchor to any property line abutting a
residential district.



         (e)   Guyed structures not within or abutting a
residential district shall comply with the requirements of division (J)(2)
and shall be situated on a site of sufficient size and shape to provide a
setback equal to the greater of the required setback for a principal use in
the applicable zoning district, 100% of the breakpoint of the tower, or 25
feet.



      (4)   All equipment buildings or cabinets associated with a
tower or antenna shall meet the setbacks required in the zoning district
where the tower and the required buildings are located.



      (5)   No freestanding conditional use tower within a
residential district or freestanding tower exceeding 60 feet in height within
an R5, R6 or any nonresidential district, shall be allowed within the greater
of a 1,000-foot radius or the separation distances set forth in division
(J)(6) below, of a freestanding conditional use tower within a residential
district.



      (6)   All freestanding towers within R5, R6 or nonresidential
districts for which applications are submitted after approval of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall conform to the following minimum
tower separation requirements:



 


Tower Height

 

<50 Feet

 

50 - 100 Feet

 

101 - 150 Feet

 

>150 Feet



< 50 feet
 

300 feet

 

500 feet

 

750 feet

 

1,000 feet



50 to 100 feet
 

500 feet

 

750 feet

 

1,000 feet

 

1,500 feet



101 to150 feet
 

750 feet

 

1,000 feet

 

1,500 feet

 

2,000 feet



> 150 feet
 

1,000 feet

 

1,500 feet

 

2,000 feet

 

2,500 feet




 



      (7)   Towers and antennas mounted on rooftops shall be exempt
from these minimum separation distances. For purposes of implementing this
chapter, an AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting
ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances
shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array.



   (K)   Location.



      (1)   General. In no case shall a freestanding tower be
located in any required front yard.



      (2)   Residential zoning districts other than R5 and R6.



         (a)   Rear yards. In any residential zoning district
other than R5 and R6, subject to the provisions of this chapter, and to the
extent that it is practicable, towers and antennas shall be located only in
the rear yard of any lot.



         (b)   Interior side yards. If signals cannot be clearly
received from the rear yard, the towers and antennas may be located in the
interior side yard.



         (c)   Roof or wall mounted. In the event signals cannot
be clearly received by locating the towers and antennas in the rear or
interior side yards of the property, it may be mounted on the roof or wall of
the principal structure, subject to the following requirements:



            1.   Roof mounted or wall anchored towers and
antennas installed on a principal building or structure shall be located on
that portion of a roof or wall which faces a rear yard; and



            2.   In the event signals cannot be clearly
received by locating the towers and antennas on that portion of a roof or
wall which faces a rear yard, the towers and antennas may be installed on the
side roof.



      (3)   R5, R6 and Nonresidential Zoning Districts.



         (a)   Rear yards, interior side yards and roof mounted.
In any R5, R6 and nonresidential zoning district, to the extent that it is
practicable, towers and antennas shall be located in rear yards, interior
side yards, or on the roof, subject to the provisions of division (K)(3)(b)
below.



         (b)   Roof mounted. In R5, R6 and nonresidential
districts roof mounted towers and antennas may be installed on any portion of
the roof of a principal structure where the antenna is effectively screened
and is installed so that it is not visible between ground level and ten feet
above ground level from any adjoining street or abutting residential property
including other residential property in R5 or R6 districts.



         (c)   Wall mounted. In R5, R6 and nonresidential
districts, wall mounted towers and antennas installed on a principal building
or structure shall be located on that portion of a wall which faces a rear
yard.



         (d)   Accessory structures. Roof mounted or wall
anchored towers and antennas installed on an accessory building or structure
may be located on any side of the roof or wall.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.040)  (Ord. 2556, § 4, passed - -2001)



§ 156.29  SHARED USE.



   (A)   Facility design. All new telecommunications towers shall be
designed to structurally accommodate shared use.



      (1)   To encourage the maximum use of existing towers, no
building permit or variance shall be required for the addition of one or more
antennas to and existing tower provided:



         (a)   The height of the tower or structure on which the
antenna is placed is not increased;



         (b)   The applicant complies with the requirements of
§§ 156.27(B) and 156.28 of this chapter; and



         (c)   The owner provides prior written notice to the
city of the additional antennas.



   (B)   New towers. As conditions of approval of a new freestanding
conditional use tower in a residential district other than R5 or R6, or a new
tower in an R5, R6 or nonresidential district, the owner shall:



      (1)   Record the letter of intent required by this code, in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds for the county in which the tower site is
located;



      (2)   Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request
for information from a potential shared use applicant;



      (3)   Negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties;



      (4)   Allow shared use where the third party seeking the use
enters into a written agreement to pay a reasonable, pro rata share of the
costs of the tower and all equipment buildings, including all charges
necessary to modify, but not totally reconstruct, the tower and transmitters
to accommodate shared use, and to avoid interference with the signals
transmitted or received by the tower’s users; and



      (5)   These conditions of approval shall be a covenant running
with the land and be binding on the current owner and all successors in
interest of the tower site.



   (C)   Where an owner whose tower was approved after the effective
date of this chapter wilfully and knowingly fails to comply with the
requirements of division (B), the city may withhold approval of any
application by the owner for a building permit, conditional use permit or
variance for any tower or antenna.



   (D)   Shared use shall not be precluded because a reasonable fee for
shared use is charged, or because reasonable costs may be incurred to adapt
the existing and proposed uses to a shared tower.



      (1)   The Director, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the
City Council may consider expert testimony to determine whether the
anticipated fees and costs are reasonable.



      (2)   Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed
unreasonable.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.050)  (Ord. 2556, § 5, passed - -2001)



§ 156.30  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES; APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND
STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS, ANTENNAS AND DISHES.



   (A)   Conditional uses and variances.



      (1)   The location, construction or installation of any
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna exceeding the height
limitations permitted by this chapter, or any satellite dish exceeding the
size limitations of this chapter, may be allowed as a conditional use
pursuant to this section. The location, construction or installation of any
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna, or satellite dish which does
not otherwise meet the requirements of §§ 156.27, 156.28, 156.29 or 156.31
may be permitted upon the grant of a variance pursuant to this section.



      (2)   A petition for a conditional use permit, variance or any
amendment thereto for a telecommunications facility, tower, antenna or
satellite dish not permitted pursuant to §§ 156.27 or 156.31 of this
subchapter shall be initiated by application to the Director in accordance
with the provision of this section, and may be issued in accordance with this
section.



      (3)   After receiving the report of the Director, the City
Council may issue or deny a conditional use permit or variance, as the case
may be, have been satisfied.



      (4)   Standards for granting a conditional use.



         (a)   The Council shall determine that the application
has met all of the general requirements of this subchapter, except as to
which a variance has been specifically granted;



         (b)   For facilities, antennas and towers, the extent of
the deviation of the proposed facility from the requirements of this chapter,
the effect of the proposed facility in terms of the goals of this chapter,
and the benefits of and need for the proposed antenna, or tower must be
greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring
properties;



         (c)   For satellite dishes, strict compliance with the
regulations contained in this chapter must result in an obstructed reception
window and must be beyond the control of the property owner and applicant; and



         (d)   The use of alternative tower structures rather
than the construction and erection of new or additional towers is one of the
goals of this subchapter. The depreciating effects and damage to the
neighboring properties of antennas and towers shall be presumed to be less
when alternative tower structures are used.



      (5)   Standards for granting a variance for antennas, towers
or dishes.



         (a)   The Council shall determine that the application
has met all of the requirements of this subchapter and this code, except for
those for which a conditional use or variance has been specifically granted;



         (b)   The variance must be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this title;



         (c)   Strict enforcement of this subchapter must result
in practical difficulties or impose exceptional hardships due to special
conditions which are not generally found on other properties in the same
zoning district;



         (d)   The exceptional hardships or special and unusual
conditions or circumstances aforementioned in division (A)(5)(c), are not
self-imposed; provided however, that in the case of variances as to
nonresidential property and R5 or R6 zoned property, or variances from the
requirements of §§ 156.27(A)(3)(b) or (c) as to residentially zoned
property other than R5 and R6 zoned property, that the property cannot yield
a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed
by this chapter;



         (e)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood and will not be a substantial
detriment to adjacent property;



         (f)   The use of alternative tower structures rather
than the construction and erection of new or additional towers is one of the
goals of this subchapter. The depreciating effects and damage to the
neighboring properties of antennas and towers shall be presumed to be less
when alternative tower structure are used;



         (g)   Variances from separation requirements for towers
and antennas may be permitted to allow more than one tower on a lot only if:



            1.   The standards contained in divisions
(A)(5)(a), (b), (c) and (e) of this section are satisfied;



            2.   Setback requirements, design and landscaping
requirements are met for each tower;



            3.   The variance is technically feasible and
failure of one will not lead to multiple failures; and



            4.   Clustered towers shall be of similar height,
not to exceed 10% deviation from the average height of all clustered towers.
The term “clustered” shall mean two or more grouped together within the
separation distances required under this subchapter, on the same parcel or
lot, or on adjacent parcels or lots and within the adjoining setback areas of
both parcels or lots.



      (6)   Conditions and restrictions. The City Council may impose
conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may
be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this section and as
may be necessary to create a buffer from, or otherwise minimize adverse
effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. If a time
limit is set forth by which conditions and restrictions must be completed,
they shall be so completed in the time specified. If no such time limit is
specified, then the conditions and restrictions shall be completed within a
reasonable amount of time. The applicant shall be obliged to fulfill and
maintain all conditions and restrictions for as long as the variance is
utilized or in effect.



      (7)   Contents of application for a conditional use. All
applications for a conditional use under this subchapter shall include such
documentation and information specified in this code, as may be required by
the Director.



      (8)   Contents of application for a variance. All applications
for variances shall include such documentation and information specified in
this code, as may be required by the Director.



      (9)   The Director shall maintain records of all the responses
to requests for information, and shall provide information to any person upon
receipt of a proper request.



      (10)   After the owner of an existing facility demonstrates
antenna(s) of the type proposed by any applicant cannot be reasonably
accommodated on the owner’s tower, no other applicant shall be required to
request information from that owner concerning antennas of the same type
which cannot be reasonably accommodated.



   (B)   Planned unit developments.



      (1)   Existing planned unit developments.



         (a)   The erection or installation of any antennas,
towers or satellite dishes subject to regulation under this chapter that are
permitted uses in the underlying PUD zoning classification shall require
approval of a minor change to the PUD unless and to the extent specifically
permitted in the approved PUD.



         (b)   The erection or installation of any antennas,
towers or satellite dishes subject to regulation under this chapter that are
conditional uses in the underlying PUD zoning classification shall require
approval of a major change to the PUD unless and to the extent specifically
permitted in the approved PUD.



      (2)   New planned unit developments. The erection or
installation of any antennas, towers or satellite dishes subject to
regulation under this chapter shall meet the standards of this chapter and
those of the underlying PUD zoning classification, unless specifically
permitted otherwise in the approved PUD.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.050)  (Ord. 2556, § 6, passed - -2001)



§ 156.31  SATELLITE DISH REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permits required. No person shall construct or install any
satellite dish exceeding one meter in size in residential districts other
than R5 and R6 zoning districts, or two meters in size in R5, R6 or
nonresidential districts without obtaining an antenna installation permit
pursuant to Chapter 110 of this code.



   (B)   General requirements. The following requirements shall apply
to all dish antennas located, installed or constructed:



      (1)   Aesthetic requirements. All dish antennas, and the bases
on which they are mounted, shall be black, gray, white, silver, tan, beige or
other light brown shades of color, or another color which matches or blends
with the predominant color of the roof surface if roof mounted, or the color
of the surroundings if ground mounted.



      (2)   Wind loads. All dish antennas and any bases on which
they are mounted shall be constructed to withstand a minimum wind velocity of
80 mph (impact pressure of 32 pounds per square foot).



      (3)   No obstruction of public ways or property. No satellite
dish shall extend above, across, over or under any public street, public
sidewalk, or other public rights of way or property, and shall have no wires,
or metal rods extending therefrom above, across, over or under any public
street, public sidewalk or other public rights of way or property.



      (4)   Buried wires, rods and connectors. All wires, rods and
other connectors between a satellite dish and the structure receiving
services from the dish shall be located underground if ground mounted or
securely attached to or located within the structure receiving service if the
satellite dish is roof or wall mounted.



      (5)   Screening for satellite dishes.



         (a)   As an exception to § 160.324, all ground mounted
satellite dish installations exceeding one meter in size in residential
districts including R5 and R6 districts, or two meters in size in any
nonresidential districts, shall include screening treatments, not less than
the height of the dish installation, along the dish’s non-reception window
axis and low-level screening treatments along the reception window axis of
the dish’s base.



         (b)   Screening treatments should completely enclosed
the satellite and consist of non-deciduous landscape materials or fencing
having an opacity of at least 75%.



      (6)   Lighting and advertising. All satellite dish
installations shall comply with all applicable FCC and FAA requirements. No
lights or signs, or other advertising shall be permitted on any satellite
dish or support structure unless required by the FCC or the FAA.



   (C)   Miscellaneous zoning requirements. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, all satellite dish installations shall comply with
all accessory use, yard, height, bulk and setback requirements specified
within the zoning district where the dish will be located.



      (1)   Residential zoning districts other than R5 and R6
Districts.



         (a)   Rear yards. In any residential zoning district
other than R5 and R6 Districts, subject to the provisions of this subchapter,
and to the extent that it is practicable, satellite dishes shall be located
only in the rear yard of any lot. All satellite dishes in a historic
preservation district which are located other than in the rear yard of any
lot.



         (b)   Interior side yards. If satellite signals cannot
be clearly received from the rear yard, the satellite dish may be located in
the interior side yard.



         (c)   Roof or wall mounted. In the event satellite
signals cannot be clearly received by locating the satellite dish in the rear
or interior side yards of the property it may be mounted on the roof or wall
of the principal structure, subject to the following requirements.



            1.   Roof mounted or wall anchored satellite
dishes installed on a principal building or structure shall be located on
that portion of a roof or wall which faces a rear yard.



            2.   In the event satellite signals cannot be
clearly received by locating the satellite dish on that portion of a roof or
wall which faces a rear yard, the satellite dish may be installed on the side
roof.



            3.   A satellite dish mounted on the side roof
shall be installed so it is not visible between ground level from any street
adjoining the front yard of the property on which it is located.



            4.   A satellite dish exceeding one meter (three
and one-half feet) in size may be permitted as a conditional use pursuant to
§ 156.30(A)(3) of this subchapter.



            5.   A satellite dish not meeting any other
standards or requirements in this subchapter may be permitted upon the grant
of a variance pursuant to § 156.30(A)(4) of this subchapter.



      (2)   Nonresidential zoning districts and R5 and R6 Districts.



         (a)   Rear yards, interior side yards and roof mounted.
In any R5 and R6, or nonresidential zoning district, to the extent that it is
practicable, satellite dishes shall be located in rear yards, interior side
yards, or on the roof, subject to the provisions of division (C)(2)(b) of
this section.



         (b)   Roof mounted. In any R5, R6 or nonresidential
districts, roof mounted satellite dishes may be installed on any portion of
the roof of a principal structure where the antenna is effectively screened
and is installed so that it is not visible between ground level and ten feet
above ground level from any adjoining street or abutting residential
property, including other multiple-family property in an R5 or R6 District.



         (c)   Wall mounted. In any R5, R6 or nonresidential
districts, wall mounted satellite dishes installed on a principal building or
structure shall be located on that portion of a wall which faces a rear yard.



         (d)   Accessory structures. Roof mounted or wall
anchored satellite dishes installed on an accessory building or structure may
be located on any side of the roof or wall.



         (e)   Conditional uses. A satellite dish in excess of
two meters (seven feet) in size may be permitted as a conditional use
pursuant to § 156.30(A)(3) of this subchapter.



         (f)   Variances. A satellite dish not meeting any other
standards or requirements in this subchapter may be permitted upon the grant
of a variance pursuant to § 156.30(A)(4) of this subchapter.



   (D)   Setbacks for satellite dishes.



      (1)   Permitted ground mounted satellite dishes.  Permitted
ground mounted satellite dishes shall be setback at least five feet from the
property line.



      (2)   Conditional use satellite dishes.  No satellite dish
exceeding one meter in size in residential districts or two meters in size in
any R5, R6 or nonresidential districts shall be located less than 15 feet
from any lot line or less than 35 feet from any existing principal structure
on a lot other than the lot on which the satellite dish is to be constructed
or installed.



   (E)   Satellite dish sizes. The size of all satellite dish
installations shall conform to the following requirements:



      (1)   Residential. No satellite dish shall be more than ten
feet in diameter whether roof mounted, wall anchored or ground mounted; and



      (2)   Nonresidential and R5 and R6. In the nonresidential and
R5 and R6 zoning districts, satellite dishes in excess of ten feet in
diameter shall be permitted upon approval of a conditional use in accordance
with § 156.30 of this subchapter.



   (F)   Satellite dish heights. The height of all satellite dish
installations shall conform to the following requirements.



      (1)   Ground mounted.



         (a)   Residential other than R5 and R6. In residential
districts other than R5 and R6, no ground-mounted satellite dish shall be
more than 12 feet in height, as measured from the lowest point of the
finished grade at the bottom of the base or tower on which it is constructed
or installed to the highest point on the satellite dish.



         (b)   Nonresidential and R5 and R6. In nonresidential
and R5 and R6 Districts, ground mounted satellite dish installations in
excess of 70 feet in height may be permitted upon approval of a conditional
use in accordance with the requirements of § 156.30 of this subchapter.



      (2)   Roof or wall mounted.



         (a)   Residential other than R5 and R6. In residential
other than R5 and R6 Districts, roof mounted or wall anchored satellite
dishes shall not exceed the maximum height restriction for principal
structures for the zoning district in which they are located.



         (b)   Nonresidential and R5 and R5. In all
nonresidential and R5 and R6 Districts, roof or wall mounted satellite dishes
in excess of 60 feet in height may be permitted upon approval of a variance
in accordance with the requirements of § 156.30 of this subchapter.



         (c)   Roof mounted satellite dishes. Any roof mounted
satellite dishes shall be installed so it is not visible between ground level
and ten feet above ground level from any street adjoining the property or any
abutting residential properties including other multiple-family property in
an R5 or R6 District.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.070)  (Ord. 2556, § 7, passed - -2001)



§ 156.32  DECISIONS.



   Any decision rendered upon an application to locate, construct or
install a telecommunications facility, tower, antenna or for a conditional
use or variance permit for any such facility shall be written and shall
include findings of fact supported by substantial evidence in a written
record.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.080)  (Ord. 2556, § 8, passed - -2001)



§ 156.33  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals from any decision of the Director rendered upon an
application to locate, construct, or install a telecommunications facility,
tower, or antenna shall be filed pursuant to the plan and zone ordinance.



   (B)   Appeals from any decision of the City Council rendered upon an
application to locate, construct, or install a telecommunications facility,
tower, antenna or for a conditional use permit for any such facility, tower,
antenna or for a conditional use permit for any such facility shall be filed
with the plan and zone ordinance.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.050)  (Ord. 2556, § 9, passed - -2001)



§ 156.34  MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS
AND ANTENNAS.



   (A)   All telecommunications facilities, towers and antennas,
including satellite dishes, shall be maintained in compliance with all
standards in applicable building and technical codes to ensure the structural
and technical integrity of the facilities.



   (B)   The Director or his or her designee shall be authorized to
enter upon the property of the owner or tenant of the antenna facility for
purposes of inspecting same, upon prior written or verbal notice to the owner
or tenant.



   (C)   If upon inspection by the Director, it is determined that a
telecommunications facility, tower or antenna fails to comply with any of the
applicable standards of the Oak Forest Building Codes, the Director shall
send a written notice of the violation to the owner of the telecommunications
facility, tower or antenna and the owner is different from the owner of such
facility. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested.



   (D)   The owner of the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna
and the owner of the property if the owner is different from the owner of the
facility, shall have 30 days after receipt of the violation notice to bring
the facility into compliance.



   (E)   In the event the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna
is not brought into compliance within the required 30-day period, the city
may provide notice to the owners requiring such a facility to be removed.



   (F)   In the event the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna
is not removed within 30 days after receipt of the notice of removal, the
city may remove or cause the removal of the facility and file a lien against
the property for the costs of removal.



   (G)   In the event that the failure of the telecommunications
facility, tower or antenna to comply with any such standards constitutes a
present danger to persons or property, the city may abate the danger, provide
notice to the owner as soon as reasonably practicable and recover the costs
of abatement from the owner and file a lien against the property for the
costs of abatement.



   (H)   The city may pursue any and all available legal remedies to
insure that a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna which fails to
comply with the Oak Forest Building Code or which constitutes a danger to
persons or property is brought into compliance or removed.



   (I)   Any delay by the city in taking enforcement action against the
owner or a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the owner of the
property if the owner is different from the owner of the facility, shall not
waive the city’s right to take any action at a later time.



   (J)   The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility,
tower or antenna removed regardless of the owner’s or operator’s intent
to the facility, and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise,
which may have been issued or granted.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.100)  (Ord. 2556, § 10, passed - -2001)



§ 156.35  ABANDONED TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES,  TOWERS OR ANTENNAS.



   (A)   Any telecommunications facility, tower or antenna that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned,
whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the facility.



   (B)   If upon inspection by the Building Commissioner, it is
determined that a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is abandoned,
the Building Commissioner shall send a written notice of the abandonment to
the owner of the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the owner
of the property if the owner is different from the owner of the facility. The
notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (C)   The owner of the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna
and the owner of the property if the owner is different from the owners of
the facility, shall have 60 days after receipt of the notice to remove all of
the facility, including any and all footings and foundation.



   (D)   If the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is not
removed within 60 days after receipt of notice from the city notifying the
owners of the abandonment, the city may remove the facility and file a lien
against the property for the costs of removal.



   (E)   The city may pursue any and all available legal remedies to
insure that an abandoned telecommunications facility, tower or antenna is
removed.



   (F)   Any delay by the city in taking action to enforce the removal
of an abandoned telecommunications facility, tower or antenna against the
owner of the telecommunications facility, tower or antenna and the owner of
the property if the owner is different from the owner of the facility, shall
not waive the city’s right to take any action at a later time.



   (G)   The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility,
tower or antenna removed regardless of the owners’ or operator’s intent
to operate the facility, and regardless of any permits, federal, state or
otherwise, which may have been issued or granted.



   (H)   If the owner of an abandoned telecommunications facility,
tower or antenna wishes to use such as abandoned facility, the owner shall
first apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the
conditions of this chapter as if the telecommunications facility, tower or
antenna were a new facility.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.110)  (Ord. 2556, § 11, passed - -2001)



§ 156.36  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, ANTENNA TOWERS AND ANTENNAS AS
EXISTING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Except as to the requirements of § 156.28(B) or as otherwise
provided in this chapter, a telecommunications facility, tower or antenna
operative on September 25, 2001 shall be permitted to continue in its present
use as an existing building or structure pursuant to the requirements of the
Oak Forest Municipal Code.



   (B)   Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or
antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted for such existing
facilities.



   (C)   Any new construction, other than routine maintenance, on an
existing telecommunications facility, tower or antenna, or on the property on
which such an existing facility is located, shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Where the city has granted approval for the construction of a
new telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna which has not yet been
constructed or placed in operation on September 25, 2001, such structure
shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility, tower or antenna
as long as the approval is valid and not expired.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.120)  (Ord. 2556, § 12, passed - -2001)



§ 156.37  PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   Telecommunications facilities, towers or antennas located on property
owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter; provided a license or lease authorizing the
operation of such a facility has been approved by the City Council.



(2000 Code, § 15.74.130)  (Ord. 2556, § 13, passed - -2001)



CHAPTER 157:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   157.01   Definitions



   157.02   Location of pools and equipment



   157.03   Permit required; fee



   157.04   Plans and drawings



   157.05   Recirculation-type pools required



   157.06   Construction; materials



   157.07   Structural design



   157.08   Walk areas



   157.09   Fences; inspections by Building Department



   157.10   Steps or ladders



   157.11   Recirculation and filter systems



   157.12   Disposal of wastewater



   157.13   Skimmers



   157.14   Water treatment



   157.15   Vacuum cleaners



   157.16   Electrical requirements; floodlights



   157.17   Safety precautions; rescue equipment; diving boards



   157.18   Operation and maintenance; nuisances prohibited



   157.19   Periodic inspections



§ 157.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL.  A receptacle for water or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet,
intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human
beings, and includes all pertinent equipment constructed, installed and
maintained in or above the ground outside of a building used for a
single-family dwelling unit. However, such a PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING
POOL shall be maintained by an individual primarily for the sole use of his
or her household and guests and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business operated for profit. No out-of-doors swimming
pool intended for the use of members and their guests of a nonprofit club or
organization, or limited to house residents of a multiple dwelling unit,
block, subdivision, neighborhood, community or other specified area of
residence, shall be permitted in a single-family residence, duplex residence
or apartment district.



   TEMPORARY SWIMMING POOL.  A private residential swimming pool
constructed in such a manner that it is intended to be placed on and
maintained on the property for the summer season only.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.010)  (Ord. 2422, Art. 2, passed - -1999)



§ 157.02  LOCATION OF POOLS AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   A private residential swimming pool is permitted in a
single-family residence district only.



   (B)   No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be
located at a distance of less than ten percent of the width of the owner’s
lot from any side property line or building line, nor, in any instance, shall
such a pool be located within a distance of less than six feet from any side
or rear property line or building line. Pumps, filters and pool water
disinfection equipment installations shall be located at a distance of not
less than six feet from any side property line, but are not permitted in any
side yard between dwellings. The term PORTION shall be construed as any part
of the periphery of the pool water or coping and shall not be construed so as
to include walk areas.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.020)



§ 157.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   No person shall proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and any
appurtenance thereto within the city without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Building Commissioner.



   (B)   The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a
private residential swimming pool shall be $20.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.030)



§ 157.04  PLANS AND DRAWINGS.



   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenance for which a permit is required shall first be presented to the
Building Commissioner for examination and approval as to proper location,
construction and use.



   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be in detail, drawn to a scale of
not less than one-eighth of an inch to a foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or
by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and
dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings shall be made explicit
and complete, showing the lot lines and including information pertaining to
the pool, walk and fence construction, the water supply system, the drainage
and water disposal system and all appurtenances pertaining to the pool.



   (C)   All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances and
water supply and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the
approved plan. If any deviation from the plan is desired, a supplementary
plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval
and shall conform to this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.040)



§ 157.05  RECIRCULATION-TYPE POOLS REQUIRED.



   All residential swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in
which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the
water drawn from the pool being clarified before being returned to the pool.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.050)



§ 157.06  CONSTRUCTION; MATERIALS.



   (A)   Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be
constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with
white or light-colored, finished, easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or
bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible.
The side and end walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be
vertical to a depth of at least six feet or shall have a slope or curvature
meeting one of the following conditions:



      (1)   The pool wall may be vertical for 30 inches from the
water level below which the walls may be curved to the bottom with a radius
at any point equal to the difference between the depth, at that point, and 30
inches; or



      (2)   To a depth of six feet, except as provided in division
(A)(1) of this section, the wall slope shall be not less than one foot
horizontal in six feet vertical.



   (B)   Pool walls that are to be lined with a plastic liner shall be
constructed of masonry or reinforced concrete.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.060)



§ 157.07  STRUCTURAL DESIGN.



   (A)   The walls of a residential swimming pool shall be designed to
withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the
earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,500 pounds per square foot.
In pools not entirely lined with a plastic liner, the pool floor shall be
designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the earth
and hydrostatic pressure from below when the pool is empty, to a pressure of
2,500 pounds per square foot.



   (B)   The slope of the bottom of such a pool shall conform to the
following:



      (1)   Not more than one foot in each six feet in gradual
slope-type pools, where the slope is uniform for the entire length of the
pool; and



      (2)   In hopper or bowled-type pools, not more than one foot
in each ten feet to a depth of four feet six inches.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.070)



§ 157.08  WALK AREAS.



   An unobstructed walk area of impervious material, not less than 36
inches wide, shall be provided, and the surface shall be smooth, easily
cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walk shall have a pitch
of at least one-fourth of an inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back
drainage from entering the pool.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.080)



§ 157.09  FENCES; INSPECTIONS BY BUILDING DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A private residential swimming pool shall be enclosed by a
fence. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure
shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be four feet in
height above the walk grade level. The fence shall enclose all sides of the
swimming pool. All gates shall be equipped with a latching device not less
than six inches from the top of the gate. The fence and gates shall be
constructed of a minimum number 9 gauge woven wire mesh corrosion resistant
material, or, in the case of wood fences, the construction method may be of
any type approved by the Building Commissioner. All fence posts shall be
decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases.



   (B)   An above-ground pool shall be fenced with a fence of the type
described in division (A) above, or a fence permanently affixed to the
railing of the pool complying with all other provisions of division (A)
above. No gap of more than three inches will be permitted between the lower
rail of the fence and the top of the pool wall.



   (C)   Inspections will be carried out by the Building Department or
an authorized representative of the city, with pool safety and public welfare
being the prime considerations.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.090)  (Ord. 2422, Art. 1, passed - -1999)



§ 157.10  STEPS OR LADDERS.



   Provisions shall be made for egress from a private residential swimming
pool in the form of steps or ladders. At least one such means of egress shall
be located on a side of the pool at both the deep and shallow ends of the
pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material
and shall be at least three inches wide for their full length. Steps and
ladders shall have a handrail on both sides.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.100)



§ 157.11  RECIRCULATION AND FILTER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Recirculation systems shall contain rapid pressure filters of
either the sand and gravel type, the diatomaceous earth type or an approved
equal. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents
of the pool in 18 hours at the rate of not more than five gallons per square
foot of filter area per minute for sand and gravel filters and not more than
three gallons per square foot of filter area per minute for diatomaceous
earth filters. Filter tanks shall be built for a minimum of 50 pounds working
pressure and shall be supported in a manner to prevent tipping or setting.



   (B)   The recirculating pump shall have sufficient capacity to
backwash at a minimum rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of
surface area.



   (C)   The filter system shall be equipped with the following:



      (1)   A pressure gauge on the influent piping;



      (2)   A pressure gauge on the effluent piping;



      (3)   A method of releasing the air at the top of the filter;



      (4)   A backwash sight glass that can easily be removed for
cleaning; and



      (5)   An access head or hole large enough to permit
inspection, maintenance and rapid work.



   (D)   A hair and lint catcher shall be installed on the suction side
of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter
from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so
designed that they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection and
shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design
features shall be as follows: Water passes through the strainer from the
outside; the strainer is made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter
of strainer openings is not more than one-eighth of an inch; and the area of
the strainer opening is at least five times the cross-sectional area of the
inlet pipe to the strainer.



   (E)   Pool piping shall be sized to permit the rate flows for
filtering and backwashing without exceeding the maximum head at which the
pump will provide such flow. In general, the water velocity in the pool
piping shall not exceed 10 feet per second. The recirculation piping and
fittings shall meet the following requirements.



      (1)   The inlet fitting shall be located so as to discharge
below the pool overflow level.



      (2)   An outlet shall be placed at the deepest point in every
pool for recirculating and emptying the pool.



      (3)   A vacuum inlet fitting shall be located in an accessible
position below the water line.



      (4)   Pool recirculation piping passing through the pool
structure shall be of copper compound.



      (5)   A minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be
provided for every 800 square feet or fraction thereof of surface area of
rectangular or oblong shaped pools, and a minimum of one recirculation system
inlet shall be provided for every 615 square feet or fraction thereof of
surface area of kidney-shaped or L-shaped pools.



      (6)   Inlets shall be placed so as to produce, so far as
possible, uniform circulation of water throughout the pool.



      (7)   A minimum of one recirculation system outlet shall be
provided for every 800 square feet or fraction thereof of surface area of all
private pools.



      (8)   Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely
emptying the pool and the discharge of pool water.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.110)



§ 157.12  DISPOSAL OF WASTEWATER.



   All water discharged from a pool by the process of filter backwash or
draining of the pool shall be disposed of as follows:



   (A)   Where space and conditions are such that no hazard or
unsanitary condition may occur, swimming pool wastewater may be used for
irrigation;



   (B)   All wastewater, other than that permitted for irrigation,
shall be discharged to a sewer. However, there shall be no direct connection
from the pool to the sewer. Any direct connection to the sewer shall be made
from the waste pipe of the filter only, and at  point of connection a gate
valve shall be installed;



   (C)   The discharge of wastewater or any water drained from a pool
shall be at a rate not exceeding 3,000 gallons per hour; and



   (D)   Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the
sewerage system during periods of rain or storm.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.120)



§ 157.13  SKIMMERS.



   At least one skimming device shall be provided for every 800 square
feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be built directly
into the pool wall and shall be located at least 30 feet apart. They shall
adequately remove floating oils and wastes and shall meet the following
general specifications:



   (A)   The total capacity of the skimmer or total of skimmers shall
be at least 50% of the required filter flow of the circulation system;



   (B)   All skimmers shall be automatically adjustable to a variation
in water level over a range of three inches;



   (C)   Whenever the water level of the pool recedes to a level that
reaches the lowest point of overflow (the lowest level at which skimming
action can take place), make-up water shall be added to an amount that will
enable the skimmer to function properly; and



   (D)   The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a
rate of flow of at least 20 gallons per minute per linear foot of weir lip.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.130)



§ 157.14  WATER TREATMENT.



   Private residential pools and pool areas shall be kept in a state of
cleanliness at all times. A proper and adequate supply of chlorine or an
equal thereof shall be kept on hand at all times. A kit for testing both the
amount of residual chlorine and the degree of the pH factor shall be
provided. The following conditions shall apply to the treatment of pool water.



   (A)   If a mechanical device is used for the injection of
disinfectant into the pool water, it shall be one using chlorine compounds
only and shall be located so as to introduce the chlorine into the
recirculation system ahead of the filter. Gaseous chlorination systems shall
not be used.



   (B)   Chlorine shall be added to the pool water at frequent
intervals and in such quantities to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual
of 0.5 parts per million.



   (C)   The pH factor shall be frequently checked to determine the
degree of acidity or alkalinity of the pool water. It is recommended that if
this factor reaches a point of less than 7.2 or higher than 7.8 on the scale,
appropriate correction treatment be made.



   (D)   It is recommended that the test kit used be of the color chart
type (colormetric comparator), with or without numerals on a scale.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.140)



§ 157.15  VACUUM CLEANERS.



   Every private pool shall be equipped with a vacuum cleaner to clean out
deposits settling at the bottom of the pool. Vacuum cleaners shall:



   (A)   Operate off the vacuum outlet line of the pool or of a design
approved by the Building Commissioner;



   (B)   Have a flexible hose with a minimum diameter of one and
one-fourth inches and sufficient in length to provide access to every corner
of the pool bottom from the point of vacuum outlet;



   (C)   Have a vacuum brush or tool at least 12 inches in length or
the equivalent in cross-sectional area; and



   (D)   Have a pole attachable to the vacuum brush or tool, of
sufficient length to reach the innermost center of the pool from a standing
position at the pool edge.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.150)



§ 157.16  ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; FLOODLIGHTS.



   (A)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used
in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformity
with the National Electrical Code adopted in § 151.007.



   (B)   No outside current carrying electrical conductor, other than
provided by public utilities, shall cross private residential swimming pools,
either overhead or aboveground within 15 feet of the pools.



   (C)   All underground electrical wiring shall be in conduit or of
underground cable within specifications of the electrical code.



   (D)   All outside electrical appurtenances, such as switches and
plug-in outlets for the underwater lighting or filtration system of the pool,
shall be installed at a distance of not less than 15 feet from the pool and
all such switches and outlets shall be of weatherproof design.



   (E)   All outside floodlights installed and designed to light the
pool area and at a distance of less than 15 feet from the pool shall be
installed at least seven feet above the ground, and installation shall be
such that the conductor to the floodlights is installed in conformity with
the National Electrical Code. Any outside switches connected with such
floodlights shall be placed at a minimum distance of 15 feet from the pool.
All the floodlights shall be located so as not to disturb adjacent property
when being used.



   (F)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter every
temporary swimming pool shall be subject to the following additional
restrictions



      (1)   The pool must be G.F.I. (ground fault interceptor)
protected.



      (2)   The pool shall be maintained on a 15 AMP circuit.



      (3)   Only one extension cord, to a maximum length of 100
feet, may be used to provide electricity for the pool:



         (a)   For cords up to 50 feet at least 14-gauge wire
with a G.F.I. shall be used; and



         (b)   For cords of 50 feet to 100 feet at least 12-gauge
wire with a G.F.I. shall be used.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.160)  (Ord. 2422, Art. 3, passed - -1999)



§ 157.17  SAFETY PRECAUTIONS; RESCUE EQUIPMENT; DIVING BOARDS.



   (A)   A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times when a private
residential swimming pool is in use.



   (B)   Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with
one or more throwing buoys, not less than 15 inches in diameter with 60 feet
of three-sixteenths of an inch manila line attached, and one or more light
but strong poles with blunted ends, not less than 12 feet in length, for
making reach assists or rescues.



   (C)   No diving board or platform more than one meter above water
level shall be installed for use in connection with any private residential
swimming pool.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.170)



§ 157.18  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE; NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No source of water other than that secured from the city
waterworks distribution system shall be used.



   (B)   A suitable substantial protective cover shall be provided and
installed over all private residential swimming pool surfaces during the
nonswimming season.



   (C)   All private pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating
condition during periods when the pool is in use.



   (D)   A lifeline shall be provided to separate the deep water from
the shallow water when used by children and nonswimmers.



   (E)   No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept,
maintained or operated in the city, if the use, keeping, maintenance or
operation is the occasion of any nuisance or is dangerous to life or
detrimental to health.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.180)



§ 157.19  PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.



   The Building Commissioner and the Health Commissioner shall
periodically inspect all private pools to determine whether or not the
provisions of this chapter regarding health, sanitation and safety applicable
thereto are being complied with.



(2000 Code, § 15.88.190)



CHAPTER 158:  MOBILE HOME PARKS



Section



   158.01   Definitions



   158.02   Licenses and temporary permits



   158.03   License and permit fees



   158.04   License application



   158.05   Park location



   158.06   Park plan



   158.07   Water



   158.08   Sanitation facilities



   158.09   Laundry facilities



   158.10   Service buildings



   158.11   Sewers



   158.12   Garbage and rubbish



   158.13   Fire extinguishers; open burning



   158.14   Animals



   158.15   Register of occupants



   158.16   Cleanliness and sanitation; responsibilities of licensees
and attendants or caretakers



   158.17   Revocation of licenses



   158.18   Posting of licenses and temporary permits



§ 158.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME.  A mobile home which does not have a flush
toilet and a bath or shower.



   INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME.  Toilet and a bath or shower.



   LICENSEE.  Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under this chapter.



   MOBILE HOME or TRAILER COACH.  Any vehicle or portable structure used
or constructed so as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a
dwelling place for one or more persons, provided that any such structure
resting in whole on a permanent foundation shall also be considered a trailer
coach or mobile home.



   MOBILE HOME SPACE.  A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.



   MOBILE TRAILER COURT.  An area of land upon which two or more occupied
trailer coaches or mobile homes are harbored for revenue purposes.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any structure designed and intended to accommodate
more than one family and includes, but is not limited to, duplex buildings,
group houses and apartment buildings.



   NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER.  Any river, pond, canal, railroad,
levee, embankment, fence or hedge.



   PARK.  A mobile home park.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a temporary permit to maintain or
operate a mobile home park is issued under this chapter.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.010)



§ 158.02  LICENSES AND TEMPORARY PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home park in the
city without first obtaining a license therefor. However, the maintenance or
operation of a mobile home park in existence on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter (Ord. 177, passed 7-22-1960) may be
continued under a temporary permit for a period of time and under conditions
as are hereinafter prescribed.



   (B)   A temporary permit, upon written request therefor, shall be
issued by the Health Department for every mobile home park in existence on
the effective date, permitting the park to be maintained and operated during
the period ending 180 days after the effective date without being subject to
the provisions of this chapter, except for those provisions which are
expressly applicable to the permittee.



   (C)   The term of the temporary permit shall be extended, upon
written request, for not more than one additional period of 180 days if:



      (1)   The permittee files an application for a license in
conformity with § 158.04 below within 90 days after the effective date;



      (2)   The permittee is of good moral character and the park
plans and specifications accompanying the application for a license comply
with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes;



      (3)   The permittee has diligently endeavored to make the
existing park conform fully to the plans and specifications submitted with
the application; or



      (4)   Failure to make the existing park conform fully to the
plans and specifications is due to causes beyond the control of the permittee.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.020)



§ 158.03  LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The annual license fee to maintain or operate a mobile home
park is $50, plus $20 per trailer.



   (B)   The temporary permit fee for each 180-day period shall be
one-half of the annual license fee prescribed in division (A) above.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.030)



§ 158.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Initial license. An application for an initial mobile home
park license shall be filed with and issued by the Health Department. The
application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall include
the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The location and legal description of the mobile home
park;



      (3)   A complete plan of the park in conformity with § 158.06
below;



      (4)   Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements
and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park;
and



      (5)   Further information as may be requested by the
Department to enable it to determine if the proposed park will comply with
legal requirements.



      (6)   The application and all accompanying plans and
specifications shall be filed in triplicate. The Department shall investigate
the applicant and inspect the application and proposed plans and
specifications. If the applicant is of good moral character, and the proposed
mobile home park, when constructed or altered in accordance with the plans
and specifications, will be in compliance with this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances and statutes, the Department shall approve the
application and, upon completion of the park according to the plans, issue
the license.



   (B)   Renewal license. Upon application, in writing, by a licensee
for renewal of a license, and upon payment of the annual license fee, the
Department shall issue a certificate renewing the license for another year.



   (C)   Transfer of license. Upon application, in writing, for
transfer of a license, and upon payment of the transfer fee, the Department
shall issue a transfer if the transferee is of good moral character.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.040)



§ 158.05  PARK LOCATION.



   A mobile home park may be located in any district in which multiple
dwellings are permitted. Each boundary of the park must be at least 200 feet
from any permanent residential building located outside the park, unless
separated therefrom by a unless a majority of the owners of property within
the 200 feet consent, in writing, to the establishment of the park.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.050)  (Ord. 2007-01-0082O, passed 1-23-2007)



§ 158.06  PARK PLAN.



   A mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements.



   (A)   The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly
graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.



   (B)   A mobile home space shall consist of a minimum of 1,500 square
feet, which shall be at least 30 feet wide and clearly defined. However, a
mobile home park in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter (Ord. 177, passed 6-22-1960), which provides mobile home
spaces having a width or area less than that prescribed in this division, may
continue to operate with spaces of the existing width and area, but in no
event shall any mobile home space be less than 25 feet wide and have an area
of less than 1,000 square feet.



   (C)   Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there is
at least a 15 foot clearance between the homes, provided, however, that with
respect to mobile-homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance may be
less than 15 feet but not less than ten feet. No mobile home shall be located
closer than ten feet from any building within the park or from any property
line bounding the park.



   (D)   A mobile home space shall abut upon a driveway of not less
than 20 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public
street, alley or highway.



   (E)   A walkway, not less than two feet wide, shall be provided from
the mobile home space to a service building.



   (F)   All driveways and walkways within the park shall be hard
surfaced and lighted at night with electric lamps of not less than 25 watts
each, spaced at intervals of not more than 100 feet.



   (G)   Each park shall provide service buildings to house toilet,
bathing and other sanitation facilities and laundry facilities as prescribed
in §§ 158.08 and 158.09 below.



   (H)   An electrical outlet supplying at least 100 volts shall be
provided for each mobile home space.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.060)



§ 158.07  WATER.



   (A)   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic
purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home spaces
within a mobile home park, to meet the requirements of the park.



   (B)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with a cold water tap
at least four inches above the ground.



   (C)   An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times
in service buildings for bathing, washing, cleaning and laundry facilities.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.070)



§ 158.08  SANITATION FACILITIES.



   Each mobile home park accommodating dependent mobile homes shall be
provided with toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation
facilities which conform to the following requirements.



   (A)   Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one
flush toilet and one urinal for the first 15 dependent mobile-homes or any
fraction thereof. For dependent mobile homes in excess of 15, not less than
one additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for every 15 additional
dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof shall be provided.



   (B)   Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than
one flush toilet for the first ten dependent mobile homes or fraction
thereof. For dependent mobile homes in excess of ten, not less than one
additional flush toilet for every ten additional dependent mobile homes or
fraction thereof shall be provided.



   (C)   Each sex shall be provided with not less than one lavatory and
one shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for the first
ten dependent mobile-homes or fraction thereof. For dependent mobile homes in
excess of ten, not less than one additional lavatory and one additional
shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for every ten
additional dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof shall be provided.



   (D)   Each toilet and shower or bathtub with individual dressing
accommodations, for which provision is made in divisions (A), (B) and (C)
above, shall be in a private compartment or stall.



   (E)   The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and
females shall be either in separate buildings or, if in the same building,
shall be separated by a soundproof wall.



   (F)   There shall be provided in a separate compartment or stall not
less than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bed pans or other
containers of human excreta and an adequate supply of hot running water for
cleaning the bed pans or containers.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.080)



§ 158.09  LAUNDRY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Laundry facilities shall be provided in mobile home parks in
either of the following ratios:



      (1)   Not less than one double laundry tray and one
conventional wringer-type washing machine for the first 25 mobile home spaces
or any fraction thereof, and for mobile home spaces in excess of 25, not less
than one additional double laundry tray and one additional conventional
wringer-type washing machine for every additional 25 mobile home spaces or
fraction thereof; or



      (2)   Not less than one single laundry tray and one automatic
or semiautomatic-type washing machine for the first 25 mobile home spaces or
any fraction thereof, and for mobile home spaces in excess of 25, not less
than one additional single laundry tray and one additional automatic or
semiautomatic-type washing machine for every 25 additional mobile home spaces
or fraction thereof.



   (B)   An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided
supplying current sufficient to operate each washing machine. Sufficient
drying spaces shall be provided to accommodate the laundry of mobile home
occupants if automatic drying equipment is not supplied.



   (C)   Laundry facilities shall be either in a separate building or,
if in the same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be
separated from the room housing the sanitation facilities by a soundproof
wall.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.090)



§ 158.10  SERVICE BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Service buildings housing sanitation and/or laundry facilities
shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and
statutes regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and
sanitation systems.



   (B)   Service buildings shall be well-lighted at all times of the
day and night, shall be well-ventilated with screened openings, shall be
constructed of the moisture-proof material, including painted woodwork, as
will permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a
temperature of at least 68°F from October 1 to May 1. The floor of the
service building shall be of water-impervious material.



   (C)   Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be
located not closer than ten feet nor farther than 200 feet from any mobile
home space upon which a dependent mobile home is harbored.



   (D)   Service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that
will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.100)



§ 158.11  SEWERS.



   (A)   Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals,
lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service and other buildings within a
park shall be discharged into a public sewerage system in compliance with
applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic
tank system of the construction and in such a manner as will present no
health hazard.



   (B)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with a trapped sewer,
at least four inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive the
waste from the shower, bathtub, flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of
the mobile home harbored in such space. The trapped sewer in each space shall
be connected to discharge the mobile home waste into a public sewerage system
in compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal
plant or septic tank system of the construction and in such a manner as will
present no health hazard.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.110)



§ 158.12  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.



   (A)   Metal garbage cans with tightly fitting covers shall be
provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish.



   (B)   Garbage cans shall be located not farther than 300 feet from
any mobile home space.



   (C)   The cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.



   (D)   Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as
frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans do not
overflow.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.120)



§ 158.13  FIRE EXTINGUISHERS; OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Every mobile home park shall be equipped, at all times, with
fire extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such a type, size and
number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable
regulations of the Fire Department.



   (B)   No open fire is permitted at any place which may endanger life
or property. No fire shall be left unattended at any time.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.130)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 158.14  ANIMALS.



   No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit the animal to run at large or commit any nuisance in any mobile home
park.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.140)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 158.15  REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Each licensee and permittee shall keep a register containing a
record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the mobile home
park. The register shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of each mobile-home occupant;



      (2)   The name and address of the owner of each mobile home
and motor vehicle by which it is towed;



      (3)   The make, model, year and license number of each mobile
home and motor vehicle;



      (4)   The state, territory or country issuing such licenses;



      (5)   The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile
home; and



      (6)   Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or
independent mobile home.



   (B)   The park shall keep the register available for inspection at
all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other
officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained
in the register. The register record for each registrant shall not be
destroyed for three years following the date of his or her departure from the
park.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.150)



§ 158.16  CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION; RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEES AND
ATTENDANTS OR CARETAKERS.



   (A)   The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or
caretaker, shall, at all times, keep the mobile home park and its facilities
and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition.



   (B)   The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the
licensee or permittee, for a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter to which the licensee or permittee is subject.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.160)



§ 158.17  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   The Health Department may revoke any license to maintain or
operate a mobile home park when the licensee is found guilty of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   After the conviction, the license may be reissued if the
circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being
maintained and operated in full compliance with law.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.170)



§ 158.18  POSTING OF LICENSES AND TEMPORARY PERMITS.



   The license or temporary permit certificate shall be conspicuously
posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times.



(2000 Code, § 5.36.180)



CHAPTER 159:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   159.01   Purposes



   159.02   Definitions



   159.03   Enforcement by City Administrator



   159.04   Duties of City Administrator



   159.05   Determination of base flood elevation



   159.06   Permitting requirements applicable to all floodplain areas



   159.07   Other development requirements



   159.08   Variances



   159.09   Disclaimer of liability



   159.10   Notice of violation; remedies



   159.11   Abrogation and greater restrictions



Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas



   159.25   General requirements for flood fringe areas



   159.26   Development permits for flood fringe areas



   159.27   Preventing increased damages in flood fringe areas



   159.28   Construction of the lowest floor below the base flood
elevation (BFE) in flood fringe areas



Occupation and Use of Designated Floodways



   159.40   Applicability of subchapter



   159.41   Development permits for designated floodways



   159.42   Preventing increased damages; list of appropriate uses



Occupation and Use of SFHA Areas Where Floodways are not Identified



   159.60   Development requirements generally



   159.61   Development permits for areas where floodways are not
identified



   159.62   Preventing increased damages in areas where floodways are
not identified



   159.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 159.01  PURPOSES.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
city by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-1-1 et seq., 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2,
11-30-8, and 11-31-2 and the city's home rule powers pursuant to Art. VII,
Sec. 6 of the 1970 Illinois Constitution.  The purpose of this chapter is to
maintain this city's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to
minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life,
loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the
quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide
for the wise utilization of water and related land resources.  This chapter
is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:



   (A)   To meet the requirements of ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18(g),
Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act;



   (B)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;



   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings
from flood damage;



   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;



   (E)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
property in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program;



   (G)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. §§ 59 – 79, as amended;



   (H)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of
land and water resources; and



   (I)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A non-habitable structure which is on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   ACT.  An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and
streams of the State of Illinois, ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.



   APPLICANT.  Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.



   APPROPRIATE USE.  Only uses of the designated floodway that are
permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that
will be allowed are as specified in § 159.42.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.  The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event.  Application of the base flood elevation at any
location is as defined in § 159.05.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the crest of the base flood.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for
more than 180 days per year.



   CHANNEL.  Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or
artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert,
gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite
bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows,
either perennially or intermittently and may have a dry bed from time to time.



   CHANNEL MODIFICATION.  Alteration of a channel by changing the
physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION
includes damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native
vegetation from the bottom or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include
the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel.
Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a
significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving
relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening).



   COMPENSATORY STORAGE.  An artificially excavated, hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage within the special flood hazard area (see
definition below) used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity
when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The
uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site
floodwater elevations and flows.



   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE.
Preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the
floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this chapter, gives
assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed
according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously
agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.



   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR).  A letter which indicates
that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones,
flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary
map or flood insurance rate map, once the as-built plans are submitted and
approved.



   CONTROL STRUCTURE.  A structure designed to control the rate of flow
that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.



   CRITICAL FACILITY.  Any facility which is critical to the health and
welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to
the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of
vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community,
or can put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where
flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities
(such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and
senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous
material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic
substances). Examples of critical facilities where flood protection is
recommended include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and
pumping stations.



   DAM.  All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with
their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of
storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage
tanks are not included.



   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.  The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally
depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the
existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more
than a 10% increase in velocities.



      (1)   The floodways are designated on the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway
limit shall prevail.



      (2)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city that may
be annexed into the city are designated for Natalie Creek, Boca Rio Ditch,
Midlothian Creek Western Branch, Midlothian Creek, and Twin Lakes Reservoir
on the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA and dated August
19, 2008.



      (3)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site,
the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway
map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps.
Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the
designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the
interpretation.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to real estate, including:



      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or
placement of a building or any addition to a building;



      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle on a site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for more than 180 days, it must be fully
licensed and ready for highway use;



      (3)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of
roads, bridges, or similar projects;



      (4)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;



      (5)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;



      (6)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams,
or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage
of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;



      (7)   Any other activity of man that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive
vegetation removal; and



      (8)   Substantial improvement of an existing building.



   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings
and facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no
increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A form published by FEMA that is used to
certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.



   EROSION.  The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water
or wave action.



   EXEMPT ORGANIZATION.  Organizations which are exempt from this chapter
per Illinois Compiled Statutes, including state, federal or local units of
government.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed
before April 1, 1990.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANU- FACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA.  Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44
C.F.R. §§ 59-79, as amended.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  A period of years, based on a statistical analysis,
during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the floodplain outside of the
designated floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  A map prepared by FEMA that depicts
the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  An examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.



   FLOODPLAIN.  That land typically adjacent to a body of water with
ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation.  Floodplains may also include detached special
flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the
special flood hazard area (SFHA).



      (1)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction
of the city that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood.  The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on
panel numbers 17031C0618J, 17031C0619J, 17031C0706J, 17031C0707J,
17031C0709J, 17031C0726J, 17031C0727J, 17031C0728J, and 17031C0729J of the
countywide flood insurance rate map of the city prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated August 19, 2008.



      (2)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be
annexed into the city are generally identified as such on panel numbers
17031C0618J, 17031C0619J, 17031C0706J, 17031C0707J, 17031C0709J, 17031C0726J,
17031C0727J, 17031C0728J, 17031C0729J of the countywide flood insurance rate
map prepared for Cook County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated August 19, 2008.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form published by FEMA that is used to
certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally
dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or
100-year frequency floods plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in
the SFHA.



   FLOODWAY.  See definition of DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.



   FREEBOARD.  An increment of elevation added to the base flood
elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations,
unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as
those caused by ice or debris jams.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;



      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic
places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; and



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.



   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS.  Engineering analysis which
determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.



   IDNR/OWR.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  Letter that revises base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an
effective FIRM.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a buildings lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel
trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180
consecutive days. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational
vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MITIGATION.  Includes those measures necessary to minimize the
negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the
public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation
of compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel
restoration.  Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a
structure's susceptibility to flooding.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after
April 1, 1990.



   NAVD 88.  National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).



   NATURAL.  When used in reference to channels, means those channels
formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made
by man.  A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain
is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared,
mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials
typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or
cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified
channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel
meanders and vegetation is re-established. Similarly, a modified channel may
be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and
revegetation.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.



   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT.  A flood control project which will be
operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study
of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed.  Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing,
in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are
not public agencies.



   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS.  All open public streams and lakes capable of
being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and
purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition
were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with
or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and
submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly
accessible thereto.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGIONAL PERMITS.  Regional permits are offered for pre-approved
projects which are considered minor projects that are permissible per
IDNR/OWR Part 3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A
complete listing of the terms and conditions for specific project types can
be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR.  A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§
1 et seq.



   REGISTERED OR LICENSED PRO- FESSIONAL ENGINEER.  An engineer
registered in the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional
Engineering Practice Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  See definition of DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.



   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAIN- TENANCE.  Development activities which do
not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.



   REPETITIVE LOSS.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25%
of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred.



   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY.  A retention facility stores stormwater
runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage
of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.



   RIVERINE SFHA.  Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel.  This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.



   RUNOFF.  The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the
land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels
or conduits.



   SEDIMENTATION.  The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other
materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See definition of FLOODPLAIN.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.



   STATEWIDE PERMITS.  Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved
projects that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the
IDNR/OWR Part 3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and
permit requirements can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.



   STRUCTURE.  See definition of BUILDING.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cumulative percentage of damage equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual
repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this
determination. The term includes repetitive loss buildings. See definition of
REPETITIVE LOSS.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or improvement of a structure taking place in which the cumulative
percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started.



      (1)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.



      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic
Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.



   TRANSITION SECTION.  Reaches of the stream or floodway where water
flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.  A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.03  ENFORCEMENT BY CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The City Administrator or his designee shall be responsible
for fulfilling all of the duties listed in § 159.04.



   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the City Administrator or his
designee should first use the criteria listed in § 159.05 to determine
whether the development site is located within a floodplain.



   (C)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the City Administrator or his designee must determine whether the
development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within a
SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified.



      (1)   If the site is within a flood fringe, the City
Administrator or his designee shall require that the minimum requirements of
§§ 159.25 through 159.28 be met.



      (2)   If the site is within a floodway, the City Administrator
or his designee shall require that the minimum requirements of §§ 159.40
through 159.42 be met.



      (3)   If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for
which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the City
Administrator or his designee shall require that the minimum requirements of
§§ 159.60 through 159.62 be met.



   (D)   In addition, the general requirements of § 159.06 shall be
met for all developments meeting the requirements of §§ 156.25 through
159.62.



   (E)   The City Administrator or his designee shall assure that all
subdivision proposals meet the requirements of § 159.07.



   (F)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the City
Administrator or his designee shall review the requirements of § 159.08 to
make sure they are met. In addition, the City Administrator or his designee
shall complete all notification requirements.



   (G)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as
required in this chapter, the City Administrator or his designee may take any
and all actions as outlined in § 159.10 and 159.99.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.04  DUTIES OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   The City Administrator or his designee shall be responsible for the
general administration and enforcement of this chapter, which shall include
the following:



   (A)   Determining the floodplain designation.



      (1)   Check all new development sites to determine whether
they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA).



      (2)   If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a
floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not
been conducted and which drains more than one square mile.



      (3)   Check whether the development is potentially within an
extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating
that the development would have adverse impacts regarding storage,
conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being
required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the
remaining sections of this chapter.



   (B)   Professional engineer review.



      (1)   If the development site is within a floodway or in a
floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains
more than one square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed
professional engineer under the employ or contract of the city for review to
ensure that the development meets §§ 159.40 through 159.62.



      (2)   In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall state
in writing that the development meets the requirements of §§ 159.40 through
159.42.



   (C)   Dam safety requirements.



      (1)   Dams are classified as to their size and their
hazard/damage potential in the event of failure.



      (2)   The construction or major modification of all Class I
(high hazard) and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam
safety permit.



      (3)   Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam
safety permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the
dam and the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off-channel detention
basins that have an embankment are non-jurisdictional Class III dam. It is
not required that IDNR/OWR "sign off' on all non-jurisdictional Class III
dams.



      (4)   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can
estimate a hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit is required.



      (5)   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR
for the construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.



      (6)   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts
or impoundment structures.



   (D)   Other permit requirements.  Ensure any and all required
federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit.



   (E)   Plan review and permit issuance.



      (1)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs
of the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter; and



      (2)   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when
the development meets the conditions of this chapter.



   (F)   Inspection review.



      (1)   Assure that the city receives record drawings (paper and
electronic) for each project which are certified by a licensed professional
engineer; and



      (2)   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the
floodplain and document the results of the inspection.



   (G)   Damage determinations.  Make damage determinations of all
damaged buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially
damaged structures which must comply with § 159.06(C)(3).



   (H)   Elevation and floodproofing certificates.  Maintain permit
files including:



      (1)   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or non-residential
building subject to § 159.06; and/or



      (2)   The elevation to which a non-residential building has
been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings
subject to § 159.06.



   (I)   Records for public inspection.  Maintain for public
inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated
floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance
documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision,
letter of map amendment and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing and/or
elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.



   (J)   State permits.  Ensure that construction authorization has
been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to §§ 159.40
through 159.62, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the
city.  However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the city
and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:



      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per
the Illinois Compiled Statutes;



      (2)   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as
defined in § 159.02 and all other state, federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the city and county, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of § 159.42(A);



      (3)   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or
culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, per § 159.42(C)(5);



      (4)   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to §
159.42(C)(4);



      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in § 159.42(C)(1), (2), and (8);



      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over
publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;



      (7)   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood
profiles; and



      (8)   BFE determinations where none now exist.



   (K)   Cooperation with other agencies.



      (1)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data
and to improve the administration of this chapter;



      (2)   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions
of a regulatory map within six months whenever a modification of the
floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the
floodplain map;



      (3)   Submit reports as required for the National Flood
Insurance Program; and



      (4)   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.



   (L)   Promulgate regulations.  Promulgate rules and regulations as
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject
however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter
changes.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.05  DETERMINATION OF BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   (A)   This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood
insurance study for the city.



      (1)   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available from federal,
state or other sources, as approved by the city.



      (2)   When a party disagrees with the best available data,
they shall submit a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing
data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and
consideration prior to any development of the site.



   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of Natalie Creek, Boca Rio Ditch, the Western Tributary to Midlothian
Creek, and Midlothian Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA dated
August 19, 2008 and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.



   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the
city shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008,
and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.



   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
SFHA delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or
depth) delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County.



   (E)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Cook County shall be according to the best existing
data available from federal, state or other sources.  Should no other data
exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine
base flood elevations.



      (1)   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine
SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or
a dynamic model such as HIP.



      (2)   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be
obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or
by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.



      (3)   Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land
use conditions in the watershed as determined from adopted local and regional
land use plans.



      (4)   Along any watercourses draining more than one square
mile, the above analysis needs to be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval, and
once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey
Floodplain Information Repository for filing.



      (5)   For a non-riverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall
be the historic flood of record plus three feet, unless calculated by a
detailed engineering study.



      (6)   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less
than one square mile) which has been identified by the City Administrator or
his designee pursuant to § 159.04(A)(3), the base flood elevation shall be
determined by the applicant utilizing a method as approved in division (E) of
this section.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.06  PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS.



   In addition to the requirements found in §§ 159.25 through 159.62 for
development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA or floodplains
where no floodways have been identified, the following requirements shall be
met.



   (A)   Public health standards.



      (1)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or
storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers,
flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below
the flood protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a
floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional
engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements
of division (C) of this section.



      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and
electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.



      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood
waters.



      (4)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells,
sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted
providing all manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE
are watertight.



      (5)   All other activities defined as development shall be
designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages



   (B)   Carrying capacity and notification.



      (1)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill,
or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse shall be maintained.



      (2)   In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities
in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse.



   (C)   Protecting buildings.



      (1)   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also
known as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood
protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory
floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards
included in §§ 159.40 through 159.42.  This building protection criteria
applies to the following situations:



         (a)   Construction or placement of a new building or
alteration or addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or
70 square feet;



         (b)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations
made to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or
equal or exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured
cumulatively. If substantially improved, the existing structure and the
addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section;



         (c)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building.
These repairs shall be figured cumulatively. If substantially damaged the
entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section;



         (d)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a
new manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection
requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site
it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage);



         (e)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle on a site for more than 180 days per year; and



         (f)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined
in § 159.02.  This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
following methods.



      (2)   A residential or non-residential building, when allowed,
may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at
or above the flood protection elevation; and



         (b)   Fill requirements:



            1.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater
than six inches deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet
beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood
protection elevation;



            2.   The top of the fill shall be above the flood
protection elevation. However, the ten foot minimum may be waived if a
structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building
from damages due to hydrostatic pressures;



            3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion
and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural
measure;



            4.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil
and not incorporate debris or refuse materials; and



            5.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow
or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary,
stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins shall be
incorporated.



      (3)   A residential or non-residential building may be
elevated in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on
crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently
open to flood waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must include a minimum of
two permanent openings, one on each wall, no more than one foot above
existing grade. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation;



         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so
as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves,
ice and floating debris;



         (c)   All areas below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage:



            1.   The lowest floor (including basement) and all
electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation; and



            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the flood protection elevation provided they are
waterproofed;



         (d)   No area below the flood protection elevation shall
be used for storage of items or materials;



         (e)   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be
installed on a site for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules
and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to
77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870 or any successor provisions. In addition, all
manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation requirements:



            1.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in
a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or
above the flood protection elevation.



            2.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
the manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest
floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches
in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations
of equivalent strength, whichever is less.



         (f)   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be
required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of this division
(C)(3)(f) of this section unless:



            1.   They are on site for fewer than 180
consecutive days; and



            2.   They are fully licensed, ready for highway
use, and used only for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather
than as a permanent dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.



      (4)   Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that:



         (a)   A licensed professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below
the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility
facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood;



         (b)   The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice; and



         (c)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees,
berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the
purpose of this division).



      (5)   A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located
below the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions
are met:



         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;



         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection
elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on
each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one
square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot
above grade;



         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the
flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade;



         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured
from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall
must not exceed four feet at any point;



         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to
remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event;



         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage; and



         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be
elevated above the flood protection elevation.



      (6)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical
facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities
constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency
elevation or three feet above the level of the 100-year flood frequency
elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be
taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released
into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base
flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.



      (7)   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway
shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in
§§ 159.40 through 159.42.  Non-conforming structures located in a
designated floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or
structurally altered in accordance with § 159.42.  A non-conforming
structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or man-made disaster
may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of its market value before it
was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter.



   (D)   Record drawings.  For all developments in the SFHA, record
drawings shall be submitted to the City Administrator or his designee, before
occupancy permits will be issued. The record drawings shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor or the licensed professional engineer who prepared
the design drawings. Three paper copies of these drawings, signed and sealed
by the surveyor or engineer, and one electronic copy, are required.
Electronic files shall be provided in Adobe Portable Document File ".pdf"
formats.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.07  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   The Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.



   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be
reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
159.06, 159.25 through 159.62 and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or
plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments
(PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer
that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters
in accordance with the Plat Act, ILCS Ch. 725, Act 205, § 2.



   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks,
travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to
manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
Where this information is not available from an existing adopted study, the
applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation per § 159.05(D) and the floodway
delineation per the definition in § 159.02.



   (C)   For all new subdivisions, the special flood hazard area must
be shown graphically on the plat.



   (D)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.



   (E)   The Council shall not approve any planned unit development
(PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed
so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.08  VARIANCES.



   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway as defined in § 159.02.



      (1)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue
hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply for a
variance pursuant to §§ 160.465 through 160.470, as amended.



      (2)   The City Administrator or his designee and Community
Development Director shall review the applicant's request for a variance and
shall submit their recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission in
advance of the scheduled public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may recommend such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary
to further the flood protection intent of this chapter.



      (3)   The City Council has final approval authority for any
variation and may approve the variation request, approve the variation with
modifications or other conditions or deny the variation request. The decision
of the City Council will be a final legislative act.



   (B)   In addition to the standards set forth in §§ 160.465 through
160.470, as amended, no variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
SFHA;



      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance
were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health,
safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or
creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief
operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities,
or other public facilities;



      (6)   The provisions of §§ 159.27 and 159.62 shall still be
met;



      (7)   The activity is not in a designated floodway;



      (8)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not
establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;



      (9)   The granting of the variance will not alter the
essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses; and



      (10)   All other required state and federal permits or waivers
have been obtained.



   (C)   The City Administrator or his designee and Community
Development Director shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of § 159.06 that would lessen the degree of protection
to a building will:



      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of
these risks and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption
of the risk and liability.



   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a
historic site or historic structure, as defined in § 159.02, may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of divisions (A) and (B)
of this section, subject to the conditions that:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and



      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the
structure being removed as a certified historic structure.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.09  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available
information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.



   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes.



   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or
outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.



   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.10  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REMEDIES.



   (A)   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or
conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter.  Upon due investigation, the City Administrator or his designee may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. 
The City Administrator or his designee shall notify the owner in writing of
such violation.



   (B)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the
violation:



      (1)   The city may make application to the circuit court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other
order as the court.



      (2)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title
to the property.



   (C)   The City Administrator or his designee shall inform the owner
that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages
and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



      (1)   The City Administrator or his designee is authorized to
issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The
stop-work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the
issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the
circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes
a suspension of the permit.



      (2)   No site development permit shall be permanently
suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Council. Written notice
of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: the grounds
for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation; and the time and place
of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity
to present evidence on his or her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing,
Council shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.11  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.



   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the city
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS



§ 159.25  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.



   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions
of this chapter.  No use will be permitted which adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems.  Developments located within the
flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this subchapter, along with the
requirements of § 159.06.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.26  DEVELOPMENT PERMITS FOR FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first
obtaining a development permit from the City Administrator or his designee.



   (B)   Submittals for a development permit shall include the
following:



      (1)   The submittal shall be accompanied by drawings of the
site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description
for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land
surveyor; existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum
of 1988, and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.



      (2)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the
submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of §
159.06.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a development permit submittal, the City
Administrator or his designee shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



      (1)   Any development located on land that can be shown to be
higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map
and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the
SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but shown on the current flood
insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The City Administrator or his designee shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first flood insurance rate map identification.



   (D)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas
shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.



   (E)   The City Administrator or his designee shall require
certification from the design engineer that all federal, state and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required by this type of activity
have been obtained. The City Administrator or his designee shall not issue a
permit unless this certification has been obtained.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.27  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES IN FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.



   No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public
health and safety.



   (A)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient
data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the floodplain.



   (B)   Compensatory storage.



      (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.



      (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5
times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.



      (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation
shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.



      (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.



      (5)   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.28  CONSTRUCTION OF THE LOWEST FLOOR BELOW THE BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
(BFE) IN FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.



   A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that
removes a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill
to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the city to
construct the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the
flood fringe. The City Administrator or his designee shall not issue such a
permit unless the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in
the this section.



   (A)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per § 159.27(B).



   (B)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall
(i.e., window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation (FPE).



   (C)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or
above the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet beyond the outside face of
the structure.



   (D)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE.



   (E)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that
meets all requirements of this section and is at least five feet thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a
LOMR-F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar
classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL,
SC or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for
Engineering Purposes.



   (F)   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is,
the soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be
in the same direction.



   (G)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified
and inspected by an Illinois licensed professional engineer, as warranted by
the site conditions.



   (H)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more
than five below the BFE.



   (I)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor
slab, and minimum of one-quarter horsepower sump pump with a backup power
supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at
four times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and
away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift
of the floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.



   (J)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.



   (K)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand
hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.



   (L)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site,
in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the
lot exceed 18 inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade.
The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if
necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means
to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.



   (M)   The builder and design engineer must certify that the design
for the development is reasonably safe from flooding in accordance with
FEMA's Technical Bulletin 10-01, and in accordance with accepted professional
practices.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS



§ 159.40  APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodway for Natalie Creek, Boca Rio Ditch, the Western Tributary
to Midlothian Creek, Midlothian Creek, and Twin Lakes Reservoir shall be as
delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County and
referenced in the commentary of flood insurance rate maps in § 159.02. Only
those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this
subchapter.  All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the
requirements of § 159.06.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.41  DEVELOPMENT PERMITS FOR DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS.



   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state
law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a
development permit from the City Administrator or his designee and IDNR/OWR.



   (A)   Submittals for a development permit shall include the
following:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



      (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;



      (4)   Description of proposed activity;



      (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;



      (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



      (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject
property if different from the applicant;



      (8)   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;



      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or
other authorized officer shall sign the application form;



      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall
sign the application form;



      (11)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer
shall sign the name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer. A
disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the submittal, identifying each
beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective
interests therein;



      (12)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:



         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity,
name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the
site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum
of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections, north
arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;



         (c)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation,
100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical);



         (d)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance;



         (e)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to
reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location;



      (13)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or
approval letters that may be required for this type of development;



      (14)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of §
159.42;



      (15)   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project,
the submittal will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA;



      (16)   The submittal for a structure shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and
existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any
proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by
a licensed professional engineer, licensed architect or licensed land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of § 159.06; and



      (17)   If the proposed project involves a channel
modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:



         (a)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the
proposed work;



         (b)   A discussion of the feasibility of using
alternative locations or methods (see § 159.42(C)(9) to accomplish the
purpose of the proposed work;



         (c)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the
impacts each feasible alternative identified in § 159.42(C)(9) would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and



         (d)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed
project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological
conditions of the body of water affected.



   (B)   The City Administrator or his designee shall require
certification from the design engineer that all federal, state and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required by this type of activity
have been obtained.



      (1)   The City Administrator or his designee shall not issue a
permit unless this certification has been obtained.



      (2)   A licensed professional engineer, under the employ or
contract of the city shall review and approve applications reviewed under
this section.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.42  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES; LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES.



   (A)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation,
and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in
flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic
habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation
methods as called for in this chapter.  Only those appropriate uses listed
in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed.  The approved appropriate
uses are as follows:



      (1)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public
works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding,
erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;



      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or
requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment
facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating,
commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;



      (3)   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;



      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities;



      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems, including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from
any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and
including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (four stall maximum) that
will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;



      (6)   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non-habitable
accessory structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway
storage;



      (7)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways,
runways and taxiways and any modification thereto;



      (8)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where
either:



         (a)   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency
flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot; or



         (b)   The applicant of a short-term recreational use
facility parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank
flooding events and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular
access during all overbank flooding events;



      (9)   Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slop toward a watercourse;



      (10)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing
lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells,
elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the
existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to
the structure;



      (11)   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged
building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the
building was damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation; and



      (12)   Modifications to an existing building that would not
increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency
flood elevation, and which will not block flood flows including but not
limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story
additions. If the building is improved to 50% or more of the market value
before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the
building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.



   (B)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement
of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise
non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or
planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as
specifically defined above as an appropriate use.



   (C)   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an
appropriate use will be considered permissible provided that the proposed
project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a licensed
professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection
requirements of § 159.06:



      (1)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase
flood stages upstream.  For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert
crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway
conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up
to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective
designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:



         (a)   Designated floodway conveyance, "K" =
(1.486/n)(AR2/3) where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the
effective flow area of the cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to
the wetted perimeter.  (See Ven Te Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics,
(McGraw-Hill, New York 1959)).



         (b)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for
both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement
with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed
conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative
to a non-vegetative land cover.



         (c)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer
can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that
more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:



            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section
to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's
length.



            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to
a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length.



            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a
vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten
feet of stream length shall be used.



            4.   Transition sections shall be provided between
cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the
designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties.



            5.   All cross-sections used in the calculations
shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.



      (2)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase
downstream flooding.



         (a)   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any
designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of
fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control
projects.



         (b)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall
be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.



         (c)   Artificially created storage lost due to a
reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.



         (d)   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall
be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed
100-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the
existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed
ten-year flood elevation.  All designated floodway storage lost above the
existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed
ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.



         (e)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at
the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall
demonstrate through a determination of flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.



         (f)   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface
area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is
necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.



      (3)   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to
increase stream erosion or flood heights.



         (a)   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or
culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an
increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.



         (b)   In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream
structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during
normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if
scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or
other design measures.



      (4)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and
roadway approaches.



         (a)   The proposed structure shall not result in an
increase of upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the
existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained
within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the
channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees
or flood walls or within recorded flood easements.



         (b)   If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact
IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit for a dam or waiver.



            1.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood
stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding
flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
159.05.  Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted
FEMA approved hydraulic models.



            2.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for
per division (C)(2) of this section.



            3.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per
division (C)(3) of this section.



            4.   If the crossing is proposed over a public
water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR
permit must be received.



            5.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater
caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory
profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not
required by this section.



            6.   All excavations for the construction of the
crossing shall be designed per division (C)(8) of this section.



      (5)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges,
culverts, and approach roads.



         (a)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach
reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1
foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood
frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure
is not a source of flood damage.



         (b)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway
approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the
upstream floodplain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility
of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into
consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream
properties.



         (c)   The determination as to whether or not the
existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must
be prepared in accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway
Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review
and concurrence before a permit is issued.



      (6)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water.



         (a)   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than
0.0 foot when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to
and including the 100-year frequency event, shall be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls
or within recorded flood easements.



         (b)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not
required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow.



         (c)   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in
§ 159.02 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part
3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:



            1.   The impoundment is determined to be in the
public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional
stormwater detention;



            2.   The impoundment will not prevent the
migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas
as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning;



            3.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute
to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should
include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a
pre-sedimentation basin;



            4.   A non-point source control plan has been
implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment
runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals,
and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream
watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should
coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control; and



            5.   The project otherwise complies with the
requirements of §§ 159.40 through 159.42.



      (7)   Flood proofing of existing habitable, residential and
commercial structures.



         (a)   If construction is required beyond the outside
dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the
floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet from the
outside of the building.



         (b)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will
not be required for floodproofing activities.



      (8)   Excavation in the floodway.



         (a)   When excavation is proposed in the design of
bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement
of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost
conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided
for the excavation.



         (b)   The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency:



            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section
to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's
length;



            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to
a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length;



            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a
vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten
feet of stream length shall be used; and



            4.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided
inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.



      (9)   If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:



         (a)   There are no practicable alternatives to the
activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural
conditions of the body of water affected.  Possible alternatives include
levees, bank stabilization, flood proofing of existing structures, removal of
structures from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or
the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel
modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions
and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;



         (b)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural
functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no
significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the
replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;



         (c)   The activity has been planned and designed and
will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the
natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the
following criteria:



            1.   The physical characteristics of the modified
channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in
length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been
previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should
be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical;



            2.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be
provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed
such that they will prevent erosion;



            3.   One-sided construction of a channel shall be
used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be
limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading
and stabilization effects of the vegetation;



            4.   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be
limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel;



            5.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a
side slope no steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are
no practicable alternatives;



            6.   All disturbed areas associated with the
modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall
be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of
the vegetative cover;



            7.   If the existing channel contains considerable
bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features,
such features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting
areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be
established, where appropriate;



            8.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the
downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of
downstream water quality;



            9.   New or relocated channels should be built in
the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be
completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel;



            10.   There shall be no increases in stage or
velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency
flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an
increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control
project; and



            11.   Unless the modification is for a public
flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of
floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and



         (d)   The project otherwise complies with the
requirements of §§ 159.40 through 159.42.



      (10)   Seeding and stabilization plan.  For all activities
located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by
the applicant.



      (11)   Soil erosion and sedimentation measures.  For all
activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in
which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the
following criteria:



         (a)   The construction area shall be minimized to
preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to
minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the
existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15
days prior to the initiation of improvements.  Temporary and/or permanent
soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As
a minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided within three days after final
grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within three days to denuded
areas which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer
than 21 days.



         (b)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed
before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent
the movement of eroded sediments off-site or into the channel. Potential
sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check
dams, diversion ditches, and sediment traps and basins.



         (c)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in
width shall be preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along
existing channels (see division (C)(16) of this section). Construction
vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall
be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction
in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.



         (d)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards
for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also
known as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 2002, or
most recent edition).



      (12)   Public flood control projects.  For public flood
control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be
considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic
and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or
cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project
right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the
100-year frequency event.



      (13)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.



         (a)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the
designated floodway study, referenced in § 159.05, must be used for analysis
of the base conditions.  If the study data appears to be in error or
conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.



         (b)   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at
the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a
downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed
construction shall be shown to meet:



            1.   The requirements of this section for the
100-year frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and



            2.   Conditions with the receiving stream at
normal water elevations.



         (c)   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local
governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or
culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional
flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or
modified within the next five years, the proposed construction shall be
analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the
existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the
bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.



      (14)   Conditional letter of map revision.



         (a)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in
the designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation,
the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations
and documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map
revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the
designated floodway change before a permit is issued.



         (b)   The final designated floodway map will not be
changed by FEMA until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling,
grading, dredging, or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by
FEMA and IDNR/OWR.



         (c)   In the case of non-government projects, the
municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas
shall concur with the proposed conditional designated floodway map revision
before IDNR/OWR approval can be given.



         (d)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall
take place until a conditional approval is issued.



         (e)   After initial filling, grading, dredging or
excavating, no activities shall take place until a final letter of map
revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.



      (15)   Professional engineer's supervision.  All engineering
analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed
professional engineer.



      (16)   For all activities in the floodway involving
construction within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be
met:



         (a)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be
preserved within at least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the
channel.



         (b)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer
strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip
shall be established upon completion of construction.



      (17)   After receipt of conditional approval of the designated
floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map
revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may
proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an
appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map
is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The designated
floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and
FEMA of the "as-built" plans.



   (D)   Development activities in delegated communities requiring
state review.  For those projects listed below located in a designated
floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their
review and concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a
community- or county-delegated state permitting authority in the floodway.



      (1)   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a
proposed bridge pursuant to division (C)(4) of this section.



      (2)   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or
culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, pursuant to division (C)(5) of this section.



      (3)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent storage pursuant to division (C)(1), (2) and (8) of this section.



      (4)   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as
defined in § 159.02) and all other federal, state, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.



      (5)   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge
affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a
smaller opening.



      (6)   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or
flood profiles.



      (7)   Projects in public bodies of water.



   (E)   Other permits.



      (1)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued
unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a
permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5,
§§ 5 et seq.



      (2)   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the
project meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3.



      (3)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR
has delegated this responsibility to the city.



   (F)   Permits for dams.



      (1)   Any work involving the construction, modification or
removal of a dam as defined in § 159.02 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702
(Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the
start of construction of a dam.



      (2)   If the City Administrator or his designee finds a dam
that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the City Administrator or his designee
shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.



      (3)   If the City Administrator or his designee finds a dam
which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the City Administrator or his
designee shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).



   (G)   Activities that do not require a licensed professional
engineer's review.  The activities in Regional Permit 3 may be permitted
without a licensed professional engineer's review. Such activities shall
still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation
requirements. Regional Permit 3 authorizes certain items to be constructed or
activities to be performed in the floodway under certain circumstances,
including underground and overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer
outfalls, sidewalks, patios, athletic fields, playground equipment and
streambank protection activities.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED



§ 159.60  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.



   In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones)
where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more
than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative
effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase
the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



§ 159.61  DEVELOPMENT PERMITS FOR AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not
exempted by state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain
without first obtaining a development permit from the City Administrator or
his designee.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the City Engineer.



      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the
site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling,
sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to
the requirements of § 159.06.



      (2)   The application for a development permit shall also
include the following information:



         (a)   A detailed description of the proposed activity,
its purpose, and intended use;



         (b)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



         (c)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



         (d)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided
which include as a minimum:



            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the
activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the
vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the structure or work, elevations, using the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and
flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation
channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially
navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of
cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;



            3.   Cross-section views of the project
perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work
as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and



            4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities, and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures
to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.



      (3)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of § 159.62.



      (4)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development.



   (C)   Based on the best available existing data according to
federal, state or other sources, the City Engineer shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



      (1)   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to § 159.05(D).



      (2)   Any development located on land that can be shown to
have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance
rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   The City Engineer shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map identification.



   (D)   The City Engineer shall require certification from the design
engineer that all federal, state and local permits, approvals or waivers that
may be required by this type of activity have been obtained. The City
Engineer shall not issue a permit unless this certification has been obtained.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.62  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES IN AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED.



   (A)   No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been
determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair
the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall
be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.



   (B)   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been
determined, the following standards shall apply:



      (1)   The developer shall have a licensed professional
engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations,
and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of §
159.42(C)(1) through (C)(9) for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of § 159.05(D).



      (2)   As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that
engineering study to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated
floodway.



      (3)   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA,
the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements
of §§ 159.40 through 159.42 for the designated floodway. The floodway shall
be defined according to the definition in § 159.02.



      (4)   A development permit shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or written documentation that a
permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5,
§§ 5 et seq.



      (5)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the
division has delegated permit responsibility to the city per 17 Ill. Adm.
Code, Part 3708, for designated floodways.



      (6)   Permits for dams.



         (a)   Any work involving the construction, modification
or removal of a dam as defined in § 159.02 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702
(Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the
start of construction of a dam.



         (b)   If the city Engineer finds a dam that does not
have an IDNR/OWR permit, the city Engineer shall immediately notify the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.



         (c)   If the City Administrator or his designee finds a
dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the City Administrator or
his designee shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).



   (C)   The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer's review or calculation of base flood elevation and
designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements
of this chapter.



      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;



      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;



      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4;



      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 5;



      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6. Activities (not involving fill or positive
change in grade) are covered by this permit;



      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;



      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;



      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 9;



      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing
residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No.
10;



      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;



      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge
widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;



      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13;



      (13)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 14; and



      (14)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located
entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway
permit requirements.



   (D)   The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.



   (E)   Compensatory storage.



      (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.



      (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5
times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.



      (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation
shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.



      (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.



   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 2008-08-0196O, passed 8-12-2008)



CHAPTER 160:  ZONING



Section



   160.01   Incorporation by reference



§ 160.01  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Zoning regulations adopted in Ordinance No. 2014-03-0487O, as amended
from time to time, are incorporated herein as if set out in full. They may be
viewed on the city’s website.



(Ord. 2014-03-0487O, passed 3-11-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-08-0507O, passed
8-12-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-08-0510O; passed 8-26-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-09-0518O,
passed 9-9-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-11-0524O, passed 11-11-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-01-0578O, passed 1-12-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-09-0618O, passed 9-13-2016;
Am. Ord. 2017-04-0637O, passed 4-11-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-10-0664O, passed
10-24-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-12-0675O, passed 12-12-2017; Am. Ord.
2018-03-0683O, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-06-0693O, passed 6-26-2018;
Am. Ord. 2018-09-0704O, passed 9-25-2018)



CHAPTER 161:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   161.01   Incorporation by reference



§ 161.01  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Subdivision regulations adopted in Ordinance 2014-06-0498O, as amended
from time to time, are incorporated herein as if set out in full. They may be
viewed on the city’s website.



(Ord. 2014-06-0498O, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-09-0619O, passed
9-13-2016)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table



         I.   USE OF LAND



         II.   PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS



         III.   TAXATION



         IV.   FRANCHISES



TABLE I:  USE OF LAND



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




2006-02-0002O
 
2-14-2006
 
Granting a rear yard setback variation for 14906 Park Avenue


2006-02-0003O
 
2-14-2006
 
Granting a special use permit for a multi-family planned unit development,
concept plan approval and preliminary plat approval


2006-02-0004O
 
2-28-2006
 
Approving a final plat of subdivision for Oak Forest Commons


2006-02-0005O
 
2-28-2006
 
Granting a special use permit for a convent and accessory child day care
facility in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District


2006-03-0009O
 
3-14-2006
 
Granting a special use permit for a mixed use condominium and commercial
planned unit development, and concept and final plan approval


2006-03-0010O
 
3-14-2006
 
Granting a rear yard setback variation for 15580 Natalie Drive


2006-04-0013O
 
4-11-2006
 
Granting a special use permit for the construction of a second floor addition
to a single-family residence in B-3 Zoning District, 15401 S. Lamon Avenue


2006-04-0022O
 
4-25-2006
 
Granting site plan approval for 15324 South Cicero Avenue


2006-04-0023O
 
4-25-2006
 
Granting site plan approval for 15711 South Cicero Avenue


2006-04-0025O
 
5-9-2006
 
Ratifying the vacation of and conveying title to certain platted unimproved
right-of-way


2006-06-0029O
 
6-13-2006
 
Granting a special use permit for a bank to operate a drive-up facility
associated with a bank facility within the B-2 General Commercial District,
5520 West 159th Street


2006-07-0042O
 
7-11-2006
 
Granting a rear yard setback variation for 14858 Parkside Avenue


2006-09-0058O
 
9-26-2006
 
Granting a maximum rear yard lot coverage variation for 16038 Long Avenue


2006-09-0059O
 
9-26-2006
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement and authorizing
the transfer of certain property located within the City of Oak Forest


2006-11-0065O
 
11-14-2006
 
Granting a rear yard setback variation for a three-season room


2006-12-0071O
 
12-12-2006
 
Granting a special use permit for yard requirements to construct a
single-family home within the R-5 Planned Residential District


2007-01-0081O
 
1-23-2007
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive- through bank facility with a
drive-through ATM facility in the B-2 General Commercial District


2007-03-0092O
 
3-27-2007
 
Amending the official zoning district map and establishing zoning for certain
property


2007-04-0093O
 
4-10-2007
 
Approving a redevelopment agreement for the Gateway Corridor Metra site
redevelopment at 159th Street and Cicero Avenue


2007-05-0104O
 
5-8-2007
 
Proposing amendment of the TIF #1 redevelopment plan and project,
confirmation of the redevelopment project area and confirmation of tax
increment allocation financing therefore, convening a joint review board and
calling a public hearing in connection therewith


2007-05-0105O
 
5-22-2007
 
Amending the City of Oak Forest official zoning district map, as amended, and
establishing zoning for certain property


2007-05-0106O
 
5-22-2007
 
Granting B-3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15426 South
Cicero Avenue, Elite Restaurant and Banquet


2007-05-0107O
 
5-22-2007
 
Granting B-3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15600 South
Cicero Avenue, Beggar’s Pizza


2007-06-0113O
 
6-26-2007
 
Granting front yard and height variations to construct a fence in the front
yard at 16114 Latrobe Avenue


2007-07-0115O
 
7-24-2007
 
Granting a special use permit for a church to operate an accessory child day
care facility in the B-2 General Commercial District


2007-08-0118O
 
8-14-2007
 
Granting a variation to construct in the front yard, 4936 - 42 West 159th
Street


2007-09-0124O
 
9-11-2007
 
Redesignating the TIF district No. 1 redevelopment project area pursuant to
the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act


2007-09-0127O
 
9-25-2007
 
Granting a special use permit to operate an auto repair business in the B-2
General Commercial District


2007-11-0133O
 
11-13-2007
 
Granting a special use permit for a church to operate in an existing building
in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District


2008-01-0150O
 
1-22-2008
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive- through pharmacy facility in the
B-1 Local Commercial District, NWC of 159th Street and Cicero Avenue, lot 3
of the Oak Forest Gateway Corridor development


2008-03-0163O
 
3-25-2008
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive-up bank facility in the B-1 Local
Commercial District; NWC of 159th Street and Cicero Avenue, lot 1 of the Oak
Forest Gateway Corridor development


2008-06-0189O
 
6-24-2008
 
Granting a special use permit for a gas station in the B-2 General Commercial
District


2008-08-0198O
 
8-26-2008
 
Granting B-3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15427 South
Cicero Avenue, Taps Pub


2008-09-0200O
 
9-9-2008
 
Granting a front yard setback variance to construct an addition to a
single-family home at 14801 Parkside Avenue


2008-10-0206O
 
10-28-2008
 
Granting a side yard setback variance for an accessory structure located at
15961 Jamie Court


2009-01-0215O
 
1-13-2009
 
Granting a front yard setback variance to construct an eave on a front porch
to a single-family home at 5565 Ann Marie Lane


2009-02-0218O
 
2-10-2009
 
Granting B3 Planned Commercial District site plan approval for 15426 South
Cicero Avenue


2009-05-0237O
 
5-26-2009
 
Granting a special use permit for a support group services center in the M2
Heavy Manufacturing District, 16405 South Frontage Road


2009-06-0243O
 
6-9-2009
 
Granting a variance to construct an oversized shed at 17004 Forest Avenue


2010-04-0288O
 
4-27-2010
 
Granting an amendment to a special use permit and planned unit development
for the Gateway Corridor Development, northwest corner of 159th Street and
Cicero Avenue.


2014-07-0505O
 
7- -2014
 
Granting a special use permit allowing the use of a display window electronic
message center of Quick India Pak at 5233 W. 159th Street


2016-06-0602O
 
6-14-2016
 
Granting a special use permit allowing construction of an electronic message
center signage at 6040-6080 West 159th Street, Golfview Shopping Center


2016-06-0603O
 
6-28-2016
 
Amending TIF #3 to extend life of tax increment financing district beyond
original termination date


2016-06-0604O
 
6-28-2016
 
Amending TIF #3 by revising the redevelopment project area legal description,
the general street location and the map of the redevelopment project area


2016-06-0605O
 
6-28-2016
 
Amending TIF #3 by revising the redevelopment project area legal description,
the general street location and the map of the redevelopment project area


2016-06-0608O
 
7-12-2016
 
Designating West 159th Street Corridor Tax Increment Financing District
Redevelopment Project Area as TIF District #7


2016-06-0610O
 
7-12-2016
 
Approving execution of intergovernmental agreement between Oak Forest,
several south suburban municipal corporations and Cook County amending the
boundaries of the Cal Sag Enterprise Zone


2016-10-0620O
 
10-25-2016
 
Revising legal description for TIF #3 to correct scrivener's error


2017-01-0631O
 
1-24-2017
 
Granting special use permit to allow a multi-family planned unit development
in the R4 Single-Family Residence District - 16131 Grove Avenue


2017-01-0632O
 
1-24-2017
 
Revising legal description for TIF #3 to correct scrivener's error


2017-02-0633O
 
2-14-2017
 
Granting Level 3 Design Approval for B&M Auto - 6100 W. 159th Street


2017-03-0636O
 
3-28-2017
 
Granting special use permit to allow a gasoline station with an associated
convenience store in the C1 Local Commercial District - 5347 West 159th Street


2017-04-0638O
 
4-11-2017
 
Granting special use permit and variations for a drive-thru associated with a
full service in the C2 General Service Commercial District - 6441 West 159th
Street


2017-04-0639O
 
4-11-2017
 
Granting Level 3 Design Review Approval for McDonalds - 5441 West 159th Street


2017-05-0645O
 
5-23-2017
 
Declaring surplus revenue in TIF #1 and authorizing payment of that surplus
to Cook County Treasurer for distribution to affected taxing districts on pro
rata basis


2017-06-0646O
 
6-13-2017
 
Vacating and conveying title to Lavergne Avenue Row


2017-06-0648O
 
6-27-2017
 
Granting a Level 3 Design Review Permit Approval for Kevin Vernick - 5338 W.
159th Street


2017-06-0649O
 
6-27-2017
 
Granting a special use permit to allow a used automobile dealership in the C3
District for Sergio Garcia and Kayode Fleming - 15350 Cicero Avenue


2017-08-0653O
 
8-8-2017
 
Granting a special use permit to allow a used automobile dealership in the C2
District for Ata Ihmoud - 5904 W. 159th Street


2017-08-0654O
 
8-8-2017
 
Vacating and conveying title to Sheila Court Row


2017-08-0655O
 
8-22-2017
 
Granting a special use permit to allow a hall and banquet room in the C2
District for Kirk Fallah - 6080 W. 159th Street


2017-08-0656O
 
8-22-2017
 
Granting a special use permit to allow a boat repair and maintenance
facility, considered similar in use to that of an automobile mechanical and
electrical repair and maintenance facility, with boat sales as an accessory
use in the C3 District for Donald Coday - 15335 Cicero Avenue


2018-01-0678O
 
1-9-2018
 
Modifying an existing special use permit to allow the expansion of an
existing self-storage facility at Cubesmart Self-Storage, 4325 Frontage Road
in the I1 District


2018-03-0684O
 
3-13-2018
 
Approving a special use permit to allow a hotel in the I1 District to allow a
variation to allow 164 parking spaces where 199 are required and a variation
to allow a four story principal structure where three stories are permitted
at the property commonly referred to as 4375 Frontage Road


2017-05-0691O
 
5-24-2018
 
Granting Level 3 Design Review Approval, Fierke Education Center


2018-05-0691O
 
5-22-2018
 
Granting a special use permit amendment to allow a time extension for a hall
and banquet room in the C2 District for Kirk Fallah - 6080 W. 159th Street


Res. 2018-06-0333R
 
6- -2018
 
Approving a redevelopment agreement between Halikias Family Company, LLC


2018-07-0694O
 
7-10-2018
 
Granting a variation to allow a six foot fence to be installed in the front
yard of a property zoned R3 for Ron Miller - 15227 Kilpatrick Avenue


2018-07-0697O
 
7-24-2018
 
Approving a special use permit to allow a planned development concept plan
for a residential dwelling unit addition to an existing restaurant and the
expansion of an existing outdoor patio at the property commonly referred to
as 6150 W. 159th Street


Res. 2018-09-0339R
 
9-25-2018
 
Approving a minor plat of subdivision at the property commonly referred to as
16001 and 16005 Lorel Avenue in the R3 District


2018-09-0702O
 
9-25-2018
 
Granting a special use permit to allow an automotive mechanical and
electrical repair and maintenance shop at 5434 W. 159th Street in the C2
District - 5434 W. 159th Street


2018-09-0703O
 
9-25-2018
 
Granting a major amendment to a special use permit to change the permit
holder for a used automobile dealership in C2 District - 5904 W. 159th Street


2018-10-0705O
 
10-23-2018
 
Approving a special use permit to approve a planned development concept plan
concurrently with a planned development final plan for property commonly
referred to as 16250 Cicero Avenue


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




2006-09-0057O
 
9-12-2006
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property owned by the City of Oak Forest


2006-10-0062O
 
10-24-2006
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property owned by the City of Oak Forest


2007-06-0110O
 
6-12-2007
 
Terminating the lease of property at 159th Street and Cicero Avenue to
Sprintcom, Inc.


2007-06-0112O
 
6-12-2007
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property owned by the City of Oak Forest,
for items to be sold on ebay or by public bid or auction


2007-11-0132O
 
11-13-2007
 
Annexing certain territory contiguous to the City of Oak Forest, 16810 and
17000 South Cicero Avenue


2007-11-0135O
 
11-27-2007
 
Annexing certain surrounded or nearly surrounded territory that is less than
60 acres in area


2007-11-0136O
 
11-27-2007
 
Annexing certain surrounded or nearly surrounded territory that is less than
60 acres in area


2007-12-0142O
 
12-11-2007
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property owned by the City of Oak Forest by
public auction


2008-03-0164O
 
3-26-2008
 
Authorizes the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2009-01-0214O
 
1-13-2009
 
Authorizing the exchange of certain property between the City of Oak Forest
and Ms. Mary Rehmeyer


2009-01-0216O
 
1-13-2009
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2014-03-0485O
 
3-11-2014
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2016-05-0600O
 
5-24-2016
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2016-08-0614O
 
8-9-2016
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicle) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2017-03-0634O
 
3-14-2017
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (bicycles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2017-05-0635O
 
3-14-2017
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2017-07-0652O
 
7-25-2017
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2017-10-0662O
 
10-24-2017
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


2018-0680O
 
2-27-2018
 
Authorizing the sale of personal property (vehicles) owned by the City of Oak
Forest


Res. 2018-06-0332R
 
6-12-2018
 
Approving purchase of property and authorizing execution of real estate sale
agreement, Lot 2 at the Gateway Project Area


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  TAXATION



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




2007-09-0123O
 
9-11-2007
 
Approving amendment No. 2 to the Tax Increment Redevelopment Plan and
Redevelopment Project for the TIF district No. 1 redevelopment project area


2007-09-0125O
 
9-11-2007
 
Confirming tax increment allocation financing for the TIF district No. 1
redevelopment project area


2008-12-0209O
 
12-9-2008
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2008 and ending
on April 30, 2009.


2008-12-0210O
 
12-9-2008
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2008 and ending
on April 30, 2009.


2008-12-0211O
 
12-9-2008
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2008 and ending
on April 30, 2009.


2008-12-0212O
 
12-9-2008
 
Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2008 and
ending on April 30, 2009.


2012-03-0374O
 
3-27-2012
 
Imposing a home rule municipal retailer’s occupation tax and a home rule
municipal service occupation tax.


2016-12-0623O
 
12-13-2016
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2016 and ending
on April 30, 2017.


2016-12-0624O
 
12-13-2016
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2016 and ending
on April 30, 2017.


2016-12-0625O
 
12-13-2016
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2016 and ending
on April 30, 2017.


2016-12-0626O
 
12-13-2016
 
Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2016 and
ending on April 30, 2017.


2017-12-0669O
 
12-12-2017
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
on April 30, 2018.


2017-12-0670O
 
12-12-2017
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
on April 30, 2018.


2017-12-0671O
 
12-12-2017
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
on April 30, 2018.


2017-12-0672O
 
12-12-2017
 
Abating certain taxes for the fiscal year beginning on May 1, 2017 and ending
on April 30, 2018.


2017-12-0673O
 
12-12-2017
 
Levying taxes for the city for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 2017 and
ending on April 30, 2017.


2018-06-0692O
 
6-12-2018
 
Declaring surplus revenue in the city Redevelopment Project Area No. 1 (TIF
No. 1) TIF District Special Tax Allocation Fund and authorizing payment of
that surplus revenue to the County Treasurer for distribution to affected
taxing districts on a pro rata basis.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


2006-04-0014O
 
4-25-2006
 
Consenting to the change of control of the cable franchisee from Wide Open
West Holdings, LLC to Racecar Acquisitions, LLC


2009-07-0250O
 
7-14-2009
 
Approving a cable franchise agreement with Comcast of California / Illinois /
Indiana / Michigan, LP


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Illinois Compiled Statutes





References to 2000 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Section
 
Code Section




Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 120
 
30.27


Ch. 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
 
30.01


Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3
 
30.46


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 1-3
 
30.46


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 2A-1.2
 
31.206


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4
 
30.46


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 10-2
 
32.146


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 10-3
 
31.206


Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
 
32.395, 32.398, 32.406, 32.409


Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3
 
33.031


Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.
 
116.075


Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.
 
33.088


Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
 
32.057


Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
 
116.043


Ch. 50, Act 105, § 3
 
30.51


Ch. 50, Act 742
 
32.074


Ch. 65, Act 5
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-1-1 et seq.
 
159.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
 
10.99, 159.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1
 
10.99, 131.27


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-14-1
 
31.206


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5
 
31.206


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-20
 
32.059


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1 - 8-2-9.10
 
32.328


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1
 
33.030


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2
 
33.081, 116.075


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2(d)
 
33.080


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17
 
116.075


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-1-1 - 10-1-48
 
32.263


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-1
 
32.260


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-3
 
32.261


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-5
 
32.262


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-6
 
32.262


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-17
 
32.261


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1
 
32.059


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1 et seq.
 
32.148


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-29
 
32.053


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3
 
33.045


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-10-1 et seq.
 
110.066


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-10-1
 
32.229, 32.232


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-1 et seq.
 
32.340


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12
 
159.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 et seq.
 
32.340


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2
 
159.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8
 
159.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2
 
159.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 15.3
 
32.194, 32.214


Ch. 210, Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
115.35


Ch. 210, Act 50, § 4.05
 
70.06


Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
53.06


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 2-202
 
116.075


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105
 
33.080, 151.067


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102
 
33.080


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v)
 
151.067


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
 
116.043


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
 
116.043, 151.067


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)
 
116.043


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801
 
116.043


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
 
116.043


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
116.043


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d)
 
116.043


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501
 
116.049


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1)
 
116.999


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s)
 
116.049


Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.
 
151.081


Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4
 
151.070


Ch. 225, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.
 
115.15


Ch. 225, Act 70, § 4
 
115.15


Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1)
 
50.26


Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.
 
159.02


Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 et seq.
 
159.02


Ch. 225, Act 447, Art. 10
 
92.05


Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 1 et seq.
 
90.085


Ch. 230, Act 40
 
114.011


Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.
 
111.50


Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5
 
111.40, 111.41, 114.011


Ch. 230, Act 40, § 25(e)
 
114.011


Ch. 230, Act 40, § 58
 
114.011


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
111.43


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-3 et seq.
 
111.40


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 3-12(11.1)
 
111.44


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2
 
111.45


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-27
 
111.44


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-9
 
111.71


Ch. 405, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.
 
117.35


Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 - 51
 
33.115


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 19
 
50.26


Ch. 430, Act 20, § 1
 
118.005


Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
151.067


Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.
 
159.02, 159.42, 159.62


Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18g
 
159.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102.1
 
70.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162
 
70.06


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188
 
10.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-815
 
73.09


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208
 
32.038


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101
 
32.117, 70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5
 
32.005, 32.039


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5(b)
 
32.039


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5(c)
 
32.039


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5(d)
 
32.039


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3
 
32.005, 32.035


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306
 
70.07


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402
 
32.117, 70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402(a)
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502(a)
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707(b)
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707(d)
 
32.117


Ch. 635, Act 5, § 11-710
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002(e)
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305
 
32.037


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1306
 
32.037


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402(b)
 
32.117


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-603.1
 
31.011


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-611
 
70.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 20-204
 
71.01


Ch. 705, Act 405, § 1-1
 
133.03


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
118.034


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-2
 
131.99


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4
 
131.99


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.
 
114.072, 114.073


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-14
 
131.26


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-15
 
131.26


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-19
 
131.27


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16-1
 
32.038


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16A
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1
 
32.038, 70.35


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.5
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4(a)
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4(b)
 
70.35


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 12
 
131.11


Ch. 720, Act 570, § 505
 
131.11


Ch. 725, Act 205, § 2
 
159.07


Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
 
32.021, 115.25


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-101
 
115.25


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-109
 
32.021


Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.
 
32.023


Ch. 765, Act 605, §§ 1 et seq.
 
151.146, 154.02


Ch. 810, Act 5, §§ 1101 et seq.
 
32.023


Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 0.01 - 12
 
33.180


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE



 

2000 Code Section
 
2008 Code Section




2.02.010
 
30.01


2.02.020
 
30.02


2.02.030
 
30.03


2.02.040
 
30.04


2.02.050
 
30.05


2.02.060
 
30.06


2.02.070
 
30.07


2.02.080
 
30.08


2.02.090
 
30.09


2.02.100
 
30.10


2.02.110
 
30.11


2.02.120
 
30.12


2.02.130
 
30.13


2.02.140
 
30.14


2.02.150
 
30.15


2.02.160
 
30.16


2.02.170
 
30.17


2.02.180
 
30.18


2.02.190
 
30.19


2.02.200
 
30.20


2.02.210
 
30.21


2.02.220
 
30.22


2.02.230
 
30.23


2.02.240
 
30.24


2.02.250
 
30.25


2.02.260
 
30.26


2.02.270
 
30.27


2.02.070
 
30.28


2.02.280
 
30.29


2.02.290
 
30.30


2.02.300
 
30.31


2.02.310
 
30.32


2.02.320
 
30.33


2.02.330
 
30.34


2.04.020
 
31.031


2.04.030
 
31.032


2.04.040
 
31.033


2.04.070
 
31.035


2.04.080
 
31.036


2.06.010
 
31.050


2.06.020
 
31.051


2.06.030
 
31.052


2.06.040
 
31.053


2.06.050
 
31.054


2.06.060
 
31.055


2.06.070
 
31.056


2.06.080
 
31.057


2.06.090
 
31.058


2.08.010
 
31.070


2.08.020
 
31.071


2.08.030
 
31.072


2.08.040
 
31.073


2.08.050
 
31.074


2.08.060
 
31.075


2.08.070
 
31.076


2.08.080
 
31.077


2.08.090
 
31.078


2.08.100
 
31.079


2.08.110
 
31.080


2.08.120
 
31.081


2.08.130
 
31.082


2.08.140
 
31.083


2.08.150
 
31.084


2.12.010
 
31.110


2.12.020
 
31.111


2.12.040
 
31.113


2.14.010
 
31.125


2.14.020
 
31.126


2.14.030
 
31.127


2.20.010
 
31.205


2.20.020
 
31.206


2.20.030
 
31.207


2.20.040
 
31.208


2.20.050
 
31.209


2.20.060
 
31.210


2.21.010
 
31.225


2.21.020
 
31.226


2.21.030
 
31.227


2.21.040
 
31.228


2.22.010
 
31.001


2.22.020
 
31.002


2.22.030
 
31.003


2.22.040
 
31.004


2.22.050
 
31.005


2.22.060
 
31.006


2.22.070
 
31.007


2.22.080
 
31.008


2.22.090
 
31.009


2.22.100
 
31.010


2.22.110
 
31.011


2.22.120
 
31.012


2.22.140
 
31.013, 31.014


2.22.150
 
31.015


2.28.010
 
33.100


2.28.020
 
33.101


2.28.030
 
33.102


2.28.040
 
33.103


2.28.050
 
33.104


2.34.030
 
32.052


2.34.040
 
32.053


2.34.050
 
32.054


2.34.060
 
32.055


2.34.070
 
32.056


2.34.080
 
32.057


2.34.090
 
32.058


2.34.100
 
32.059


2.36.010
 
32.070


2.36.030
 
32.072


2.36.060
 
32.075


2.36.070
 
32.076


2.36.090
 
32.078


2.36.110
 
32.080


2.36.120
 
32.081


2.36.130
 
32.082


2.36.140
 
32.083


2.36.150
 
32.084


2.36.160
 
32.085


2.36.170
 
32.086


2.36.180
 
32.087


2.36.190
 
32.088


2.36.200
 
32.089


2.36.210
 
32.090


2.36.220
 
32.091


2.36.230
 
32.092


2.36.240
 
32.093


2.36.250
 
32.094


2.36.260
 
32.095


2.36.270
 
32.096


2.36.280
 
32.097


2.36.290
 
32.098


2.36.300
 
32.099


2.36.310
 
32.100


2.36.320
 
32.101


2.44.010
 
32.145


2.44.020
 
32.146


2.44.030
 
32.147


2.44.040
 
32.148


2.44.050
 
32.149


2.46.010
 
32.160


2.46.020
 
32.161


2.46.030
 
32.162


2.46.040
 
32.163


2.50.010
 
32.175


2.50.020
 
32.176


2.50.030
 
32.177


2.50.040
 
32.178


2.50.050
 
32.179


2.52.010
 
32.190


2.52.020
 
32.191


2.52.030
 
32.192


2.52.040
 
32.193


2.52.050
 
32.194


2.52.060
 
32.195


2.54.010
 
32.210


2.54.020
 
32.211


2.54.030
 
32.212


2.54.040
 
32.213


2.54.050
 
32.214


2.56.010
 
32.225


2.56.020
 
32.226


2.56.030
 
32.227


2.56.040
 
32.228


2.56.050
 
32.229


2.56.060
 
32.230


2.56.070
 
32.231


2.56.090
 
32.233


2.56.100
 
32.234


2.58.010
 
32.425


2.58.020
 
32.426


2.58.030
 
32.427


2.58.040
 
32.428


2.58.050
 
32.429


2.58.060
 
32.430


2.66.010
 
32.260


2.66.020
 
32.261


2.66.030
 
32.262


2.66.040
 
32.263


2.66.050
 
32.264


2.68.010
 
32.275


2.68.020
 
32.276


2.68.030
 
32.277


2.70.010
 
32.290


2.70.020
 
32.291


2.70.030
 
32.292


2.70.040
 
32.293


2.70.050
 
32.294


2.72.010
 
32.445


2.72.020
 
32.446


2.72.030
 
32.447


2.72.040
 
32.448


2.80.020
 
32.321


2.80.030
 
32.322


2.80.040
 
32.323


2.80.050
 
32.324


2.80.070
 
32.326


2.80.080
 
32.327


2.80.090
 
32.328


2.80.100
 
32.329


2.86.010
 
32.340


2.86.020
 
32.341


2.86.030
 
32.342


2.86.040
 
32.343


2.86.050
 
32.344


2.86.060
 
32.345


2.86.070
 
32.346


2.86.080
 
32.347


2.86.090
 
32.348


2.86.100
 
32.349


2.88.010
 
32.360


2.88.020
 
32.361


2.88.040
 
32.363


2.94.010
 
32.375


2.94.020
 
32.376


2.94.030
 
32.377


2.94.040
 
32.378


2.94.050
 
32.379


2.94.060
 
32.380


2.96.010
 
32.460


2.96.020
 
32.461


2.96.030
 
32.462


2.96.040
 
32.463


2.96.050
 
32.464


2.96.060
 
32.465


2.97.010
 
32.480


2.97.020
 
32.481


2.97.030
 
32.482


2.97.040
 
32.483


2.98.010
 
32.535


2.98.020
 
32.536


2.98.030
 
32.537


2.99.010
 
32.560


2.99.020
 
32.561


2.99.030
 
32.562


2.99.040
 
32.563


2.99.050
 
32.564


3.04.010
 
33.030


3.04.020
 
33.031


3.04.030
 
33.032


3.08.010
 
33.045


3.12.010
 
33.115


3.12.020
 
33.116


3.12.030
 
33.117


3.12.040
 
33.118


3.12.050
 
33.119


3.12.060
 
33.120


3.12.070
 
33.121


3.12.080
 
33.122


3.12.090
 
33.123


3.12.100
 
33.124


3.12.110
 
33.125


3.16.010
 
33.140


3.16.020
 
33.141


3.16.030
 
33.142


3.16.040
 
33.143


3.16.050
 
33.144


3.16.060
 
33.145


3.16.070
 
33.146


3.16.080
 
33.147


3.16.090
 
33.148


3.16.100
 
33.149


3.16.110
 
33.150


3.16.120
 
33.151


3.16.130
 
33.152


3.20.010
 
33.165


3.20.020
 
33.166


3.24.010
 
33.180


3.24.020
 
33.181


3.24.030
 
33.182


3.24.040
 
33.183


3.28.010
 
33.001


3.28.020
 
33.002


3.28.030
 
33.003


3.28.040
 
33.004


3.28.050
 
33.005


3.28.060
 
33.006


3.28.070
 
33.007


3.28.080
 
33.008


3.28.090
 
33.009


3.28.100
 
33.010


3.28.110
 
33.011


3.28.120
 
33.012


3.28.130
 
33.013


3.28.140
 
33.014


3.28.150
 
33.015


3.28.160
 
33.016


3.28.170
 
33.017


3.28.180
 
33.018


3.32.020
 
117.15


3.36.010
 
33.060


3.36.020
 
33.061


3.36.030
 
33.062


3.36.040
 
33.063


3.36.050
 
33.064


3.36.060
 
33.065


3.36.070
 
33.066


3.80.060
 
32.325


5.02.010
 
110.001


5.02.020
 
110.002


5.02.030
 
110.003


5.02.040
 
110.004


5.02.050
 
110.005


5.02.060
 
110.006


5.02.070
 
110.007


5.02.080
 
110.008


5.02.090
 
110.009


5.02.100
 
110.010


5.02.110
 
110.011


5.02.120
 
110.012


5.02.130
 
110.013


5.02.140
 
110.014


5.02.150
 
110.015


5.02.160
 
110.016


5.02.170
 
110.017


5.02.180
 
110.018


5.04.010
 
115.01


5.04.030
 
115.02


5.04.040
 
115.99


5.06.010
 
113.01


5.06.020
 
113.02


5.06.030
 
113.03


5.06.040
 
113.04


5.06.050
 
113.05


5.06.060
 
113.06


5.06.070
 
113.07


5.06.080
 
113.08


5.06.090
 
113.09


5.06.100
 
113.10


5.06.110
 
113.11


5.06.120
 
113.12


5.08.010
 
111.40


5.08.020
 
111.62


5.08.030
 
111.68


5.08.040
 
111.41


5.08.050
 
111.43


5.08.060
 
111.46


5.08.080
 
111.45


5.08.100
 
111.48


5.08.110
 
111.50, 111.52


5.08.130
 
111.51


5.08.140
 
111.49


5.08.150
 
111.53


5.08.170
 
111.54


5.08.180
 
111.61


5.08.190
 
111.57


5.08.200
 
111.56


5.08.210
 
111.63


5.08.220
 
111.66


5.08.230
 
111.65


5.08.240
 
111.60


5.08.250
 
111.70


5.08.280
 
111.99


5.10.080
 
114.001


5.10.090
 
114.002


5.10.100
 
114.003


5.10.110
 
114.004


5.10.120
 
114.005


5.10.130
 
114.006


5.10.010
 
114.007


5.10.020
 
114.008


5.10.030
 
114.009


5.10.040
 
114.010


5.10.060
 
114.012


5.10.070
 
114.013


5.10.140
 
114.999


5.12.010
 
116.001


5.12.020
 
116.002


5.12.030
 
116.003


5.12.050
 
116.016


5.12.060
 
116.017


5.12.070
 
116.018


5.12.080
 
116.019


5.12.090
 
116.020


5.12.100
 
116.021


5.12.110
 
116.022


5.12.120
 
116.023


5.12.130
 
116.024


5.12.140
 
116.025


5.12.150
 
116.026


5.12.160
 
116.027


5.12.170
 
116.028


5.12.180
 
116.029


5.12.190
 
116.040


5.12.200
 
116.041


5.12.210
 
116.042


5.12.230
 
116.044


5.12.240
 
116.045


5.12.250
 
116.046


5.12.260
 
116.047


5.12.270
 
116.048


5.12.280
 
116.050


5.12.290
 
116.051


5.12.300
 
116.052


5.12.310
 
116.053


5.12.320
 
116.054


5.12.330
 
116.055


5.12.340
 
116.056


5.12.350
 
116.057


5.12.360
 
116.058


5.12.370
 
116.059


5.14.010
 
110.045


5.14.020
 
110.046


5.14.030
 
110.047


5.14.040
 
110.048


5.14.050
 
110.049


5.14.060
 
110.050


5.14.070
 
110.051


5.14.080
 
110.052


5.16.010
 
118.070


5.16.020
 
118.071


5.16.030
 
118.072


5.16.040
 
118.073


5.16.050
 
118.074


5.16.060
 
118.075


5.16.070
 
118.076


5.16.080
 
118.077


5.16.090
 
118.078


5.16.100
 
118.079


5.16.110
 
118.080


5.16.120
 
118.081


5.16.130
 
118.082


5.16.140
 
118.083


5.18.010
 
111.01


5.18.020
 
111.02


5.18.030
 
111.03


5.18.040
 
111.04


5.18.050
 
111.05


5.18.060
 
111.06


5.18.070
 
111.07


5.18.080
 
111.08


5.18.100
 
111.09


5.18.110
 
111.10


5.18.120
 
111.11


5.20.010
 
110.065


5.20.020
 
110.066


5.20.030
 
110.067


5.20.040
 
110.068


5.22.010
 
119.01


5.22.020
 
119.02


5.22.030
 
119.03


5.22.040
 
119.04


5.22.050
 
119.05


5.24.010
 
110.080


5.24.020
 
110.081


5.24.030
 
110.082


5.24.040
 
110.083


5.24.050
 
110.084


5.24.060
 
110.085


5.24.070
 
110.086


5.24.080
 
110.087


5.24.090
 
110.088


5.24.100
 
110.089


5.24.110
 
110.090


5.24.120
 
110.999


5.26.010
 
113.25


5.26.020
 
113.26


5.26.030
 
113.27


5.26.040
 
113.28


5.26.050
 
113.29


5.26.060
 
113.30


5.26.070
 
113.31


5.28.010
 
110.105


5.28.020
 
110.106


5.28.030
 
110.107


5.28.040
 
110.108


5.30.010
 
118.115


5.30.020
 
118.116


5.30.030
 
118.117


5.30.040
 
118.118


5.30.050
 
118.119


5.30.060
 
118.120


5.30.070
 
118.121


5.30.080
 
118.122


5.30.090
 
118.123


5.30.100
 
118.124


5.30.105
 
118.125


5.30.110
 
118.126


5.30.120
 
118.127


5.30.130
 
118.128


5.30.140
 
118.129


5.30.150
 
118.130


5.30.160
 
118.131


5.32.010
 
118.095


5.32.020
 
118.096


5.32.030
 
118.097


5.32.040
 
118.098


5.32.050
 
118.099


5.32.060
 
118.100


5.32.070
 
118.101


5.32.080
 
118.102


5.32.090
 
118.103


5.34.010
 
112.01


5.34.020
 
112.02


5.34.030
 
112.03


5.34.040
 
112.04


5.34.050
 
112.05


5.34.060
 
112.06


5.34.070
 
112.07


5.34.080
 
112.08


5.34.090
 
112.09


5.34.100
 
112.10


5.34.110
 
112.11


5.34.120
 
112.12


5.34.130
 
112.13


5.34.140
 
112.99


5.36.010
 
158.01


5.36.020
 
158.02


5.36.030
 
158.03


5.36.040
 
158.04


5.36.050
 
158.05


5.36.060
 
158.06


5.36.070
 
158.07


5.36.080
 
158.08


5.36.090
 
158.09


5.36.100
 
158.10


5.36.110
 
158.11


5.36.120
 
158.12


5.36.130
 
158.13


5.36.140
 
158.14


5.36.150
 
158.15


5.36.160
 
158.16


5.36.170
 
158.17


5.36.180
 
158.18


5.40.010
 
115.15


5.40.020
 
115.16


5.40.030
 
115.17


5.40.050
 
115.19


5.40.060
 
115.20


5.40.070
 
115.21


5.40.080
 
115.22


5.40.090
 
115.23


5.40.100
 
115.24


5.40.110
 
115.25


5.40.120
 
115.26


5.40.130
 
115.27


5.40.140
 
115.28


5.40.150
 
115.29


5.40.160
 
115.30


5.40.170
 
115.31


5.40.180
 
115.32


5.40.190
 
115.33


5.40.200
 
115.34


5.40.210
 
115.35


5.40.220
 
115.36


5.40.230
 
115.37


5.42.010
 
113.45


5.42.020
 
113.46


5.42.030
 
113.47


5.42.040
 
113.48


5.42.050
 
113.49


5.42.060
 
113.50


5.42.070
 
113.51


5.42.080
 
113.52


5.42.090
 
113.53


5.42.100
 
113.54


5.42.110
 
113.55


5.48.010
 
118.145


5.48.020
 
118.146


5.48.030
 
118.147


5.50.010
 
118.160


5.50.020
 
118.162


5.50.030
 
118.163


5.50.040
 
118.164


5.50.050
 
118.165


5.50.060
 
118.166


5.50.070
 
118.167


5.50.080
 
118.168


5.50.090
 
118.169


5.50.100
 
118.170


5.50.110
 
118.171


5.50.120
 
118.174


5.50.130
 
118.175


5.50.140
 
118.176


5.50.150
 
118.177


5.50.160
 
118.178


5.50.180
 
118.180


5.52.010
 
118.001


5.52.020
 
118.002


5.52.030
 
118.003


5.52.040
 
118.004


5.52.050
 
118.005


5.52.060
 
118.006


5.52.070
 
118.007


5.52.080
 
118.008


5.54.010
 
118.020


5.54.020
 
118.021


5.54.030
 
118.022


5.54.040
 
118.023


5.54.050
 
118.024


5.54.060
 
118.025


5.54.070
 
118.026


5.54.080
 
118.027


5.54.090
 
118.028


5.54.100
 
118.029


5.54.110
 
118.030


5.54.120
 
118.031


5.54.130
 
118.032


5.54.140
 
118.033


5.54.150
 
118.034


5.54.160
 
118.035


5.54.170
 
118.036


5.54.180
 
118.037


5.54.190
 
118.038


5.54.200
 
118.039


5.54.210
 
118.040


5.54.220
 
118.999


5.54.230
 
118.041


5.56.010
 
112.25


5.56.020
 
112.26


5.56.030
 
112.27


5.56.040
 
112.28


5.56.050
 
112.29


5.56.060
 
112.30


5.56.070
 
112.31


5.56.080
 
112.32


5.56.090
 
112.33


5.56.100
 
112.34


5.56.110
 
112.35


5.56.120
 
112.36


5.56.130
 
112.37


5.56.140
 
112.38


5.56.150
 
112.39


5.56.160
 
112.40


5.56.170
 
112.41


5.56.180
 
112.42


5.56.190
 
112.43


5.56.200
 
112.44


5.56.210
 
112.45


5.58.010
 
116.070


5.58.020
 
116.071


5.58.030
 
116.072


5.58.040
 
116.073


5.58.050
 
116.074


5.58.060
 
116.075


5.58.070
 
116.076


5.58.080
 
116.077


5.58.090
 
116.078


5.58.100
 
116.079


5.58.110
 
116.080


5.58.120
 
116.999


5.58.130
 
116.081


5.60.010
 
118.055


5.60.020
 
118.056


5.60.030
 
118.057


5.60.040
 
118.058


5.60.050
 
118.999


5.62.010
 
112.60


5.62.020
 
112.61


5.62.030
 
112.62


5.62.040
 
112.63


5.62.050
 
112.64


5.62.060
 
112.65


5.62.070
 
112.66


5.62.080
 
112.67


5.62.090
 
112.68


5.62.100
 
112.69


5.62.110
 
112.70


5.64.010
 
111.25


5.64.020
 
111.26


5.64.030
 
111.27


5.64.040
 
111.28


5.66.010
 
110.030


5.66.020
 
110.031


5.68.010
 
114.070


5.68.020
 
114.071


5.68.030
 
114.072


5.68.040
 
114.073


5.68.050
 
114.074


5.68.060
 
114.075


5.68.070
 
114.076


5.68.080
 
114.077


5.68.090
 
114.078


5.68.100
 
114.999


5.70.010
 
114.090


5.70.020
 
114.091


5.70.030
 
114.092


5.70.040
 
114.093


5.70.050
 
114.094


5.70.060
 
114.095


5.70.070
 
114.096


5.70.080
 
114.097


5.70.090
 
114.098


5.70.100
 
114.099


5.70.110
 
114.100


5.70.120
 
114.101


5.70.130
 
114.102


5.70.140
 
114.103


5.70.150
 
114.104


5.74.010
 
118.190


5.74.020
 
118.191


5.74.030
 
118.192


5.74.040
 
118.193


5.74.050
 
118.194


5.74.060
 
118.195


5.74.070
 
118.999


6.04.010
 
95.01


6.04.020
 
95.02


6.04.030
 
95.03


6.04.040
 
95.04


6.04.050
 
95.05


6.04.060
 
95.06


6.04.070
 
95.07


6.04.080
 
95.08


6.04.090
 
95.09


6.04.100
 
95.10


6.04.140
 
95.11


6.04.150
 
95.25


6.04.160
 
95.26


6.04.170
 
95.27


6.04.180
 
95.28


6.04.190
 
95.29


6.04.200
 
95.30


6.04.210
 
95.31


6.04.220
 
95.32


6.04.220
 
95.33


6.04.230
 
95.35


6.04.240
 
95.36


6.04.250
 
95.37


6.04.260
 
95.38


6.04.270
 
95.39


6.04.280
 
95.40


6.04.290
 
95.41


6.04.300
 
95.42


6.04.310
 
95.43


6.04.320
 
95.44


6.04.330
 
95.45


6.04.340
 
95.46


6.04.350
 
95.47


6.04.360
 
95.48


6.04.370
 
95.49


6.04.380
 
95.50


6.04.390
 
95.51


6.04.400
 
95.52


6.04.410
 
95.99


8.04.010
 
91.001


8.04.020
 
91.002


8.04.030
 
91.003


8.04.040
 
91.004


8.04.050
 
91.005


8.04.060
 
91.006


8.04.070
 
91.007


8.04.080
 
91.008


8.04.090
 
91.009


8.04.100
 
91.010


8.04.120
 
91.011


8.04.130
 
91.012


8.04.140
 
91.013


8.12.010
 
93.01


8.12.020
 
93.02


8.12.030
 
93.03


8.12.040
 
93.04


8.12.050
 
93.05


8.12.060
 
93.06


8.12.070
 
93.07


8.16.010
 
94.01


8.16.020
 
94.02


8.16.030
 
94.03


8.16.040
 
94.04


8.16.050
 
94.05


8.16.060
 
94.06


8.16.070
 
94.07


8.16.080
 
94.08


8.16.090
 
94.09


8.16.100
 
94.10


8.16.110
 
94.11


8.16.120
 
94.12


8.16.130
 
94.13


8.16.140
 
94.14


8.16.150
 
94.15


8.16.160
 
94.16


8.16.170
 
94.17


8.16.180
 
94.18


8.16.190
 
94.19


8.16.200
 
94.20


8.16.210
 
94.99


8.24.010
 
91.025


8.24.020
 
91.026


8.24.030
 
91.027


8.24.040
 
91.028


8.24.050
 
91.029


8.24.060
 
91.999


8.28.010
 
91.040


8.28.020
 
91.041


8.28.030
 
91.042


8.28.040
 
91.043


8.28.050
 
91.044


8.28.060
 
91.045


8.28.070
 
91.046


8.28.080
 
91.047


8.32.010
 
91.060


8.32.020
 
91.061


8.32.030
 
91.062


8.36.010
 
94.55


8.36.020
 
94.56


8.36.030
 
94.57


8.36.040
 
94.58


8.36.050
 
94.59


8.36.060
 
94.60


8.36.070
 
94.61


8.36.080
 
94.99


8.36.090
 
94.62


8.36.100
 
94.63


8.40.010
 
94.35


8.40.020
 
94.36


8.40.030
 
94.99


8.40.040
 
94.37


8.40.050
 
94.38


8.40.060
 
94.39


8.40.070
 
94.40


8.40.080
 
94.41


9.04.010
 
130.01


9.04.020
 
130.02


9.08.010
 
131.01


9.08.020
 
131.02


9.08.030
 
131.03


9.08.040
 
131.04


9.08.045
 
131.05


9.08.050
 
131.06


9.08.060
 
131.07


9.08.070
 
131.08


9.08.080
 
131.09, 131.99


9.08.090
 
131.10


9.08.100
 
131.11


9.08.110
 
131.12


9.08.120
 
131.25


9.08.130
 
131.26


9.08.140
 
131.27


9.08.150
 
131.28


9.08.160
 
131.29


9.08.170
 
131.30


9.08.180
 
131.99


9.12.010
 
132.01


9.12.020
 
132.02


9.12.030
 
132.03


9.12.040
 
132.04


9.12.050
 
132.05


9.12.060
 
132.06


9.12.070
 
132.07


9.12.080
 
132.08


9.12.090
 
132.09


9.12.100
 
132.10


9.12.110
 
132.11


9.12.120
 
132.12


9.12.130
 
132.13


9.12.140
 
132.14


9.12.150
 
132.15


9.12.160
 
132.16, 132.99


9.12.170
 
132.17, 132.99


9.16.020
 
133.02, 133.99


9.20.010
 
135.01


9.20.020
 
135.02


9.20.030
 
135.03, 135.99


9.20.040
 
135.04


9.24.010
 
134.01


9.24.020
 
134.02, 134.99


9.24.030
 
134.03


10.04.010
 
71.01


10.08.010
 
70.01


10.08.020
 
70.02


10.08.030
 
70.03


10.08.040
 
70.04


10.08.050
 
70.05


10.08.060
 
70.06


10.08.070
 
70.99


10.16.010
 
72.01


10.16.020
 
72.02


10.16.030
 
72.03


10.16.040
 
72.04


10.16.050A
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


10.16.050B
 
72.99


10.16.060
 
72.05


10.20.010
 
70.20


10.20.020
 
70.21


10.20.030
 
70.22


10.20.040
 
70.23


10.20.050
 
70.24


10.24.010
 
73.01


10.24.020
 
73.02


10.24.030
 
73.03


10.24.040
 
73.04


10.24.050
 
73.05


10.24.060
 
73.06


10.24.070
 
73.07


10.24.080
 
73.08


10.24.090
 
73.09


10.24.100
 
73.10


10.24.110
 
73.11


10.24.120
 
73.25


10.24.130
 
73.26


10.24.140
 
73.27


10.24.150
 
73.28


10.24.160
 
73.29


10.24.180
 
73.32


10.24.190
 
73.33


10.28.010
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


10.32.010 - 10.32.060
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


10.36.010
 
74.01


10.36.020
 
74.02


10.36.030
 
74.03


10.36.040
 
74.04


10.36.050
 
74.05


10.36.060
 
74.06


10.36.070
 
74.07


10.36.080
 
74.08


10.36.090
 
74.09


10.36.100
 
74.10


10.40.010
 
75.01


10.40.020
 
75.02


10.40.030
 
75.03


10.40.040
 
75.04


10.40.050
 
75.05


10.40.060
 
75.06


10.40.070
 
75.07


12.04.010
 
90.001


12.04.020
 
90.002


12.04.030
 
90.003


12.04.040
 
90.999


12.08.010
 
90.015


12.08.020
 
90.016


12.08.030
 
90.017


12.08.040
 
90.018


12.08.060
 
90.019


12.08.070
 
90.020


12.08.080
 
90.021


12.08.090
 
90.022


12.08.100
 
90.023


12.08.110
 
90.024


12.08.120
 
90.025


12.08.130
 
90.026


12.08.140
 
90.999


12.16.010
 
90.070


12.16.020
 
90.071


12.16.030
 
90.072


12.16.040
 
90.999


12.20.020
 
90.085


12.20.030
 
90.086


12.28.010
 
90.120


12.28.020
 
90.121


12.28.030
 
90.122


13.04.010
 
51.01


13.04.020
 
51.02


13.04.030
 
51.03


13.04.040
 
51.04


13.04.050
 
51.05


13.04.060
 
51.06


13.04.070
 
51.07


13.04.080
 
51.08


13.04.090
 
51.09


13.04.100
 
51.10


13.04.110
 
51.11


13.04.120
 
51.12


13.04.140
 
51.13


13.04.150
 
51.14


13.04.160
 
51.15


13.04.170
 
51.16


13.04.180
 
51.17


13.04.190
 
51.18


13.04.200
 
51.19


13.04.210
 
51.20, 51.99


13.08.010
 
52.001


13.08.020
 
52.002


13.08.030
 
52.003


13.08.040
 
52.004


13.08.050
 
52.005


13.08.060
 
52.006


13.08.070
 
52.007


13.08.080
 
52.008


13.08.090
 
52.009


13.08.100
 
52.010


13.08.110
 
52.011


13.08.120
 
52.012


13.08.130
 
52.999


13.08.140
 
52.025


13.08.150
 
52.026


13.08.160
 
52.027


13.08.180
 
52.028


13.08.170
 
52.028


13.08.190
 
52.030


13.08.200
 
52.031


13.08.210
 
52.032


13.08.220
 
52.033


13.08.230
 
52.034


13.08.240
 
52.035


13.08.250
 
52.036


13.08.260
 
52.037


13.08.270
 
52.038


13.08.280
 
52.039


13.08.290
 
52.040


13.08.300
 
52.041


13.08.310
 
52.042


13.08.315
 
52.043


13.08.320
 
52.055


13.08.330
 
52.056


13.08.340
 
52.057


13.08.350
 
52.058


13.08.360
 
52.059


13.08.370
 
52.060


13.08.380
 
52.061


13.08.390
 
52.062


13.08.400
 
52.063


13.08.410
 
52.064


13.08.420
 
52.065


13.08.430
 
52.066


13.08.440
 
52.080


13.08.450
 
52.081


13.08.460
 
52.082


13.08.470
 
52.083


13.08.480
 
52.084


13.08.490
 
52.085


13.08.500
 
52.086


13.08.510
 
52.087


13.08.520
 
52.088


13.08.530
 
52.089


13.08.540
 
52.090


13.08.550
 
52.091


13.08.560
 
52.092


13.08.570
 
52.105


13.08.580
 
52.106


13.12.010
 
53.01


13.12.020
 
53.02


13.12.030
 
53.03


13.12.040
 
53.04


13.12.050
 
53.05


13.12.070
 
53.06


13.12.060
 
53.99


15.26.010
 
151.100


15.26.020
 
151.999


15.28.010
 
153.01


15.28.020
 
153.02


15.28.030
 
153.03


15.28.040
 
153.04


15.28.050
 
153.05


15.28.060
 
153.06


15.28.070
 
153.07


15.28.080
 
153.08


15.28.090
 
153.09


15.28.100
 
153.10


15.28.110
 
153.11


15.28.120
 
153.12


15.28.130
 
153.13


15.28.140
 
153.14


15.28.150
 
153.15


15.28.160
 
153.16


15.28.170
 
153.17


15.28.180
 
153.18


15.28.190
 
153.19


15.28.200
 
153.20


15.28.210
 
153.21


15.28.220
 
153.22


15.28.230
 
153.23


15.28.240
 
153.24


15.28.250
 
153.25


15.32.010
 
154.01


15.32.020
 
154.02


15.32.030
 
154.03


15.32.040
 
154.04


15.32.050
 
154.05


15.32.055
 
154.06


15.32.060
 
154.07


15.32.070
 
154.08


15.32.080
 
154.09


15.32.090
 
154.10


15.32.100
 
154.11


15.32.110
 
154.12


15.32.120
 
154.99


15.36.010
 
152.30


15.36.020
 
152.31


15.36.030
 
152.32


15.36.040
 
152.33


15.36.050
 
152.34


15.36.060
 
152.35


15.36.070
 
152.36


15.36.080
 
152.37


15.40.010
 
151.115


15.40.020
 
151.116


15.44.010
 
152.01


15.44.020
 
152.02


15.44.030
 
152.03


15.44.040
 
152.04


15.44.050
 
152.05


15.44.060
 
152.06


15.44.070
 
152.07


15.44.080
 
152.08


15.44.090
 
152.09


15.44.100
 
152.10


15.44.110
 
152.11


15.44.120
 
152.12


15.44.130
 
152.13


15.44.140
 
152.14


15.44.150
 
152.15


15.44.160
 
152.16


15.44.170
 
152.17


15.44.180
 
152.18


15.48.010
 
151.130


15.48.020
 
151.131


15.56.010
 
155.01


15.56.020
 
155.02


15.64.010
 
151.145


15.64.020
 
151.147


15.64.030
 
151.146


15.64.035
 
151.148


15.64.040
 
151.149


15.64.045
 
151.150


15.64.050
 
151.151


15.64.060
 
151.152


15.64.070
 
151.153


15.64.080
 
151.154


15.64.090
 
151.999


15.70.010
 
151.185


15.70.020
 
151.186


15.72.010
 
156.01


15.72.020
 
156.02


15.72.030
 
156.03


15.72.040
 
156.04


15.72.050
 
156.05


15.72.060
 
156.06


15.72.070
 
156.07


15.72.080
 
156.08


15.72.090
 
156.09


15.72.100
 
156.10


15.72.110
 
156.11


15.74.010
 
156.25


15.74.020
 
156.26


15.74.030
 
156.27


15.74.040
 
156.28


15.74.050
 
156.29, 156.33


15.74.050
 
156.30


15.74.070
 
156.31


15.74.080
 
156.32


15.74.100
 
156.34


15.74.110
 
156.35


15.74.120
 
156.36


15.74.130
 
156.37


15.76.010
 
151.200


15.76.020
 
151.201


15.80.010
 
151.215


15.80.020
 
151.216


15.80.030
 
151.217


15.80.040
 
151.218


15.80.050
 
151.219


15.80.060
 
151.220


15.80.070
 
151.221


15.80.080
 
151.222


15.80.090
 
151.223


15.84.010
 
152.50


15.84.020
 
152.51


15.84.030
 
152.52


15.84.040
 
152.53


15.84.050
 
152.54


15.84.060
 
152.55


15.84.070
 
152.56


15.84.080
 
152.57


15.84.090
 
152.58


15.84.100
 
152.59


15.84.110
 
152.60


15.84.120
 
152.61


15.84.130
 
152.62


15.84.140
 
152.63


15.84.150
 
152.64


15.84.160
 
152.65


15.84.170
 
152.99


15.88.010
 
157.01


15.88.020
 
157.02


15.88.030
 
157.03


15.88.040
 
157.04


15.88.050
 
157.05


15.88.060
 
157.06


15.88.070
 
157.07


15.88.080
 
157.08


15.88.090
 
157.09


15.88.100
 
157.10


15.88.110
 
157.11


15.88.120
 
157.12


15.88.130
 
157.13


15.88.140
 
157.14


15.88.150
 
157.15


15.88.160
 
157.16


15.88.170
 
157.17


15.88.180
 
157.18


15.88.190
 
157.19


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


2018-06-0332R
 
6-12-2018
 
T.S.O. II


2018-06-0333R
 
6- -2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-09-0338R
 
9-25-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-09-0339R
 
9-25-2018
 
T.S.O. I


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




21
 
1-16-1948
 
91.013


177
 
6-22-1960
 
158.06


177
 
7-22-1960
 
158.02


733
 
11-6-1973
 
32.052


2220, § 1
 
- -1997
 
32.290


2220, § 2
 
- -1997
 
32.291


2220, § 3
 
- -1997
 
32.292


2220, § 4
 
- -1997
 
32.293


2220, § 5
 
- -1997
 
32.294


2272, § 1
 
- -1997
 
32.340


2272, § 2
 
- -1997
 
32.342


2272, § 3
 
- -1997
 
32.343


2272, § 5
 
- -1997
 
32.349


2272, § 6
 
- -1997
 
32.344


2272, § 13
 
- -1997
 
32.347


2272, § 11 (part)
 
- -1997
 
32.341, 32.346


2272, § 12 (part)
 
- -1997
 
32.345, 32.348


2324, § 1
 
- -1998
 
30.15


2324, § 2 (part)
 
- -1998
 
30.16 - 30.27


2326 § 1
 
- -1998
 
94.16


2326 § 2
 
- -1998
 
94.17


2327, § 1
 
- -1998
 
30.01


2353, § 1
 
- -1998
 
31.205


2353, § 2
 
- -1998
 
31.206


2353, § 3
 
- -1998
 
31.207


2353, § 4
 
- -1998
 
31.208


2353, § 5
 
- -1998
 
31.209


2353, § 6
 
- -1998
 
31.210


2380, Art. 1
 
- -1999
 
151.145


2380, Art. 2
 
- -1999
 
151.147


2380, Art. 3
 
- -1999
 
151.146


2380, Art. 4
 
- -1999
 
151.149


2380, Art. 5
 
- -1999
 
151.151


2380, Art. 6
 
- -1999
 
151.152


2380, Art. 7
 
- -1999
 
151.153


2380, Art. 8
 
- -1999
 
151.154


2380, Art. 9
 
- -1999
 
151.999


2417, (part)
 
- -1999
 
31.011, 32.053, 32.055, 32.057, 32.059, 32.101, 32.148, 32.229, 32.232,
32.260 - 32.263, 32.328, 33.030, 33.031, 33.115, 70.06, 72.04, 73.09, 95.99


2418, (part)
 
- -1999
 
31.011, 32.053, 32.055, 32.057, 32.059, 32.101, 32.148, 32.229, 32.232,
32.260 - 32.263, 32.328, 33.030, 33.031, 33.115, 70.06, 72.04, 73.09


2371 § 2
 
- -1999
 
33.184


2411, § 2
 
- -1999
 
151.149


2414, § 2
 
- -1999
 
151.149


2422, Art. 1
 
- -1999
 
157.09


2422, Art. 2
 
- -1999
 
157.01


2422, Art. 3
 
- -1999
 
157.16


2371, § 1
 
- -1999
 
33.183


2375, § 1
 
- -1999
 
32.535


2375, § 2
 
- -1999
 
32.536


2375, § 3
 
- -1999
 
32.537


2410, § 1
 
- -1999
 
32.375


2410, § 2
 
- -1999
 
32.376


2412, § 1
 
- -1999
 
32.099


2413, § 1
 
- -1999
 
32.425


2413, § 2
 
- -1999
 
32.426


2413, § 3
 
- -1999
 
32.427


2413, § 4
 
- -1999
 
32.428


2413, § 5
 
- -1999
 
32.429


2413, § 6
 
- -1999
 
32.430


2423, § 2
 
- -1999
 
151.149


2429, § 1 (part)
 
- -1999
 
95.28, 95.99


2454, § 1 (part)
 
- -2000
 
70.20 - 70.22


2461, § 1
 
- -2000
 
94.55


2461, § 2
 
- -2000
 
94.56


2461, § 3
 
- -2000
 
94.57


2461, § 4
 
- -2000
 
94.58


2461, § 5
 
- -2000
 
94.59


2461, § 6
 
- -2000
 
94.60


2461, § 7
 
- -2000
 
94.61


2461, § 8
 
- -2000
 
94.99


2461, § 9
 
- -2000
 
94.62


2461, § 10
 
- -2000
 
94.63


2489, § 1
 
- -2000
 
30.04


2493, § 1
 
- -2000
 
33.001


2493, § 2
 
- -2000
 
33.002


2493, § 3
 
- -2000
 
33.003


2493, § 4
 
- -2000
 
33.004


2493, § 5
 
- -2000
 
33.005


2493, § 6
 
- -2000
 
33.006


2493, § 7
 
- -2000
 
33.007


2493, § 8
 
- -2000
 
33.008


2493, § 9
 
- -2000
 
33.009


2493, § 10
 
- -2000
 
33.010


2493, § 11
 
- -2000
 
33.011


2493, § 12
 
- -2000
 
33.012


2493, § 13
 
- -2000
 
33.013


2493, § 14
 
- -2000
 
33.014


2493, § 15
 
- -2000
 
33.015


2493, § 16
 
- -2000
 
33.016


2493, § 17
 
- -2000
 
33.017


2493, § 18
 
- -2000
 
33.018


2479, § 1
 
- -2000
 
151.100


2479, § 2
 
- -2000
 
151.999


2486, § 1 (part)
 
- -2000
 
73.25, 73.33


2506, § 2 (part)
 
- -2001
 
90.018, 90.020, 90.023, 90.025, 90.040, 90.070, 90.071


2507 § 1
 
- -2001
 
70.05


2556, § 1
 
- -2001
 
156.25


2556, § 2
 
- -2001
 
156.26


2556, § 3
 
- -2001
 
156.27


2556, § 4
 
- -2001
 
156.28


2556, § 5
 
- -2001
 
156.29


2556, § 6
 
- -2001
 
156.30


2556, § 7
 
- -2001
 
156.31


2556, § 8
 
- -2001
 
156.32


2556, § 9
 
- -2001
 
156.33


2556, § 10
 
- -2001
 
156.34


2556, § 11
 
- -2001
 
156.35


2556, § 12
 
- -2001
 
156.36


2556, § 13
 
- -2001
 
156.37


2568, § 1
 
- -2001
 
95.28


2573, § 1
 
- -2001
 
73.05


2597, § 1
 
- -2002
 
151.185


2597, § 2
 
- -2002
 
151.186


2599, § 1
 
- -2002
 
95.32


2599, § 2
 
- -2002
 
95.33


2602, § 1
 
- -2002
 
154.03


2602, § 2
 
- -2002
 
154.04


2602, § 3
 
- -2002
 
154.06


2603, § 1
 
- -2002
 
151.146


2603, § 2
 
- -2002
 
151.148


2603, § 3
 
- -2002
 
151.149


2603, § 4
 
- -2002
 
151.150


2603, § 5 (part)
 
- -2002
 
151.152, 151.153


2632, § 1
 
- -2002
 
90.120


2632, § 2
 
- -2002
 
90.121


2632, § 3
 
- -2002
 
90.122


2659
 
10-8-2002
 
33.101


2662, §§ 1, 2
 
- -2002
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2675, §§ 1, 2
 
- -2002
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2676, § 2
 
- -2002
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


2684, § 2 (part)
 
- -2002
 
33.060 - 33.066


2696, § 2
 
- -2003
 
33.062


2729, § 1
 
- -2003
 
70.22


2731, § 2
 
- -2003
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2745, § 1
 
- -2003
 
32.291


2756, §§ 1, 2
 
- -2003
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2757, §§ 1, 2
 
- -2003
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2758, § 2
 
- -2003
 
32.264


2763, § 1
 
- -2003
 
72.05


2799, § 2
 
- -2004
 
32.560


2799, § 3
 
- -2004
 
32.561


2799, § 4
 
- -2004
 
32.562


2799, § 5
 
- -2004
 
32.563


2799, § 6
 
- -2004
 
32.564


2809, §§ 1, 2
 
- -2004
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2819, § 1
 
- -2004
 
30.28


2838, § 1
 
- -2004
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2842, § 1
 
- -2004
 
32.445


2842, § 2
 
- -2004
 
32.446


2842, § 3
 
- -2004
 
32.447


2842, § 4
 
- -2004
 
32.448


2846, § 2 (part)
 
- -2004
 
31.225 - 31.228


2850, § 1
 
- -2004
 
32.480


2850, § 2
 
- -2004
 
32.481


2850, § 3
 
- -2004
 
32.482


2850, § 4
 
- -2004
 
32.483


2874, § 1
 
- -2005
 
91.060


2874, § 2
 
- -2005
 
91.061


2874, § 3
 
- -2005
 
91.062


2882, Art. 2 (part)
 
- -2005
 
32.460 - 32.465


2890, §§ 1, 2
 
- -2005
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2895, §§ 1, 2
 
- -2005
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2914 § 1
 
- -2005
 
94.35


2914 § 2 (part)
 
- -2005
 
94.36, 94.37, 94.99


2914 § 3 (part)
 
- -2005
 
94.38 - 94.41


2931, §§ 2, 3 (Exh. A)
 
- -2005
 
33.101


2943, § 2
 
- -2005
 
31.111


2943, § 5
 
- -2005
 
31.113


2006-02-0002O
 
2-14-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-02-0003O
 
2-14-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-02-0004O
 
2-28-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-02-0005O
 
2-28-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-02-0006O
 
2-28-2006
 
32.395 - 32.411


2006-02-0008O
 
2-28-2006
 
32.115, 32.116


2006-03-0009O
 
3-14-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-03-0010O
 
3-14-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-04-0013O
 
4-11-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-04-0014O
 
4-25-2006
 
T.S.O. IV


2006-04-0015O
 
4-25-2006
 
32.363


2006-04-0016O
 
4-25-2006
 
73.25


2006-04-0017O
 
4-25-2006
 
70.21


2006-04-0021O
 
4-25-2006
 
31.140 - 31.161, 31.999, 111.90 - 111.92


2006-04-0022O
 
4-25-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-04-0023O
 
4-25-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-04-0024O, § 2
 
4-25-2006
 
32.320


2006-04-0025O
 
5-9-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-06-0029O
 
6-13-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-06-0033O
 
6-13-2006
 
30.04


2006-06-0034O
 
6-13-2006
 
32.480


2006-06-0036O
 
6-13-2006
 
32.060


2006-06-0037O
 
6-13-2006
 
51.02


2006-06-0038O
 
6-27-2006
 
90.040 - 90.063, 90.999


2006-07-0042O
 
7-11-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-07-0044O
 
7-11-2006
 
94.38


2006-07-0046O
 
7-11-2006
 
33.088


2006-07-0047O
 
7-25-2006
 
32.449


2006-07-0045O
 
8-8-2006
 
111.51, 111.52


2006-08-0050O
 
8-8-2006
 
30.01


2006-09-0054O
 
9-12-2006
 
90.015, 90.016, 90.018, 90.020, 90.021, 90.024


2006-09-0055O
 
9-12-2006
 
70.55


2006-09-0057O
 
9-12-2006
 
T.S.O. II


2006-09-0058O
 
9-26-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-09-0059O
 
9-26-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-10-0061O
 
10-24-2006
 
32.495 - 32.500, 32.515 - 32.520


2006-10-0062O
 
10-24-2006
 
T.S.O. II


2006-11-0065O
 
11-14-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-11-0067O
 
11-14-2006
 
32.245 - 32.247


2006-11-0070O
 
11-28-2006
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2006-12-0071O
 
12-12-2006
 
T.S.O. I


2006-12-0072O
 
12-12-2006
 
110.007, 111.07, 112.70, 113.47, 114.008, 115.02, 115.18, 118.002, 118.071,
118.163


2006-12-0073O
 
12-12-2006
 
117.01 - 117.03


2006-12-0075O
 
12-12-2006
 
117.15 - 117.23


2006-12-0078O
 
12-12-2006
 
33.080 - 33.087, 33.999


2007-01-0080O
 
1-9-2007
 
111.51


2007-01-0081O
 
1-23-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-01-0082O
 
1-23-2007
 
158.05


2007-02-0085O
 
2-13-2007
 
111.45, 111.48, 111.50


2007-03-0086O
 
3-13-2007
 
50.01 - 50.07, 50.20 - 50.32, 50.99


2007-03-0090O
 
3-27-2007
 
32.001 - 32.006, 32.020 - 32.023, 32.035 - 32.039


2007-03-0092O
 
3-27-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-04-0093O
 
4-10-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-04-0099O, § 3
 
4-24-2007
 
51.03, 51.07, 51.12


2007-04-0100O
 
4-24-2007
 
52.056, 52.060, 111.52


2007-04-0097O
 
5-8-2007
 
33.104


2007-05-0104O
 
5-8-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-05-0105O
 
5-22-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-05-0106O
 
5-22-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-05-0107O
 
5-22-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-06-0108O
 
6-12-2007
 
116.015


2007-06-0109O
 
6-12-2007
 
31.240, 31.241


2007-06-0110O
 
6-12-2007
 
T.S.O. II


2007-06-0112O
 
6-12-2007
 
T.S.O. II


2007-06-0113O
 
6-26-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-07-0115O
 
7-24-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-08-0118O
 
8-14-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-08-0120O
 
8-28-2007
 
133.03, 133.99


2007-09-0123O
 
9-11-2007
 
T.S.O. III


2007-09-0124O
 
9-11-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-09-0125O
 
9-11-2007
 
T.S.O. III


2007-09-0126O
 
9-11-2007
 
111.52


2007-09-0127O
 
9-25-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-10-0128O
 
10-9-2007
 
151.065 - 151.088, 151.999


2007-10-0130O
 
10-9-2007
 
116.049, 116.999


2007-11-0132O
 
11-13-2007
 
T.S.O. II


2007-11-0133O
 
11-13-2007
 
T.S.O. I


2007-11–0134O
 
11-13-2007
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2007-11-0135O
 
11-27-2007
 
T.S.O. II


2007-11-0136O
 
11-27-2007
 
T.S.O. II


2007-11-0139O
 
11-27-2007
 
116.043


2007-11-0140O
 
11-27-2007
 
70.05


2007-11-01410
 
11-27-2007
 
70.07


2007-11-0138O
 
11-27-2007
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


2007-11-0140O
 
11-27-2007
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


2007-12-0142O
 
12-11-2007
 
T.S.O. II


2007-12-0146O
 
12-11-2007
 
111.52


2008-01-0148O
 
1-8-2008
 
30.45 - 30.52, 30.99


2008-01-0150O
 
1-22-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-02-0153O
 
2-12-2008
 
150.01


2008-02-0154O
 
2-12-2008
 
91.075 - 91.080, 91.999


2008-02-0155O
 
2-12-2008
 
111.52


2008-02-0156O
 
2-12-2008
 
111.52


2008-02-0158O
 
3-11-2008
 
151.001 - 151.005, 151.007 - 151.022


2008-03-0162O
 
3-11-2008
 
30.27


2008-02-160O
 
3-25-2008
 
151.165 - 151.172


2008-03-0163O
 
3-25-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-03-0164O
 
3-26-2008
 
T.S.O. II


2008-04-0165O
 
4-8-2008
 
111.51


2008-04-0166O
 
4-8-2008
 
111.51


2008-04-0167O
 
4-8-2008
 
111.51


2008-04-0168O
 
4-8-2008
 
111.51


2008-04-0169O
 
4-8-2008
 
111.51


2008-04-0170O
 
4-8-2008
 
111.51


2008-04-0171O
 
4-22-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-04-0174O
 
4-22-2008
 
51.03, 51.07, 51.08, 51.12


2008-04-0175O
 
4-22-2008
 
52.056, 52.060, 52.061


2008-04-0177O
 
4-22-2008
 
111.51


2008-05-0182O
 
5-13-2008
 
70.21, 70.22


2008-05-0183O
 
5-13-2008
 
51.03, 51.07, 51.08, 51.12


2008-05-0178O
 
5-27-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-05-0180O
 
5-27-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-05-0184O
 
5-27-2008
 
31.095 - 31.097


2008-05-0185O
 
5-27-2008
 
54.01 - 54.05, 54.20 - 54.25, 54.40, 54.41


2008-05-0186O
 
5-27-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-05-0187O
 
6-10-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-06-0188O
 
6-10-2008
 
33.180


2008-06-0189O
 
6-24-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-07-0190O
 
9-9-2008
 
94.12


2008-07-0193O
 
7-22-2008
 
91.090 - 91.102, 91.999


2008-08-0195O
 
8-12-2008
 
Ch. 76, Sch. III


2008-08-0196O
 
8-12-2008
 
159.01 - 159.11, 159.25 - 159.28, 159.40 - 159.42, 159.60 - 159.62, 159.99


2008-08-0198O
 
8-26-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-09-0200O
 
9-9-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-10-0203O
 
10-28-2008
 
32.575 - 32.578


2008-10-0204O
 
10-14-2008
 
111.51


2008-10-0205O
 
10-14-2008
 
111.51


2008-10-0206O
 
10-28-2008
 
T.S.O. I


2008-11-0207O
 
11-25-2008
 
90.100 - 90.108


2008-12-0208O
 
12-9-2008
 
Adopting Ordinance


2008-12-0209O
 
12-9-2008
 
T.S.O. III


2008-12-0210O
 
12-9-2008
 
T.S.O. III


2008-12-0211O
 
12-9-2008
 
T.S.O. III


2008-12-0212O
 
12-9-2008
 
T.S.O. III


2008-12-0213O
 
12-9-2008
 
32.070, 32.075, 32.076, 32.078, 32.080


2009-01-0214O
 
1-13-2009
 
T.S.O. II


2009-01-0215O
 
1-13-2009
 
T.S.O. I


2009-01-0216O
 
1-13-2009
 
T.S.O. II


2009-01-0217O
 
1-27-2009
 
32.070, 32.075, 32.076, 32.078, 32.080


2009-02-0218O
 
2-10-2009
 
T.S.O. I


2009-02-0219O
 
2-10-2009
 
111.51


2009-02-0220O
 
2-10-2009
 
111.51


2009-02-0221O
 
2-10-2009
 
111.51


2009-04-0230O
 
4-28-2009
 
111.51


2009-05-0237O
 
5-26-2009
 
T.S.O. I


2009-05-0239O
 
5-26-2009
 
52.067


2009-05-0240O
 
5-26-2009
 
51.15, 51.21, 51.22, 51.25


2009-06-0243O
 
6-9-2009
 
T.S.O. I


2009-07-0250O
 
7-14-2009
 
T.S.O. IV


2009-07-0251O
 
7-28-2009
 
32.576, 32.577


2009-08-0252O
 
8-11-2009
 
111.51


2009-09-0257O
 
9-8-2009
 
32.291


2009-09-0259O
 
9-22-2009
 
118.115 - 118.117, 118.123, 118.129, 118.131


2009-09-0260O
 
9-22-2009
 
111.52


2009-12-0264O
 
11-24-2009
 
111.51


2009-11-0265O
 
11-24-2009
 
111.51


2009-12-0268O
 
12-8-2009
 
32.395 - 32.411


2009-11-0273O
 
12-14-2009
 
111.51


2010-01-0276O
 
1-26-2010
 
111.51


2010-02-0277O
 
2-23-2010
 
112.60 - 112.71, 112.99


2010-02-0278O
 
2-23-2010
 
70.20 - 70.22


2010-03-0283O
 
3-9-2010
 
30.01


2010-03-0284O
 
3-23-2010
 
70.99, Ch. 77, Sch. I


2010-04-0287O
 
4-27-2010
 
32.130 - 32.133, 32.590 - 32.593


2010-04-0288O
 
4-27-2010
 
T.S.O. I


2010-04-0289O
 
4-27-2010
 
33.064


2010-05-0291O
 
5-11-2010
 
111.51


2010-05-0292O
 
5-11-2010
 
111.51


2010-06-0295O
 
6-8-2010
 
32.605 - 32.607


2010-06-0296O
 
6-8-2010
 
133.01, 133.03


2010-07-0293O
 
7-13-2010
 
111.51


2010-07-0299O
 
7-27-2010
 
111.51


2010-07-0300O
 
7-27-2010
 
111.51


2010-07-0301O
 
7-27-2010
 
111.51


2010-08-0303O
 
8-10-2010
 
90.062


2010-09-0307O
 
9-28-2010
 
95.01 - 95.11, 95.25 - 95.54, 95.99


2010-11-0314O
 
11-23-2010
 
51.03, 51.07


2010-12-0315O
 
12-14-2010
 
111.52


2010-12-0316O
 
12-14-2010
 
70.07


2011-01-0321O
 
1-11-2011
 
32.038, 32.039


2011-01-0324O
 
1-25-2011
 
32.061


2011-01-0325O
 
2-8-2011
 
92.01 - 92.11


2011-02-0329O
 
2-22-2011
 
151.001, 151.002, 151.006, 151.008, 151.009, 151.010, 151.011, 151.015,
151.016, 151.017, 151.019


2011-02-0330O
 
2-22-2011
 
151.035, 151.050


2011-04-0334O
 
4-12-2011
 
51.13


2011-04-0335O
 
4-12-2011
 
32.576, 32.577


2011-04-0336O
 
4-26-2011
 
92.04


2011-04-0340O
 
4-26-2011
 
73.33


2011-04-0341O
 
4-26-2011
 
33.064


2011-06-0345O
 
6-14-2011
 
32.446


2011-06-0346O
 
6-15-2011
 
32.449


2011-08-0351O
 
8-23-2011
 
31.013


2011-09-0353O
 
9-27-2011
 
111.51


2011-09-0362O
 
9-27-2011
 
90.085


2011-10-0355O
 
10-25-2011
 
111.51


2011-10-0356O
 
10-25-2011
 
111.51


2011-11-0360O
 
11-22-2011
 
111.51


2011-11-0361O
 
11-22-2011
 
111.51


2011-11-0362O
 
11-22-2011
 
90.042


2011-11-3570O
 
11-6-2011
 
32.002


2012-03-0274O
 
3-27-2012
 
T.S.O. III


2012-03-0375O
 
3-27-2012
 
111.51


2012-04-0377O
 
4-24-2012
 
94.35


2012-05-0379O
 
5-8-2012
 
31.030, 31.034 - 31.036


2012-06-0386O
 
6-26-2012
 
111.57


2012-07-0390O
 
7-24-2012
 
32.246


2012-08-0391O
 
8-28-2012
 
32.361


2012-09-0393O
 
9-11-2012
 
32.481


2012-09-0394O
 
9-11-2012
 
32.606


2012-09-0400O
 
9-25-2012
 
32.275


2012-09-0401O
 
9-25-2012
 
111.51


2012-09-0402O
 
9-25-2012
 
111.51


2012-10-0408O
 
10-19-2012
 
111.51


2012-10-0405O
 
10-23-2012
 
114.011


2012-10-0411O
 
11-27-2012
 
111.51


2012-11-0412O
 
11-27-2012
 
111.51


2013-01-0428O
 
1-8-2013
 
111.51


2013-02-0430O
 
2-12-2013
 
51.23, 51.24


2013-03-0434O
 
3-12-2013
 
95.01 - 95.11, 95.25 - 95.54, 95.99


2013-03-0435O
 
3-12-2013
 
114.050 - 114.057, 114.999


2013-04-0438O
 
4-23-2013
 
70.21, 70.22


2013-04-0439O
 
4-23-2013
 
111.51


2013-04-0440O
 
4-23-2013
 
111.51


2013-05-0442O
 
5-14-2013
 
31.112


2013-05-0445O
 
5-14-2013
 
111.51


2013-05-0446O
 
5-14-2013
 
111.51


2013-05-0447O
 
5-14-2013
 
111.51


2013-07-0454O
 
7-9-2013
 
32.058


2013-09-0461O
 
9-24-2013
 
117.35 - 117.45


2013-10-0462O
 
10-8-2013
 
111.51


2013-10-0463O
 
10-8-2013
 
111.51


2013-11-0470O
 
11-26-2013
 
111.51


2013-11-0471O
 
11-26-2013
 
111.51


2013-12-0474O
 
12-10-2013
 
51.03, 51.07, 51.12


2013-12-0475O
 
12-10-2013
 
52.056, 52.060


2014-01-0482O
 
1-14-2014
 
94.37, 94.38


2014-03-0485O
 
3-11-2014
 
T.S.O. II


2014-03-0487O
 
3-11-2014
 
160.01


2014-03-0889O
 
3-20-2014
 
111.51


2014-03-0488O
 
3-25-2014
 
111.40 - 111.71, 111.99


2014-04-0490O
 
4-8-2014
 
111.52


2014-05-0493O
 
5-27-2014
 
118.160 - 118.180, 118.199


2014-05-0495O
 
5-27-2014
 
33.101


2014-06-0498O
 
6-10-2014
 
161.01


2014-07-0503O
 
7-22-2014
 
32.073, 32.074


2014-07-0504O
 
7-22-2014
 
32.050, 32.051


2014-07-0505O
 
7- -2014
 
T.S.O. I


2014-08-0507O
 
8-12-2014
 
160.01


2014-08-0510O
 
8-26-2014
 
160.01


2014-08-0513O
 
8-26-2014
 
32.449


2014-08-0515O
 
8-26-2014
 
111.70


2014-09-0518O
 
9-9-2014
 
160.01


2014-11-0524O
 
11-11-2014
 
160.01


2014-12-0533O
 
12-16-2014
 
51.03, 51.07


2014-12-0534O
 
12-16-2014
 
52.056


2015-08-0554O
 
9-22-2015
 
94.38


2015-09-0556O
 
9-22-2015
 
112.61


2015-09-0557O
 
9-22-2015
 
70.35 - 70.42


2015-10-0562O
 
10-27-2015
 
110.012


2015-10-0565O
 
10-27-2015
 
32.576


2015-11-0569O
 
11-24-2015
 
151.006


2016-01-0578O
 
1-12-2016
 
160.01


2016-04-0590O
 
4-12-2016
 
32.117


2016-05-0600O
 
5-24-2016
 
T.S.O. II


2016-05-0601O
 
5-24-2016
 
111.51


2016-06-0602O
 
6-14-2016
 
T.S.O. I


2016-06-0603O
 
6-28-2016
 
T.S.O. II


2016-06-0604O
 
6-28-2016
 
T.S.O. II


2016-06-0605O
 
6-28-2016
 
T.S.O. II


2016-06-0607O
 
6-28-2016
 
111.50, 111.52, 111.53


2016-06-0608O
 
7-12-2016
 
T.S.O. I


2016-06-0609O
 
7-12-2016
 
T.S.O. I


2016-06-0610O
 
7-12-2016
 
T.S.O. I


2016-07-0611O
 
7-12-2016
 
T.S.O. I


2016-07- 0612O
 
8-9-2016
 
111.51


2016-08-0614O
 
8-9-2016
 
T.S.O. II


2016-08-0615O
 
8-9-2016
 
95.02 - 95.05, 95.29


2016-08-0616O
 
9-13-2016
 
111.40, 111.41, 111.50 - 111.52, 114.011


2016-08-0617O
 
- -2016
 
31.220 - 31.223


2016-09-0618O
 
9-13-2016
 
160.01


2016-09-0619O
 
9-13-2016
 
161.01


2016-10-0620O
 
10-25-2016
 
T.S.O. I


2016-07-0621O
 
11-8-2016
 
111.51


2016-12-0621O
 
12-13-2016
 
T.S.O. III


2016-12-0624O
 
12-13-2016
 
T.S.O. III


2016-12-0625O
 
12-13-2016
 
T.S.O. III


2016-12-0626O
 
12-13-2016
 
T.S.O. III


2016-12-0627O
 
12-13-2016
 
111.51


2016-12-0628O
 
12-13-2016
 
33.001, 33.002, 33.185


2017-01-0629O
 
1-10-2017
 
111.51


2017-01-0630O
 
1-10-2017
 
32.192, 32.193


2017-01-0631O
 
1-24-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-01-0632O
 
1-24-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-02-0633O
 
2-14-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-03-0634O
 
3-14-2017
 
T.S.O. II


2017-03-0635O
 
3-14-2017
 
T.S.O. II


2017-03-0636O
 
3-28-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-04-0637O
 
4-11-2017
 
160.01


2017-04-0638O
 
4-11-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-04-0639O
 
4-11-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-04-0640O
 
4-25-2017
 
51.03, 51.07, 51.12


2017-04-0641O
 
4-25-2017
 
52.056, 52.060


2017-04-0643O
 
4-25-2017
 
31.004


2017-05-0644O
 
5-9-2017
 
111.51


2017-01-0645O
 
5-23-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-06-0646O
 
6-13-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-06-0647O
 
6-27-2017
 
111.51


2017-06-0648O
 
6-27-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-06-0649O
 
6-27-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-07-0650O
 
7-11-2017
 
111.51


2017-07-0651O
 
7-11-2017
 
111.51


2017-07-0652O
 
7-25-2017
 
T.S.O. II


2017-08-0653O
 
8-8-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-08-0654O
 
8-8-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-08-0655O
 
8-22-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-08-0656O
 
8-22-2017
 
T.S.O. I


2017-09-0659O
 
9-12-2017
 
31.036, 31.037


2017-09-0660O
 
9-12-2017
 
111.51


2017-10-0662O
 
10-24-2017
 
T.S.O. II


2017-10-0664O
 
10-24-2017
 
160.01


2017-10-0665O
 
10-24-2017
 
151.066, 151.067, 151.070, 151.080, 151.081, 151.300 - 151.303


2017-10-0666O
 
10-24-2017
 
111.51


2017-11-0667
 
11-14-2017
 
32.382 - 32.385


2017-12-067O
 
12-12-2017
 
T.S.O. III


2017-12-0669O
 
12-12-2017
 
T.S.O. III


2017-12-0671O
 
12-12-2017
 
T.S.O. III


2017-12-0672O
 
12-12-2017
 
T.S.O. III


2017-12-0673O
 
12-12-2017
 
T.S.O. III


2017-12-0674
 
12-12-2017
 
111.07


2017-12-0675O
 
12-12-2017
 
160.01


2018-01-0678O
 
1-9-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-02-0679O
 
2-13-2018
 
111.51


2018-0680O
 
2-27-2018
 
T.S.O. II


2018-02-0681O
 
2-27-2018
 
95.01 - 95.11, 95.25 - 95.54, 95.99


2018-03-0682O
 
3-13-2018
 
111.52


2018-03-0683O
 
3-13-2018
 
160.01


2018-03-0684O
 
3-13-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-04-0686O
 
4-24-2018
 
51.03, 51.07, 51.12


2018-04-0687O
 
4-24-2018
 
51.03, 51.07


2018-04-06880
 
4-24-2018
 
32.099


2018-04-06890
 
4-24-2018
 
94.40


2018-04-06900
 
4-24-2018
 
32.102


2018-05-0691O
 
5-22-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2017-05-0961O
 
5-24-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-06-0692O
 
6-12-2018
 
T.S.O. III


2018-06-0693O
 
6-26-2018
 
160.01


2018-07-0694O
 
7-10-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-07-0695
 
- -2018
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I, II


2018-07-0696O
 
7-24-2018
 
111.51


2018-07-0697O
 
7-24-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-08-0699O
 
8-28-2018
 
92.02


2018-08-0700O
 
- -2018
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


2018-09-0701O
 
9-11-2018
 
111.51


2018-09-0702O
 
9-25-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-09-0703O
 
9-25-2018
 
T.S.O. I


2018-09-0704O
 
9-25-2018
 
160.01


2018-10-0705O
 
10-23-2018
 
T.S.O. I


CITY OF OAK FOREST
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted March 11, 2014
Last Amended September 25, 2018
i Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
This page is intentionally left blank.
ii Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I : Title and Purpose .............................................................................................................. 1
Article II: Zoning Districts and Official Zoning Map ..................................................................... 3
Article III: Single Family Residential Districts .................................................................................. 7
Article IV: Multi-Family Residential Districts ................................................................................ 17
Article V: Commercial Districts ...................................................................................................... 28
Article VI: Office District .................................................................................................................. 35
Article VII: Industrial District ........................................................................................................... 40
Article VIII: Special Districts ............................................................................................................... 44
Part I: Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area .................................................................................. 44
Part II: Redevelopment Overlay District ....................................................................................... 48
Part III: Open Space District .......................................................................................................... 52
Part IV: Institutional Buildings District .......................................................................................... 56
Article IX: District Regulations of General Applicability .............................................................. 60
Part I: Accessory and Temporary Structures and Uses ............................................................... 60
Part I-B: Parking and Loading Requirements .................................................................................. 78
Part I-C: Sign Regulations ............................................................................................................... 92
Part I-D: Buffers and Landscaping Requirements ......................................................................... 129
Part II: Supplemental Regulations for Particular Uses ................................................................ 134
Part III: Sexually Oriented Uses ................................................................................................... 138
Part III-B: Massage Establishments ................................................................................................. 143
Part IV: Design Guidelines ........................................................................................................... 145
Article X: Nonconformities ............................................................................................................ 148
Article XI: Zoning Administration and Enforcement .................................................................. 160
Part I: Administrative Officials and Bodies ............................................................................... 160
Part II: Zoning Applications and Hearings ................................................................................. 170
Part III: Zoning Certificates ......................................................................................................... 189
Part IV: Interpretations, Appeal and Variations ........................................................................... 195
Part V: Amendments and Special Approvals .............................................................................. 205
Part VI: Settlement of Litigation .................................................................................................. 235
Part VII: Enforcement and Penalties .............................................................................................. 236
Article XII: Applicability, Interpretation and Enforcement ......................................................... 238
iii Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Part I: Applicability ................................................................................................................... 238
Part II: Interpretation ................................................................................................................... 243
Appendix A: Table of Uses .................................................................................................................. 276
Appendix B: Record of Amendments ................................................................................................ 287
1
ARTICLE I. TITLE AND PURPOSE
1-101: TITLE
This document will be known, and may be referred to, as the Zoning Ordinance of Oak Forest.
1-102: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Section 6(a) of Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois (1970) provides that any municipality which has a population of more than 25,000 is a Home Rule Unit. The City, with a population in excess of 25,000, is a Home Rule Unit and may, therefore, exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs. This Code is adopted pursuant to such Constitutional authority for the following purposes:
A. Land Use Patterns:
1. Implement and foster the goals and policies of the City’s Official Comprehensive Plan;
2. Establish a rational pattern of land uses and encourage the most appropriate use of individual parcels and land throughout the City;
3. Provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses that adversely affect the character and value of permitted development;
4. Protect the character of the existing residential, commercial, office and manufacturing areas in the City from the encroachment of incompatible uses;
5. Promote the rational and orderly redevelopment of transitional areas and areas lacking a defined character otherwise provided for in this Code;
6. Achieve a sustainable pattern of development that provides for well designed, compatible, and economically viable commercial, employment, and industrial land use areas;
7. Encourage compatibility among different land uses;
8. Encourage and enhance the preservation of natural resources, aesthetic amenities and natural features;
9. Secure adequate natural light, clean air, privacy, a safe environment and convenience of access to property; and
10. Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City.
B. Public Infrastructure.
2 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. Facilitate the most efficient use of existing and planned public facilities and utilities.
2. Protect existing public facilities and utilities from being overloaded due to excess development;
3. Protect and enhance a pattern of interconnected streets and highways that is unified, integrated, safe, effective and efficient;
4. Regulate use along arterial streets and highways to protect their through-traffic function and capacity;
5. Protect residential streets from degradation by non-residential traffic;
6. Reduce congestion and promote safety on streets and highways by limiting traffic generation through the control of land use intensity;
7. Avoid or lessen the hazards of flooding and storm water accumulation and run-off; and
8. Establish and regulate setback lines along streets and highways, property lines and storm and flood water run-off channels and basins.
C. Justifiable Expectations and Taxable Value.
1. Protect and respect the justifiable reliance of existing residents, business people and taxpayers on the continuation of existing, established land use patterns;
2. Establish procedures for the efficient and effective use of provisions of this Code;
3. Establish standards for the review of applications filed pursuant to this Code; and
4. Protect and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings.
D. Administration.
1. Define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies necessary to administer this Code;
2. Establish procedures for the efficient and effective use of the provisions of this Code;
3. Establish standards for the review of applications filed pursuant to this Code; and
4. Prescribe penalties for the violation of the provision of this Code.
3
ARTICLE II. ZONING DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
2-101: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the purposes of this Code, the City is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
A. Single Family Residential Districts. (Article III)
R1 Single Family Residential District
R2 Single Family Residential District
R3 Single Family Residential District
R4 Single Family Residential District
B. Multiple Family Residential District. (Article IV)
R5 Multiple Family Residential District
R6 Multiple Family Residential District
C. Commercial Districts. (Article V)
C1 Local Commercial District
C2 General Service Commercial District
C3 Central Business District
COD 159th Street Commercial Overlay District
D. Office Districts. (Article VI)
O1 Office District
E. Industrial Districts. (Article VII)
I1 Industrial District
F. Special Districts. (Article VIII)
GRD Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area
OLRD Overlay Redevelopment District
OS Open Space District
IB Institutional Building District
2-102: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT SEQUENCE
A. General Rule.
This Code rejects as outdated and inappropriate the concept of hierarchical and cumulative zoning districts and is, except as noted below, based on the concept that each district should be
4 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
designed to accomplish a specific purpose, to encourage a particular type of development and to protect that development from being encroached upon by incompatible types of development.
B. Special Rule.
Within the foregoing philosophy, however, it is recognized that when different districts are juxtaposed, their differing characters may require special treatment to ameliorate incompatibilities that might otherwise result. For that limited purpose, this Code recognizes the concept of more Restrictive and less restrictive districts. For this purpose, the districts established by this Code shall be considered more restrictive or less restrictive in accordance with the following rules:
1. The R1 District shall be deemed to be the most restrictive residential district and the R6 District shall be deemed to be the least restrictive residential district and residential districts shall be deemed to become less restrictive as the district number increases.
2. Residential Districts shall be deemed to be more restrictive than any non-residential district, except the Open Space District.
3. Business and Office Districts shall be deemed to be more restrictive than the Industrial District and shall, as among themselves, be deemed to become less restrictive as the permitted building height increases.
4. Districts with equal height limits shall be deemed to become less restrictive as the permitted building height increases.
5. The Open Space District shall be more restrictive than any other District.
6. Overlay Districts shall not be considered in determining the restrictiveness of the underlying district.
2-103: ZONING MAP
A. Map Incorporated.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Code are as shown on a map entitled Zoning Map of the City of Oak Forest, Illinois, hereafter referred to as the Zoning Map, which is by this reference incorporated as part of this Code. All notations, references and other information shown on the Zoning Map, and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this Code as if specifically set forth and literally described herein.
B. Omitted Land.
It is the intent of this Code that the entire area of the City, including all land and water areas, be included in the districts established by this Code. Any area lying within the City but not shown on the Zoning Map as being included in such a district shall be deemed to be, and it is hereby, classified in the R1 Single Family Residential District.
5 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
C. District Boundaries.
In the event that any uncertainty exists with respect to the intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. The district boundaries are the center lines of tollways, expressways, highways, streets, alleys, waterways, railroads and other rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated. Where designation of a boundary line on the Zoning Map coincides with the location of any such right-of-way, the center line of such right-of-way shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
2. Where a district boundary does not coincide with the location of any right-of-way but does coincide with a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
3. Where a district boundary does not coincide with the location of any right-of-way or lot line, the district boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
D. Maintenance and Availability of Official Zoning Map.
The official copy of the Zoning Map shall be maintained by the Community Development Director and shall be available for public inspection during the City business hours at the City Hall. Any amendment to zoning district boundaries or any change in any other information shown on the Zoning Map made by amendment to this Code shall be indicated on the official copy of the Zoning Map.
E. Mapping of Parcel Affected by Court Decrees.
Parcels of land affected by court decrees shall be shown on the Zoning Map in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 12-106 of this Code.
F. Availability of Zoning Map.
A revised, up-to-date copy of the official Zoning Map, certified as to being inclusive of all amendments and drawn to a convenient scale, shall be published at least once annually and made available for sale at the City Hall.
2-104: ANNEXED LAND
A. Annexation of Fully Developed Land.
All land which shall, after the effective date of this Code, be annexed to the City and which shall, on the date of such annexation, be fully developed and have no area sufficient for the creation of a developable zoning lot shall upon such annexation be automatically classified into the City Zoning District that is, in the opinion of the City Council, most compatible with the development existing on and around such land.
6 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
B. Annexation of Undeveloped or Partially Developed Land.
All land which, after the effective date of this Code, shall be annexed to the City and which, on the date of such annexation, shall be undeveloped or partially developed and have sufficient area for the creation of a developable zoning lot, shall upon such annexation be automatically classified in the R1 Single Family Residential District.
C. Application for Different Classification.
When any land is classified pursuant to this Section, it shall remain so classified unless and until an application to amend such classification is filed and granted pursuant to Section 11-301 of this Code, which application may, however, be filed prior to or contemporaneously with the annexation of the land in questions.
7 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE III. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
3-101: PURPOSE
Four zoning districts are provided for single family residential development. Only service uses that are compatible with the single family residential character of each zoning district and Assembly Uses and their associated elementary and secondary schools are allowed as permitted or special permit uses in addition to permitted residential uses.
The four single family districts blend, in combination with the multiple family districts in Article IV, to provide a broad range of opportunity for the development and preservation of housing responsive to diverse demand. The districts, while distinct, permit a harmonious spectrum of housing alternatives.
The single family districts provide for a range of housing densities from low density estate-type lots in a semi-rural setting (R1) through lots of modest size with greater density potential (R4). The intervening districts (R2, R3) provide gradation of lot area, frontage and yard requirements.
The availability of special permits for planned developments in all single family districts allows for varied plan treatment while maintaining the essential character of the district as it relates both to housing type and overall density.
In the single family district the combination of uniform use regulations and varied bulk and yard regulations is intended to:
A. Perpetuate the existing high quality residential character of the City by preserving established neighborhoods while encouraging beneficial new development consistent with the overall character of the existing City;
B. Accommodate persons with diverse economic circumstances and life-style preferences seeking to establish or maintain residence in the City through the various stages of life; and
C. Implement, through reasonable regulation, the purposes and intent of this Code.
3-102: PERMITTED USES
The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in all Single Family Residential Districts in the City:
A. Single family detached dwellings.
B. Community residences, provided, however, that no such community residence shall be permitted unless it:
1. Has no more than five residents;
2. Is located at least 1,500 feet from any other community residence; and
8 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3. Is registered with the City Administrator.
3-103: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all Single Family Residential Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
3-104: HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations are permitted in all Single Family Residential Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-102 of this Code.
3-105: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in all Single Family Residential Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
3-106: SPECIAL PERMIT USES
Except as specifically limited in the following paragraphs, the following uses may be permitted in any Single Family Residential District subject to the issuance of a special permit as provided in Section 11-602 of this Code and subject to the additional standards hereinafter set forth:
A. Planned Developments, subject to the special procedures and standards set forth in Article XI of this Code and to the following additional standard:
1. Uses in R1 through R2 Districts. Uses in planned developments in the R1 through R2 Districts are limited to single family detached dwellings and the permitted, special, accessory and temporary uses as otherwise permitted in those districts.
2. Uses in R3 and R4 Districts. Uses in planned developments in the R3 and R4 Districts may, in addition to the permitted, special, accessory and temporary uses allowed in these districts, include the permitted, special, accessory and temporary uses in the C1 and C2 Districts.
B. Child Day Care Services, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Required Approvals. No child day care service will be established without the prior licensing, certification or other approval of every public agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed service. Every application for a special permit for a child day care service must set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the service and be accompanied by a formal acknowledgment of approval from each agency. In the event any approval has been delayed, the application must set forth the status of each application, and state any facts known to the applicant that might have contributed to the delay of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special permit.
9 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
At the end of every six month period following the effective date of a special permit for child day care services, the permittee must submit to the City evidence of all required inspections by the State of Illinois or other agencies with jurisdiction within the preceding six month period.
2. Structure Type. Every child day care service must be located in a building of the type permitted or specially permitted in the district where the facility is located. The type of construction must be in compliance with the City building code. No alteration of any dwelling unit that would prevent its future use as a single family dwelling will be permitted.
3. Supervision. Every child day care service must provide qualified supervisory personnel in sufficient numbers to assure the safety, well-being and appropriate behavior of all children enrolled in the service. The special permit may establish minimum supervision requirements.
4. Outdoor Play Area. Unless waived by the City Council based on evidence of staggered use by all enrolled children, every child day care service must provide at least 75 square feet of open space per child, exclusive of any open space located in a required front yard, which must be completely enclosed by a fence or other suitable barrier sufficient to prevent children access to neighboring properties, vehicular traffic, and other hazards. A fence or barrier previously erected by a neighboring property owner will not be relied upon to satisfy this requirement unless a written agreement of such owner authorizing the use is filed with the City Administrator.
5. Recreational Devices. No recreational device can be located within 20 feet of any abutting residential property.
6. Financial Stability. No special permit for a child day care service will be granted unless the applicant establishes, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and maintenance of the facility in accordance with the representations of the application and the various standards applicable to such facility by reason of this Code and other laws and regulations.
C. Transitional Service Facilities for up to six transitional service facility residents subject to the following additional standards:
1. Required Approvals. No transitional service facility can be established without the prior licensing, certification or other approval of every public agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every application for a special permit for a transitional service facility must set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the facility and must be accompanied by a formal acknowledgment of approval from each agency. In the event any approval has been delayed, the application must set forth the status of each application, and state any facts known to the applicant that
10 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
might have contributed to the delay of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special permit.
2. Structure Type. Every transitional service facility must be located in a single family dwelling of the type permitted in the district where the facility is located. The type of construction must be in compliance with the City building code. No alteration of any single family dwelling that would prevent its future use as a single family dwelling will be permitted.
3. Supervision. Every transitional service facility must provide qualified and experienced supervisory personnel in sufficient numbers and during sufficient and appropriate hours of the day and night to meet all standards of any agency responsible for the licensing or regulation of the transitional service facility and additional services as may be required by the City Council. The special permit will specifically establish minimum standards for supervision. The name and telephone number of at least one person having direct responsibility for the operation of the facility must be kept on file with the City Administrator and must be listed in any paper or electronic Oak Forest telephone directory under the name of the facility.
4. Availability of Facilities. Every transitional service facility must be provided with, or have ready access to, facilities and services necessary and appropriate to the needs of its residents for active and passive recreation; medical care; educational, cultural and religious activities; consumer goods and services; and public transportation.
5. Financial Stability. No special permit for a transitional service facility will be granted unless the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the City Council that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and maintenance of the facility in accordance with the representations of the application and the various standards applicable to the facility by reason of this Code and other laws and regulations.
D. Public Utility Stations and Electrical Substations, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Structure Appearance & Screening. All buildings and structures must have exteriors that give the appearance of a structure permitted in the district where located or must comply with the buffer and landscape requirements applicable to non-residential uses abutting a residential district pursuant to Subsection 9-107 of this Code.
2. Safety Fencing. All public utility stations and electrical substation uses must be fenced where any hazard to the safety of human or animal life is present.
3. Service and Storage Prohibited. No service or storage yard or building will be permitted except as permitted for other uses in the district.
11 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
E. Home Occupations that include one or both of the following:
1. The presence of more than four employees, clients or independent contractors at one time in the dwelling unit in which the home occupation is conducted; or
2. More than two vehicles visiting the site of a home occupation at any one time or more than eight vehicle visits to the site of the home occupation per day.
F. Institutional uses, and their associated elementary and secondary schools, are subject to the following conditions::
1. Particular attention will be paid to the impacts of these uses on surrounding residential uses. Institutional Uses must comply with the buffering provisions of Section 9-107, the lighting provisions of Paragraph 9-101 D15, the sign regulations in Section 9-106, and the off-street parking and loading provisions of Sections 9-104 and 9-105.
2. No for-profit use can be located in a structure owned or occupied by a not-for-profit institutional uses. For the purposes of this section, "not-for-profit" shall mean any use operated by an organization that is entitled to exemption from income taxation under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code.
3. The total area of the Institutional Use subject property shall be no less than 1.7 acres/74,052 square feet with all property contiguous.
4. Any school must be under the same ownership and control as the Institutional Use and must be located on the same zoning lot as, or an adjacent zoning lot to, the Institutional Use.
3-107: PARKING & LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The parking and loading requirements applicable in all Single Family Residential Districts are set forth in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code. Footnote references appear in Subsection 3-110 F at the end of the table.
3-108: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in all Single Family Residential Districts are set forth in Section 9-106 of this Code.
3-109: BUFFERS & LANDSCAPING
Requirements relating to buffering and landscaping of certain uses and structures in Single Family Residential Districts are set forth in Section 9-107 of this Code.
12 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3-110: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The building height, lot area, yard and dwelling size requirements applicable in the Single Family Residential Districts are as set forth in the following table. Footnote references appear in Subsection 3-110 F at the end of the table. R1 R2 R3 R4 A. Maximum Height of Principal Structure (whichever is less (1)(2))
1. Feet
35
35
35
35
2. Stories
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5 B. Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions (3)(5)(6)
1. Total Lot Area (square feet)
a. All Interior Lots
10,000
6,600
8,000
5,300
b. All Corner Lots
10,000
6,600
8,000
5,300
c. Planned Development
10,000
6,600
8,000
5,300
2. Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (square feet)
All Uses
10,000
6,600
8,000
5,300
3. Lot Width (feet)
a. All Interior Lots
80
60
50
50
b. All Corner Lots
80
60
50
50 C. Minimum Yard & Setbacks (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)(11)(12)(13)
1. Front Yard (feet)
All Uses
30
25
25
20
2. Side yards (feet)
a. Corner Lots
i. Corner side
30
25
15
15
ii. Interior side
8
6
5
5
b. Interior Lots
i. Minimum per interior side yard
8
6
5
5
ii. Minimum total
20
16
12
12
3. Rear Yard (feet)
All Uses
40
30
30
20 D. Maximum Lot Coverage (percent of lot)
1. All Uses
50
50
50
50 E. Maximum Building Coverage (percent of lot)
1. All Uses
45
35
35
35
F. Exceptions and Explanatory Notes
1. Height of Alterations and Enlargements of Pre-Code Structures. See Section 10-104 of this Code for reduced height limits applicable to certain alterations and enlargements of pre-code structures.
2. Height of Accessory Structures. No accessory structure will exceed fifteen (15) feet in height when located in any yard or setback required for any principal structure.
13 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3. Nonconforming Lots. See Section 10-105 of this Code for lot requirements with respect to nonconforming lots of record.
4. Clustering in Planned Developments. In planned developments, minimum lot size per unit requirements are intended only as a limit on overall development density and not as a requirement that each individual unit be placed on a lot of the specified size. In other words, units may be clustered together so long as sufficient common open space is provided within the development to meet the average minimum lot size requirement of the development taken as a whole.
5. Lot Dimensions and Yards in Planned Developments.
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits for planned developments.
(b) Special Requirements; Limitation of Waiver Authority. Special perimeter open space, and spacing requirements for planned developments are set forth in Article XI of this Code. These requirements will not be waived under any circumstances.
(c) Standards for Waiver. No waiver will be recommended or authorized except on the basis of the development's achieving the purposes for which planned developments may be approved pursuant to Article XI of this Code and satisfying the standards applicable to such developments as set forth in Article XI of this Code.
6. Lot Dimensions and Yards for Electrical Substations
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits for electrical substations.
(b) Standards for Waiver. No waiver will be recommended or authorized except on the basis of need and impact on the surrounding properties.
7. Yard Requirements for Uses Without Structures. On any lot occupied by a use without structures, the minimum yards that would otherwise be required for such lot must be provided and maintained.
8. Visibility Across Corners. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, nothing will be erected, placed, planted, allowed to grow or maintained on any corner lot in any residential district above a height of 2-1/2 feet from grade within the area of a Sight Triangle as defined in Section 12-206 S of this Code.
14 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
9. Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks are established for some signs by Subsection 9-106 H of this Code; those setbacks control over the yard and setbacks established in the table.
10. Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required yard:
(a) Accessory uses, subject to the limitations of Section 9-101.
(b) Statuary and ornamental light standards having a height of ten feet or less.
(c) Arbors and trellises but not in a required front yard.
(d) Awnings, canopies, eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall.
(e) Balconies projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance of not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that the projections come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 45 degrees with the wall in question.
(f) Bay windows projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that these projections will (i) come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 45 degrees with the wall in question and (ii) be located only on the first story when in a required front yard.
(g) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices and the like projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall.
(h) Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than three feet and having a height of four feet or less.
(i) Flagpoles.
(j) Non-mechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
(k) Off-street parking and loading of vehicles, but only as expressly authorized and regulated in Sections 9-101, 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
(l) Driveways, but only as expressly authorized and regulated in Section 9-104 of this Code.
(m) Terraces.
(n) Recreational devices, except in front yards.
15 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(o) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of Section 9-107 of this Code.
(p) No more than one (1) basketball backboard and related support structure per zoning lot may be located in a required yard. Basketball backboards and support structures in front yards shall only be installed adjacent to permitted driveways.
(q) Air conditioning equipment and back-up electrical generators, except in front yards, with screening from public views.
11. Front and Corner Side Yard Adjustment. If a lot in the single family residential districts is not subject to any platted building line or other private agreement, covenant, or relationship establishing a setback, yard or building line, or is subject to such a building line or other requirement that is less than the required front yard or corner side yard in the district, then the front yard or corner side yard, as the case may be, shall be determined as follows:
(a) Interior Lots. For any interior lot, the front yard for that lot shall be determined by taking the average of the front setbacks of the buildings on two adjoining lots on each side of the lot that are located within the same frontage and district; provided, however, that for any interior lot that has only one lot on any side that is within the same frontage and district, the front yard shall be determined by taking the average of the setbacks of the buildings on up to three adjoining lots, if available within the same frontage and district, on one side and one lot on the other side.
(b) Corner Lots. For any corner lot, the front yard and corner side yard for that lot shall each be determined by taking the average of the setbacks of the buildings on four adjoining lots that are located within the same frontage and district as the affected front yard and corner side yard, respectively; provided, however, that for any corner lot that has less than four adjoining lots within the frontage and the district in which either its front yard or corner side yard is located, the front yard or corner side yard, as applicable, shall be determined by taking the average of the setbacks of the buildings on the adjoining lots within the applicable frontage and district.
(c) General Rules for Calculating Average Setback. All average yards calculated under this Paragraph shall be subject to the following rules:
(i) When any lot used to calculate an average front yard or corner side yard is subject to a platted building line, or other established minimum building setback established by private agreement, covenant, or relationship, as the case may be, in the applicable yard that is: (i) equal to or greater than the required front yard or corner side yard in the district, then the platted building line, or other established minimum building setback established by private
16 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
agreement, covenant, or relationship, as the case may be, shall be used; (ii) less than the required front yard or corner side yard in the district, then the required front yard or corner side yard, as the case may be, shall be used.
(ii) When any lot used to calculate an average front yard or corner side yard is not subject to a platted building line, or other established minimum building setback established by private agreement, covenant, or relationship, as the case may be, but is improved with a building that is: (i) located within the required front yard or corner side yard for the district, then the required front yard or corner side yard, as the case may be, shall be used; (ii) located outside the required front yard or corner side yard for the district, then the setback of the building shall be used.
(iii) When any unimproved lot used to calculate an average front yard or corner side yard is not subject to a platted building line, or other established minimum building setback established by private agreement, covenant, or relationship, as the case may be, the required front yard or corner side yard for that district shall be used.
(iv) When any building or structure on any lot used to calculate an average front yard or corner side yard has received a variation to allow for a front yard or corner side yard, as the case may be, that is less than the front yard or corner side yard required in the district, then the minimum required front yard or corner side yard, as the case may be, of the applicable district shall be used rather than the yard allowed pursuant to such variation.
(v) In no event shall the average front yard or corner side yard established under this Paragraph be less than the applicable yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located.
12. Platted Building and Setback Lines. See Subsection 12-101 F of this Code.
13. Side and Rear Yard Regulations for Accessory Structures. Notwithstanding the otherwise applicable side and rear yard regulations established for principal structures and uses by the district regulations of this Code, detached accessory structures and uses located in whole or in part within the rear twenty percent (20%) of the lot shall not be required to maintain an interior side or rear yard in excess of five (5) feet; provided, however, that this special regulation shall not apply to residential recreational facilities and provided, further, that no accessory structure or use, or combination of such structures or uses, located in whole or in part within an otherwise required side or rear yard pursuant to this Paragraph shall occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of such required yard.
14. Height Exceptions. Structures housing Assembly Uses may extend to a height of 55 feet and may include spires and minarets that extend to a height of 70 feet.
17 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE IV. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
4-101: PURPOSE
Two zoning districts are provided for multiple family residential development and two zoning districts are provided in Article VIII and one zoning district is provided in Article IX of this Code for multiple family residential development in combination with certain complementary non-residential uses.
The R5 District provides for single family detached and townhouse-type dwellings, and is intended to function as a transition between single family detached neighborhoods and other, less restrictive, zoning districts. The R5 District provides for a wider variety of single family dwelling types with the flexibility offered through planned developments. The permitted use and bulk regulations are designed to encourage a moderate density residential area including an alternate housing type.
The R6 District is intended to allow modestly higher density townhouse-type homes as well as permitting various residential building types, including multiple family dwellings, which may result in higher densities than in single family developments.
4-102: PERMITTED USES
Except as noted below, the following uses, and no others, are permitted as of right in all Multiple Family Residential Districts in the City:
A. Single family detached dwellings.
B. Townhouse dwellings.
C. Two-family dwellings.
D. Multiple family dwellings.
E. Selected service uses that are compatible with the residential character of each zoning district.
F. Community residence. No such community residence shall be permitted unless it:
1. Has no more than five residents,
2. Is located at least 1,500 feet from any other community residence, and
3. Is registered with the City Administrator.
18 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
4-103: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all Multiple Family Residential Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
4-104: HOME OCCUPATIONS
Home occupations are permitted in all Multiple Family Residential Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-102 of this Code.
4-105: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in all Multiple Family Residential Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
4-106: SPECIAL PERMIT USES
Except as specifically limited in the following paragraphs, the following uses may be permitted in any Multiple Family Residential District subject to the issuance of a special permit as provided in Article XI of this Code and subject to the additional standards hereinafter set forth.
A. Senior Citizen Housing subject to the following additional standards:
1. Special Design Requirements. Every senior citizen housing dwelling shall be so designed and constructed as to be convertible to a dwelling allowed as a permitted use in the district in which the senior citizen housing is located. This requirement shall not be satisfied by a design for conversion to a nursing or personal care facility.
2. Special Parking Requirements. Where conversion of a senior citizen housing dwelling to a dwelling allowed as a permitted use as aforesaid would require more off-street parking or loading than is required for the senior citizen housing, the development shall provide sufficient excess landscaped open space to accommodate such additional parking without violating any of the yard requirements applicable to the permitted use.
3. Community Need. No special permit for senior citizen housing shall be granted except on evidence satisfactory to the City Council that there is, and will for the foreseeable future continue to be, a ready market demand among current area residents for all of the dwelling units in the senior citizen housing development.
4. Location. Every senior citizen housing development shall be located in an area of the City that is conducive to the special needs of senior citizens. This will typically require a location with convenient access to public transportation, retail stores and medical services.
5. Facilities and Staff. Every senior citizen housing development shall provide such on-site facilities and staff as may be necessary and appropriate to satisfy the
19 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
social, cultural, recreational and, where appropriate, medical needs of its residents. The name and telephone number of at least one person having direct responsibility for the operation of the development shall be kept on file with the City Administrator and shall be listed in the Oak Forest telephone directory under the name of the development.
6. Required Approvals. No senior citizen housing development shall be established without the prior licensing, certification or other approval of every public agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every application for a special permit for a senior citizen housing development hall set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the facility and shall be accompanied by a formal acknowledgment of approval from each such agency. In the event any such approval has been delayed, the application shall set forth the status of each such application, and shall state any facts known to the applicant that might have contributed to the delay of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special permit.
7. Financial Stability. No special permit for a senior citizen housing development shall be granted unless the applicant therefore shall establish, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and maintenance of such facility in accordance with the representations of the application and the various standards applicable to such facility by reason of this Code and other laws and regulations.
8. Annual Report. The owner of every senior citizen housing development shall annually file a report with the City Administrator not later than 60 days following the close of the development's fiscal year demonstrating the development's compliance with the foregoing standards and with this Code's definition of Senior Citizen Housing.
B. Nursing and Personal Care Facilities, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Supervision. Every nursing or personal care facility shall provide qualified and experienced supervisory personnel in sufficient numbers and during sufficient and appropriate hours of the day, to meet all standards of any agency responsible for the licensing or regulation of the nursing or personal care facility and such additional services as may be required by the City Council. The special permit shall specifically establish minimum standards for supervision. The name and telephone number of at least one person having direct responsibility for the operation of the facility shall be kept on file with the City Administrator and shall be listed in the Oak Forest telephone directory under the name of the facility.
2. Availability of Facilities. Every nursing and personal care facility shall be provided with, or have ready access to, facilities and services necessary and appropriate to the needs of its residents for active and passive recreation; medical
20 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
care; educational, cultural and religious activities; consumer goods and services; and public transportation.
3. Required Approvals. No special permit for a nursing or personal care facility shall be granted unless the applicant therefore shall first present proof of licensing, certification or other approval of every public agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every application for a special permit for a nursing or personal care facility shall set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the facility and shall be accompanied by a formal acknowledgment of approval from each such agency. In the event any such approval has been delayed, the application shall set forth the status of each such application, and shall state any facts known to the applicant that might have contributed to the delay of any required approval that has been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special permit.
4. Financial Stability. No special permit for a nursing or personal care facility shall be granted unless the applicant therefore shall establish, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and maintenance of such facility in accordance with the representations of the application and various standards applicable to such facility by reason of this Code and other laws and regulations.
C. Planned Developments. Subject to the special procedures and standards set forth in Article 11 of this Code and subject to the additional standard that uses in planned developments in the R5 and R6 Districts shall be limited to the permitted, special, accessory and temporary uses as otherwise permitted in those districts; provided, however, that multiple family dwellings may be permitted in an R-6 planned development upon a showing that such use will not have a detrimental impact on existing or future development in any more restricted district.
D. Child Day Care Services, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Required Approvals. No child day care service shall be established without the prior licensing, certification or other approval of every public agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed service. Every application for a special permit for a child day care service shall set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the service and shall be accompanied by a formal acknowledgment of approval from each such agency. In the event any such approval has been delayed, the application shall set forth the status of each such application, and shall state any facts known to the applicant that might have contributed to the delay of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special permit.
At the end of every six (6) month period following the effective date of a special permit for child day care services, the permittee shall submit to the City evidence
21 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
of all required inspections by the State of Illinois or other entities with jurisdiction within the preceding six (6) month period.
2. Structure Type. Every child day care service shall be located in a building of the type permitted or specially permitted in the district where the facility is located. The type of construction shall be in compliance with the City Building Code. No alteration of any dwelling unit that would prevent its use as a dwelling shall be permitted.
3. Supervision. Every child day care service shall provide qualified supervisory personnel in sufficient numbers to assure the safety, well-being and appropriate behavior of all children enrolled in the service. The special permit may establish minimum supervision requirements.
4. Outdoor Play Area. Unless waived by the City Council based on evidence of staggered usage by subgroups of all enrolled children, every child day care service shall provide at least 75 square feet of open space per child, exclusive of any open space located in a required front yard, which shall be completely enclosed by a fence or other suitable barrier sufficient to prevent access of children to neighboring properties or to traffic or other hazards. A fence or barrier previously erected by a neighboring property owner shall not be relied upon to satisfy this requirement unless a written agreement of such owner authorizing such use is filed with the City Administrator.
5. Recreational Devices. No recreational device shall be located within 20 feet of any abutting residential property.
6. Landscape Buffer. Trees, shrubs and bushes shall be planted and maintained along all property lines of abutting residential properties to create a visual barrier and to absorb and diffuse noise.
7. Financial Stability. No special permit for a child day care service shall be granted unless the applicant therefore shall establish, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and maintenance of such facility in accordance with the representations of the application and the various standards applicable to such facility by reason of this Code and other laws and regulations.
E. Transitional Service Facilities for Up to Six Transitional Service Facility Residents, subject to the following additional standards:
1. District Location. Transitional service facilities shall not be permitted in the R6 District.
2. Supervision. Every transitional service facility shall provide qualified and experienced supervisory personnel in sufficient numbers and during sufficient and appropriate hours of the day and night, to meet all standards of any agency responsible for the licensing or regulation of the transitional service facility and
22 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
such additional services as may be required by the City Council. The special permit shall specifically establish minimum standards for supervision.
The name and telephone number of at least one person having direct responsibility for the operation of the facility shall be kept on file with the City Administrator and shall be listed in the Oak Forest telephone directory under the name of the facility.
3. Structure Type. Every transitional service facility shall be located in a dwelling of the type permitted in the district where the facility is located. The type of construction shall be in compliance with the City Building Code. No alteration of any such dwelling that would prevent its use as a dwelling shall be permitted.
4. Availability of Facilities. Every transitional service facility shall be provided with, or have ready access to, facilities and services necessary and appropriate to the needs of its residents for active and passive recreation; medical care; educational and cultural activities; consumer goods and services; and public transportation.
5. Required Approvals. No transitional service facility shall be established without the prior licensing, certification or other approval of every public agency charged with the regulation or supervision of any facet of the activity of the proposed facility. Every application for a special permit shall set forth each agency that must approve the establishment or operation of the facility and shall be accompanied by a formal acknowledgment of approval from each such agency. In the event any such approval has been delayed, the application shall set forth the status of each such application, and shall state any facts known to the applicant that might have contributed to the delay of any required approval that has not been obtained as of the time of the filing of the application for a special permit.
6. Financial Stability. No special permit for a transitional service facility shall be granted unless the applicant therefore shall establish to the satisfaction of the City Council that there exists a reasonably certain source of continuous and sufficient funds to provide for the operation and maintenance of such facility in accordance with the presentations of the application and the various standards applicable to such facility by reason of this Code and other laws and regulations.
F. Public Utility Stations and Electrical Substations, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Structure Appearance and Screening. All buildings and structures either shall have exteriors which give the appearance of a structure permitted in the district where located or shall comply with the buffer and landscape requirements applicable to nonresidential uses abutting a residential district pursuant to Subsection 9-107 of this Code.
2. Safety Fencing. All such uses shall be fenced where any hazard to the safety of human or animal life is present.
23 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3. Service and Storage Prohibited. No service or storage yard or building shall be permitted except as permitted for other uses in the district.
G. Landbanking of Required Parking, subject to Subsection 9-104 E of this Code.
H. Community Residences, subject to the following additional standards:
1. Registration. All community residences shall be registered with the City Administrator.
2. Spacing. No special permit for a community residence shall be granted to a community residence that is less than 1,500 feet from any other community residence.
F. Institutional Uses, and their associated elementary and secondary schools, but in only the R5 District, and are subject to the following conditions:
1. Particular attention will be paid to the impacts of these uses on surrounding residential uses. Institutional Uses must comply with the buffering provisions of Section 9-107, the lighting provisions of Paragraph 9-101 D15, the sign regulations in Section 9-106, and the off-street parking and loading provisions of Sections 9-104 and 9-105.
2. No for-profit use can be located in a structure owned or occupied by a not-for-profit Institutional Uses. For the purposes of this section, "not-for-profit" shall mean any use operated by an organization that is entitled to exemption from income taxation under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code.
3. The total area of the Institutional Use subject property shall be no less than 1.7 acres/74,052 square feet with all property contiguous.
4. Any school must be under the same ownership and control as the Institutional Use and must be located on the same zoning lot as, or an adjacent zoning lot to, the Institutional Use.
I. Home Occupations that include one or both of the following:
1. The presence of more than four employees, clients or independent contractors at one time in the dwelling unit in which the home occupation is conducted; or
2. More than two vehicles visiting the site of a home occupation at any one time or more than eight vehicle visits to the site of the home occupation per day.
4-107: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The parking and loading requirements applicable in all Multiple Family Residential Districts are set forth in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
24 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
4-108: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in all Multiple Family Residential Districts are set forth in Section 9-106 of this Code.
4-109: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
Requirements relating to buffering and landscaping of certain uses and structures in Multiple Family Residential Districts are set forth in Section 9-107 of this Code.
4-110: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The building height, lot area yard, floor area, and dwelling unit size requirements applicable in the Multiple Family Residential Districts are set forth in the following table. Footnote references appear in Subsection 4-110 F at the end of the table. R5 R6 A. Maximum Height (whichever is less)(15)
Smallest minimum lot size per dwelling unit: 1,750 sq. ft.
1. Feet
35
35
2. Stories
3
3 B. Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions (1) (6)(14)
1. Total Lot Area (square feet)
a. Single Family Detached
7,500
7,500
b. Townhouse
5 acres
24,000
c. Two-family
7,500
6,500
d. Multiple Family
15,000
15,000
e. Senior Housing
7,500
7,500
f. Nursing or Personal Care Facility
7,500
7,500
g. Planned Development
7,500
7,500
h. Day Care Center
7,500
7,500
i. Transitional Service Facility
7,500
7,500
j. Public Utility Station
7,500
7,500
2. Gross Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (square feet)
a. Single Family Detached
7,500
7,500
b. Townhouse
3,000
3,000
c. Two-family
3,750
3,250
d. Multiple Family
3,500
3,500
e. Senior Housing
2,000
1,750
f. Nursing or Personal Care Facility
2,000
1,750
g. Planned Development
2,000
1,750
3. Lot Width (feet) All Uses
50
50 C. Minimum Yard & Setbacks (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)(11)(12)(14)
1. Front and Corner Side Yard (feet)All Uses
25
25
2. Side yards (feet) All Uses
5
5
3. Rear Yard (feet) All Uses
25
25
25 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
F. Exceptions and Explanatory Notes
1. Nonconforming Lots. See Section 10-105 for lot requirements with respect to nonconforming lots of record.
2. Application of Requirements to Townhouse and Two-Family Dwellings. In the case of townhouse and two-family dwellings, the stated requirement shall be applied with respect to the entire dwelling and the zoning lot on which it is located and not to individual dwelling units within such dwelling.
3. Calculation of Nursing or Personal Care Facility Density. Every patient bed in a nursing or personal care facility, whether in a private, semi-private or dormitory room, shall be counted as one dwelling unit. In addition, any dwelling unit occupied or available for occupancy by staff of the nursing or personal care facility shall be counted as a dwelling unit.
4. Clustering in Planned Developments. In planned developments, minimum lot size per unit requirements are intended only as a limit on overall development density and not as a requirement that each individual unit be placed on a lot of the specified size. In other words, units may be clustered together so long as sufficient common open space is provided within the development to meet the average minimum lot size requirement of the development taken as a whole.
5. Lot Dimensions and Yards in Planned Developments.
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits for planned developments.
(b) Special Requirements; Limitation of Waiver Authority. Special perimeter open space, setback and spacing requirements for planned developments are set forth in Article XI of this Code. Such requirements shall not be waived under any circumstances.
(c) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except in accordance with the provisions of Article XI of this Code.
6. Yard Requirements for Uses Without Structures. On any lot occupied without structures, the minimum yards that would otherwise be required for such lot shall be provided and maintained. D. Maximum Floor Area Ratio (2) (3)(4)
All Uses
.50
.55 E. Maximum Lot Coverage (percent of lot)
1. Single Family Detached
50
50
2. All Other Uses
50
50
26 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
7. Visibility Across Corners. Any other provision of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, allowed to grow or maintained on any corner lot in any residential district above a height of 2-1/2 feet from grade within the area of a sight triangle as defined in Section 12-206 S of this Code.
8. Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks are established for some signs by Subsection 9-106 of this Code; those setbacks shall control over the yards and setbacks established in the table.
9. Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required yard.
(a) Accessory uses, subject to the limitations of Section 9-101.
(b) Statuary, arbors, trellises and ornamental light standards having a height of ten feet or less.
(c) Awnings, canopies, eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall.
(d) Bay windows and balconies projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that such projections shall come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 22-1/2 degrees with the wall in question.
(e) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices and the like projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall.
(f) Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than three feet and having a height of four feet or less.
(g) Flagpoles.
(h) Non-mechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
(i) Off-street parking and loading of vehicles, but only as expressly authorized and regulated in Sections 9-101, 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
(j) Terraces.
(k) Recreational devices, except in front yards.
(l) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of Section 9-107 of this Code.
27 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(m) Decks of three feet or less in height.
(n) No more than one (1) basketball backboard and related support structure per zoning lot or separately owned lot containing a single dwelling unit may be located in a required yard. Basketball backboards and support structures in front yards shall only be installed adjacent to permitted driveways.
(o) Air conditioning equipment and back-up electrical generators, except in front yards, with screening from public views.
10. Front and Corner Side Yard Adjustment Next to Existing Structures. Where a lot abuts, on both sides, lots that have already been developed, the front yard applicable to such lot shall be determined by taking the average of the setbacks of the buildings on the two abutting lots; provided, however, that no such front or corner side yard shall be less than 25 feet. Where a lot abuts a lot that has already been developed on one side and a vacant lot or street on the other side, the front or corner side yard applicable to such lot shall be determined by taking the average of the setback of the building on the abutting developed lot and the required front yard in the zoning district; provided, however, that no such front or corner side yard shall be less than 25 feet.
11. Platted Building and Setback Lines. See Subsection 12-101 F of this Code.
12. Dwelling Unit Sizes in Senior Citizen Housing and Nursing and Personal Care Facilities. The minimum dwelling unit size for senior citizen housing dwelling units shall be 625 square feet. Nursing and personal care facilities shall provide 300 square feet of net floor area for each patient bed.
13. Lot Dimensions and Yards for Electrical Substations.
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits for electrical substations.
(b) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except on the basis of need and impact on the surrounding properties.
14. Height Exceptions. Structures housing Assembly Uses may extend to a height of 55 feet and may include spires and minarets that extend to a height of 70 feet.
28 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE V. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
5-101: PURPOSE
Four zoning districts are provided for commercial uses and two zoning districts are provided in Article VIII of this Code for commercial uses that are complementary to multiple family residential uses. When taken together, these districts are intended to permit development of property for the full range of commercial uses needed to serve the citizens of Oak Forest and surrounding areas in a suburban setting.
Specifically, the C1 Local Commercial District is intended to provide for local and neighborhood retail and service commercial establishments. The C2 General Service Commercial District is intended to provide for general commercial activity, including what has traditionally been called highway commercial activities for large more intense commercial developments such as shopping centers, strip centers and establishments with areas of outside product display and sales such as automobile dealerships. The C3 Central Business District is intended to serve the entire Oak Forest suburban community with a wider variety of retail and service uses. The COD is intended to preserve and assist the 159th Street Business Corridor revenue generating capacity. The overlay district provides the regulations necessary to encourage commercial development that contributes to the overall tax base of Oak Forest.
5-102: PERMITTED USES AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES
In interpreting the permitted and special use designations, reference should be made to the North American Industry Classification System, as amended by the City (see Appendix A) and Section 11-501 of this Code.
5-103: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all Commercial Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
5-104: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in all Commercial Districts subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
5-105: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The parking and loading requirements applicable in all Commercial Districts are set forth in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
5-106: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in all Commercial Districts are set forth in Section 9-106 of this Code.
29 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
5-107: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
Requirements relating to buffering and landscaping of certain uses and structures in Commercial Districts are set forth in Section 9-107 of this Code.
5-108: USE LIMITATIONS
A. C1 Local Commercial District
1. New Structures. Any new structure constructed in the C1 District shall be designed to be compatible in appearance with adjacent single family residential structures. The quality of exterior design and materials shall be equal on facades of the structure.
2. Exterior Lighting. No exterior lighting shall be located in any required rear yard in the C1 District.
3. Signage. No business sign located in the C1 District shall be in direct view of any abutting residential lot.
4. Landscaping. The entire rear yard of any lot in the C1 District shall be treated as a required landscaped open space.
B. C3 Central Business District
1. Single Family Detached Dwelling Units. Single family detached dwelling units located on lots which do not occupy frontage on a major arterial street and/or state highway are permitted within the C3 District.
2. Multi-Family Dwelling Units. Multi-Family attached dwelling units proposed as part of a mixed-use planned commercial development are permitted as a special use.
C. All Commercial Districts
1. Manufacturing Limited. No manufacturing, processing or treatment of products shall be conducted on the premises except those that are incidental to a principal retail business use. At least 75 percent of all products produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises.
2. Storage Limited. No storage or warehousing of any product shall be permitted except such as is incidental to a principal retail use.
3. Above Ground Tanks. No above ground tanks designed or used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be located less than 600 feet from the lot line of any lot on which a fire station is located.
30 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
D. Outdoor Display of Merchandise. For displays of merchandise not otherwise permitted under Section 9-103 of this Code regarding Temporary Uses, the outdoor display of merchandise shall be permitted in any Commercial District subject to the following conditions, standards, and requirements:
1. Permit. The owner of the property on which the merchandise is to be displayed shall obtain a permit from the City Administrator prior to the display of any merchandise outdoors. No permit shall be issued unless a plan is submitted to the City Administrator by the owner illustrating the intended locations on the property where any merchandise will be displayed outdoors. The plan shall be subject to review by the Police, Fire, Public Works and Development Departments to ensure the proposed outdoor display will not pose a public safety hazard. The plan shall clearly illustrate the following:
(a) All property lines, sidewalk and building locations, fire hydrants, parking areas, and fire lanes; and
(b) The location of an unobstructed pedestrian walkway with a width of at least five feet providing ingress and egress to all entrances and exits to all buildings or structures on the property. If the outdoor display will be located on property with adjacent businesses, there shall be an unobstructed path of at least five feet in width to and from the front of every adjoining business.
(c) Upon review and approval of the plan, the City Administrator shall issue a permit subject to such conditions as he or she deems necessary to ensure that the outdoor display will not cause a public nuisance.
2. Term. The permit shall be valid for a term not to exceed one year. Renewal of a permit shall require City review and approval of a new plan pursuant to the procedures and conditions of Paragraph 5-108 D1 of this Code.
3. General Standards. The owner shall ensure that any outdoor display of merchandise satisfies the following conditions, standards, and requirements at all times:
(a) The display does not block or hinder access to the emergency exits of any building or structure or any fire lane on the property;
(b) The display contains only merchandise available for sale within the building or structure adjacent to, or in close proximity to, the display;
(c) The display does not encroach on any parking area; and
(d) The display is maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly fashion.
31 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
4. Revocation. The failure of an owner to comply with the terms of the permit or the conditions, standards and requirements of this Subsection 5-108 shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the permit by the City.
5-109: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The building height, yard and setback requirements applicable in the Commercial Districts are set forth in the following table. Footnote references appear in Section 5-109 D at the end of the table. C1 C2 C3 A. Maximum Height (whichever is less)(10)
1. Feet
35
35
45
2. Stories
2
2
3 B. Minimum Lot Area & Dimensions (1)(5)(9)
1. Total Lot Area (square feet)
6,250
8,500
6,250
2. Lot Width (feet)
50
60
50 C. Minimum Setbacks (2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)
1. Front and Corner Side (feet)
a. Yard
25
25
0
b. Setback
25
25
0
2. Interior Side (feet)
a. Yard
0
5
0
b. Setback
0
5
0
3. Rear (feet)
a. Yard
20
20
25
b. Setback
25
25
25
D. Exceptions and Explanatory Notes
1. Nonconforming Lots. See Subsection 10-105 for lot requirements with respect to nonconforming lots of record.
2. Yard Requirements for Uses Without Structures. On any lot occupied by a use without structures, the minimum yards that would otherwise be required for such lot shall be provided and maintained.
3. Visibility Across Corners. Any other provision of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, in all Commercial Districts other than the C3 District, on any corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, allowed to grow or maintained above a height of 2-1/2 feet from grade within the area of a Sight Triangle as defined in Section 12-206 S of this Code.
4. Transitional Setbacks in C1 and C2 Districts Abutting Residential Districts. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, the following shall be
32 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
setback from the nearest residential property line a distance equal to at least 40 feet.
5. Lot Dimensions and Yards in Planned Developments.
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension requirements of the underlying district and the yard requirements of the underlying district for yards within the interior of the development when approving special permits for planned developments.
(b) Special Requirements; Limitation of Waiver Authority. Special perimeter open space setback and spacing requirements for planned developments are set forth in Subparagraphs 11-603 E2 (f) and (g) of this Code. Such requirements shall not be waived under any circumstances.
(c) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-603 H of this Code.
6. Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks are established for some signs by Subsections 9-106 H and 9-106 I of this Code; those setbacks shall control over the yards and setbacks established in the table.
7. Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required yard.
(a) Accessory uses, subject to the limitations of Section 9-101.
(b) Statuary, arbors, trellises and ornamental light standards having a height of ten feet or less.
(c) Awnings, canopies, eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall.
(d) Bay windows and balconies projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that such projections shall come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 22-1/2 degrees with the wall in question.
(e) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices and the like projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall.
(f) Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than three feet and having a height of four feet or less.
33 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(g) Flagpoles.
(h) Non-mechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
(i) Off-street parking and loading of vehicles, but only as expressly authorized and regulated in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
(j) Terraces.
(k) Recreational devices, except in front yards.
(l) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of Section 9-107 of this Code.
8. Platted Building and Setback Lines. See Subsection 12-101 F of this Code.
9. Lot Dimensions and Yards for Electrical Substations.
(a) Authority to Waive. The City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving site plans for electrical substations.
(b) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except on the basis of need and impact on the surrounding properties.
10. Height Exceptions. Structures housing religious organizations may extend to a height of 55 feet and may include spires and minarets that extend to a height of 70 feet.
5-110: 159TH STREET COMMERCIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the 159th Street Commercial Overlay District (“COD”) is enhance and build upon a core business area, to add to the support of the business and retail vitality of the City in a limited, specified, visible corridor within the City, to limit or eliminate obstacles to maximizing business location and operation within the corridor and in furtherance of the goal of business generation and preservation to create zoning regulations that specifically target, promote and maintain business opportunities, interests and development in the corridor and to preserve, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, the COD by limiting the permitted and special uses allowed therein to commercial retail stores, commercial establishments, service establishments, professional offices and commercial/retail mixed uses that generate sales tax revenues, maintain the City’s property tax base and allow for convenient locations for the public to shop, obtain services and conduct business.
B. Boundaries. The COD is generally located along 159th Street between Oak Park Avenue and Cicero Avenue, and is as depicted in the Appendix C map attached to this Zoning Ordinance.
34 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
[INSERT LEGAL DESCRIPTION]
C. Standards. Where the standards for the COD differ from or are inconsistent with those of the base zoning standards, the COD standards shall control. Otherwise, the base zoning standards are applicable.
D. Permitted Uses. The permitted uses in the COD shall be limited to commercial retail stores, commercial establishments, service establishments, and professional offices that generate sales tax revenues, promote and maintain the City’s property tax base and provide for convenient locations for the public to shop, obtain services and conduct business. [Insert column in Appendix A zoning table in Ordinance for Overlay district and list permitted uses].
E. Prohibited Uses. All tax exempt uses listed and defined in NAICS Code 813 including, without limitation, not-for-profit, religious, professional, fraternal and civic organizations, are expressly prohibited in the COD.
F. Base Zoning. [Insert base zoning].
G. Commercial Planned Unit Developments. Commercial Planned Unit Developments shall be permitted in the COD subject to the approval process provided for in §160.385 of the Zoning Code.
35 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE VI. OFFICE DISTRICT
6-101: PURPOSE
One zoning district is provided for office development. This office district provides a broad range of opportunities for the development and preservation of office space responsive to diverse demands.
In the office district, the use regulations and bulk and yard regulations is intended to perpetuate the existing high quality character of the City by preserving established office use areas while encouraging beneficial new office development in a variety of suburban settings consistent with the overall character and land use patterns of the existing City;
6-102: PERMITTED USES AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES
In interpreting the permitted and special use designations, reference should be made to the North American Industry Classification System, as amended by the City (see Appendix A) and Section 11-501 of this Code.
6-103: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the Office District subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
6-104: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in the Office District subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
6-105: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Office District are set forth in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
6-106: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in the Office District are set forth in Section 9-106 of this Code.
6-107: BUFFERS & LANDSCAPING
Requirements relating to buffering and landscaping of certain uses and structures in the Office District are set forth in Section 9-107 of this Code.
6-108: USE LIMITATIONS
A. Noise. No noise (other than ordinary vehicular noise) from operations of any use in the Office Districts shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located.
36 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
B. Glare and Heat. No excessive glare or heat from any operations of any use in the Office District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located or detectable from any adjacent use on a multi-use lot.
C. Vibration. No earth-borne vibration from any operations of any use in the Office District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located or detectable from any adjacent use on a multi-use lot.
D. Air Pollution. No air pollution, including smoke or gas, odors and particulate matter, from any operations of any use in the Office District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located or detectable from any adjacent use on a multi-use lot, unless in compliance with all applicable regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
E. Electromagnetic Interference. Electromagnetic interference from any operations of any use in the Office District shall not adversely affect the operation of any equipment located off the zoning lot on which such interference originates or any equipment located in any adjacent use on a multi-use lot.
F. Fire and Explosive Hazards. Materials that present potential fire and explosive hazards shall be transported, stored and used only in conformance with all applicable federal, state and local laws.
G. Special Hazards. Hazardous, toxic and radioactive materials shall be transported, stored and used only in conformance with all applicable federal, state and local laws.
H. Safety Equipment. No research, development, or testing facility classified as a "high-hazard use" by the City Building Code shall be established after March 6, 2004 unless the building in which such use is established shall be equipped with sprinkler systems, automatic fire detection and suppression systems and Class 1 electrical fixtures as required by the then current City Codes for new construction.
I. Above Ground Tanks. No above ground tanks designed or used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be located less than 600 feet from the lot line of any lot on which a fire station is located.
J. Laboratories. Any laboratory activities shall comply with the applicable biosafety level precautions as defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
6-109: BULK, SPACE & YARD REQUIREMENTS
The building height, lot, yard, and setback requirements applicable in the Office District are set forth in the following table. Footnote references appear in Section 6-109 D at the end of the table.
(See Table on next page)
37 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
O1 A. Maximum Height (whichever is less)
1. Feet
65
2. Stories
4 B. Minimum Lot Area & Dimensions (9)
1. Total Lot Area (square feet)
20,000
2. Lot Width (feet)
50 C. Minimum Setbacks (2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)
1. Front and Corner Side (feet)
a. Yard
30
b. Setback
30
2. Interior Side (feet)
a. Yard
5
b. Setback
5
3. Rear (feet)
a. Yard
30
b. Setback
30
D. Exceptions and Explanatory Notes.
1. Nonconforming Lots. See Subsection 10-105 for lot requirements with respect to nonconforming lots of record.
2. Yard Requirements for Uses without Structures. On any lot occupied by a use without structures, the minimum front, side and rear yard requirements that would otherwise be required for such lot shall be provided and maintained.
3. Visibility Across Corners. Any other provision of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, in all Office Districts, on any corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, allowed to grow or be maintained above a height of 2-1/2 feet from grade within the area of a Sight Triangle as defined in Section 12-206 S of this Code.
4. Transitional Setbacks Abutting Residential Districts. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, every portion of a building in an Office District that exceeds 35 feet in height shall be set back from the nearest residential property line a distance equal to at least 50 feet plus an additional five feet for every foot of height of such building, or the table requirement, whichever is greater.
5. Lot Dimensions and Yards in Planned Developments.
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits for planned developments.
38 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(b) Special Requirements; Limitation of Waiver Authority. Special perimeter open space, setback and spacing requirements for planned developments are set forth in Subparagraphs 11-603 E2 (f) and (g) of this Code and such requirements shall not under any circumstances be waived.
(c) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-603 H of this Code.
6. Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks for some signs are established by Subsection 9-106 I of this Code; those setbacks shall control over the yards and setbacks established in the table.
7. Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required yard.
(a) Accessory uses, subject to the limitations of Section 9-101.
(b) Statuary, arbors, trellises and ornamental light standards having a height of ten feet or less.
(c) Awnings, canopies, eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall.
(d) Bay windows and balconies projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that such projections shall come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 22-1/2 degrees with the wall in question.
(e) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices and the like projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall.
(f) Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than three feet and having a height of four feet or less.
(g) Flagpoles.
(h) Non-mechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
(i) Off-street parking and loading of vehicles, but only as expressly authorized and regulated in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
(j) Terraces.
(k) Recreational devices, except in front yards.
39 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(l) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of Section 9-107 of this Code.
8. Platted Building and Setback Lines. See Subsection 12-101 F of this Code.
9. Lot Dimensions and Yards for Electrical Substations
(a) Authority to Waive. The City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits or site plans for electrical substations.
(b) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except on the basis of need and impact on the surrounding properties.
10. Height Exceptions. Structures housing religious organizations may extend to a height of 55 feet and may include spires and minarets that extend to a height of 70 feet.
40 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE VII. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
7-101: PURPOSE
The Industrial District is provided to accommodate a range of manufacturing, warehousing, transportation and wholesaling uses that are compatible with the suburban residential character of the City.
7-102: PERMITTED USES, CONDITIONAL USES, AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES
In interpreting the permitted and special use designations, reference should be made to the North American Industry Classification System, as amended by the City (see Appendix A) and Section 11-501 of this Code.
7-103: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the Industrial District subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
7-104: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in the Industrial District subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
7-105: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Industrial District are set forth in Section 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
7-106: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in the Industrial District are set forth in Section 9-106 of this Code.
7-107: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
Requirements relating to buffering and landscaping of certain uses and structures in the Industrial Districts are set forth in Section 9-107 of this Code.
7-108: USE LIMITATIONS
A. Noise. No noise (other than ordinary vehicular noise) from operations of any use in the Industrial District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located.
B. Glare and Heat. No glare or heat from any operations of any use in the Industrial District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located.
C. Vibration. No earth-borne vibration from any operations of any use in the Industrial District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located.
41 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
D. Electromagnetic Interference. Electromagnetic interference from any operations of any use in the Industrial District shall not adversely affect the operation of any equipment located off the zoning lot on which such interference originates.
E. Fire and Explosive Hazards. Materials that present potential fire and explosive hazards shall be transported, stored and used only in conformance with applicable federal, state and local laws.
F. Special Hazards. Hazardous, toxic and radioactive materials shall be transported, stored and used only in conformance with all applicable federal, state and local laws.
G. Safety Equipment. No research or development laboratory or commercial testing facility requiring a special permit shall be established after the effective date of this Code unless the building in which such use is established shall be equipped with sprinkler systems, automatic fire detection and suppression systems and Class 1 electrical fixtures as required by the then current City codes for new construction.
H. Above Ground Tanks. No above ground tanks designed or used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be located less than 600 feet from the lot line of any lot on which a fire station is located.
7-109: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The building height, lot, yard and setback requirements applicable in the Industrial District are set forth in the following table. Footnote references appear in Subsection 7-109 D at the end of the table.
I1 A. Maximum Height (whichever is less)(10)
1. Feet
50
2. Stories
3 B. Minimum Lot Area & Dimensions (1)(5)(9)
1. Total Lot Area (square feet)
10,000
2. Lot Width (feet)
100 C. Minimum Yard & Setbacks (2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)
1. Front and Corner Side (feet)
a. Yard
10
b. Setback
10
2. Interior Side (feet)
a. Yard
5
b. Setback
5
3. Rear (feet)
a. Yard
20
b. Setback
20
42 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
D. Exceptions and Explanatory Notes
1. Nonconforming Lots. All such lots of record which have been subdivided prior to the effective date of this chapter shall provide a minimum lot area of 7,500 and minimum lot width of 60 feet. See Subsection 10-105 for additional lot requirements with respect to nonconforming lots of record.
2. Yard Requirements for Uses Without Structures. On any lot occupied by a use without structures, the minimum yards that would otherwise be required for such lot shall be provided and maintained.
3. Visibility Across Corners. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, maintained or allowed to grow on any corner lot in an Industrial District above a height of 2-1/2 feet from grade within the area of a Sight Triangle as defined in Section 12-206 S of this Code.
4. Transitional Setbacks Abutting Residential Districts. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, every building in any industrial district shall be set back at least 75 feet from every lot line adjacent to any residential district.
5. Lot Dimensions and Yards in Planned Developments.
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits for planned developments.
(b) Special Requirements; Limitation of Waiver Authority. Special perimeter open space, setback and spacing requirements for planned developments are set forth in Subparagraphs 11-603 E2 (f) and (g) of this Code. Such requirements shall not be waived under any circumstances.
(c) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 11-603 H of this Code.
6. Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks are established for some signs by Subsections 9-106 J of this Code; those setbacks shall control over the yards and setbacks established in the table.
7. Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required yard:
(a) Accessory uses, subject to the limitations of Section 9-101.
(b) Statuary, arbors, trellises and ornamental light standards having a height of ten feet or less.
43 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(c) Awnings, canopies, eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall.
(d) Bay windows and balconies projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that such projections shall come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 22-1/2 degrees with the wall in question.
(e) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices and the like projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall.
(f) Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than three feet and having a height of four feet or less.
(g) Flagpoles.
(h) Non-mechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
(i) Off-street parking and loading, but only as expressly authorized in Paragraphs 9-104 C 1 and 9-105 C 1 of this Code.
(j) Terraces.
(k) Recreational devices, except in front yards.
(l) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of Section 9-107 of this Code.
8. Platted Building and Setback Lines. See Subsection 12-101 F of this Code.
9. Lot Dimensions and Yards for Electrical Substations
(a) Authority to Waive. The City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving site plans for electrical substations.
(b) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except on the basis of need and impact on the surrounding properties.
10. Height Restrictions. When such zoning lot abuts a residential zoning district, the height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
44 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE VIII. SPECIAL DISTRICTS
PART I - GATEWAY REDEVELOPMENT SUB-AREA
8-101: PURPOSE
The regulations of the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area are intended to accommodate and promote redevelopment consistent with and in the vicinity of the Gateway Redevelopment, as adopted by the Corporate Authorities pursuant to Ordinance No. 2008-01-0147O. Reference Appendix B for Sub-Area map.
A. Special Character. To facilitate redevelopment activity consistent with the Gateway Redevelopment, promoting pedestrian scaled, mixed use redevelopment.
B. Compatibility. To insure compatibility of redevelopment with the existing characteristics of the Gateway Redevelopment.
C. Attractiveness. To protect and enhance the City’s attractiveness to visitors and support and stimulate local business activity.
D. Strong Economy. To strengthen the economy of the City.
E. Promote Only Compatible Redevelopment. To promote the careful and considered redevelopment of areas within the vicinity of the Gateway Redevelopment.
8-102: PERMITTED USES
A. In interpreting the permitted and special use designations, reference should be made to the North American Industry Classification System, as amended by the City (see Appendix A) and Section 11-501 of this Code..
Special Regulations Applicable to Outdoor Eating Areas.
1. City Council Approval. Outdoor eating areas shall not be permitted in the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area without approval of the City Council, by resolution duly adopted.
2. Alcoholic Beverage Service. Alcoholic beverages shall be served in outdoor eating areas only when such service is incidental and complementary to the sale and service to customers of complete meals that are served and eaten at tables, not at a bar or counter, in the outdoor eating area. “Meals,” as used in this Subparagraph, shall mean a diversified selection of foods that are not susceptible to consumption in the absence of at least some articles of tableware and that cannot be conveniently consumed while standing or walking about. The service of pretzels, popcorn, candy, nuts, chips, and similar snack foods, without other food components, shall not be considered to be a “meal” under this Subparagraph.
45 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3. Pedestrian Traffic. The location of all outdoor eating areas shall ensure the maintenance of adequate pedestrian circulation in and around the outdoor eating area.
4. Emergency Egress. Emergency egress gates shall be provided for all outdoor eating areas and shall be of a type and in locations approved in advance by the City Fire Chief.
5. General Health Standards. All outdoor eating areas and related service stations shall be maintained and kept in a clean, neat, and safe condition at all times and shall at all times comply with applicable City and Cook County Health Department requirements, standards, and regulations. All containers, including specifically, but without limitation, ice bins, beverage dispensers, and condiment jars, shall be covered or lidded when not in use. Perishable condiments shall not be stored at any time in the outdoor eating area, and when not in use shall be taken directly from the outdoor tables to the principal indoor eating place.
6. Restaurant Service. Restaurant service for any outdoor eating area shall be provided using the same china, tableware, and cloth napkins as are used in the principal indoor eating place unless the restaurant presents other food service items approved by the Community Development Director.
7. Trash and Laundry Handling. All trash containers shall be lidded at all times. Soiled linens, tablecloths, and napkins shall not be stored at any time in the outdoor eating area, but shall be taken immediately from the outdoor eating area to the principal indoor eating place.
8. Minimum Setback Required. The location of any outdoor seating area shall comply with all applicable setback requirements for accessory uses and structures.
9. Additional Regulations. In addition to the specific regulations set forth in this Subsection, outdoor eating areas shall be subject to such additional regulations as the City Council may deem necessary, including specifically, but without limitation, regulations regarding (i) the number and size of tables and seats, (ii) the duration and hours of operation, (iii) security for and removal of equipment, (iv) signage, (v) landscaping and pedestrian amenities, (vi) lighting, (vii) trash and refuse collection and location; and (viii) the materials, construction, cleaning, and maintenance of any awnings or other protective coverings. Additional regulations imposed pursuant to this Paragraph shall be specified in the resolution approving the outdoor eating area.”
8-103: ACCESSORY USES
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the GRD subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
46 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
8-104: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in the GRD subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
8-105: PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. Relief From Parking Requirements Governing New and Enlarged Uses. The off-street parking requirements set forth in Subsection 9-104 B of this Code shall apply in the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area, except as specifically modified in this Section:
1. Special Parking Areas. Each of the following areas shall be deemed “Special Parking Area”:
(a) The Gateway Development located at the northwest corner bordered by 159th Street to the south, Cicero Avenue to the east, and the Rock Island railroad to the northwest.
(b) The south side of 159th Street bordered by Oak Avenue to the west and Cicero Avenue to the east extending southerly on Cicero Avenue until 160th Street.
(c) The north and south sides of 159th Street bordered by Laramie Avenue to the west and LeClaire Avenue to the east.
(D) The area bordered by Cicero Avenue to the east, Lamon Avenue to the west, 156th Street to the north and the Rock Island railroad to the south.
8-106: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in the GRD are set forth in Section 9-106 of this Code.
8-107: SPECIAL BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The following special bulk, space, and yard requirements shall apply in the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area:
A. Building Height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 35 feet or 2 stories; provided, however, that, subject to the issuance of a special permit, the maximum permitted building height shall be 45 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less.
B. F.A.R.: Additional Special Permit Standard. The floor area ratio shall be increased from .50 to 1.0 and may, subject to the issuance of a special permit, be increased to an amount in excess of 1.0. In addition to those standards for special permits established in Subsection 11-602 E of this Code, no special permit to allow a structure with a floor area ratio greater than 1.0 shall be authorized unless the applicant shall establish that the proposed structure and uses thereof will have sufficient parking to support the proposed use.
47 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
C. Special Yard Standards. There shall be no minimum front yard requirement for any property in the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area.
8-108: VARIATIONS
Whenever an application for a variation concerning property located within the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area is filed pursuant to this Code or the Subdivision and Development Code (2010), the authority to hear and decide the application otherwise delegated to the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to Section 11-503 of this Code shall be reserved to the City Council. For such purposes, the City Council shall have all of the authority granted to, and shall be subject to all of the limitations imposed on, the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to Section 11-503 of this Code.
48 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART II - REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
8-201: PURPOSE
The Redevelopment Overlay District is intended to recognize that private investment undertaken to comply with the requirements of this Code may, in limited areas and circumstances existing in the City, be counterproductive to the City's long term land use goals and policies. Inappropriate investment in properties located in areas characterized by underdevelopment, obsolete development or development no longer in harmony with patterns emerging in the vicinity may simply delay the time when economic conditions would warrant total redevelopment of the area or may increase the ultimate cost of public programs designed to foster such redevelopment. It is the purpose of this overlay district to provide the City Council with discretion to temporarily modify, waive or vary standards of this Code when doing so will prevent such counterproductive private investment.
8-202: OVERLAY DISTRICT
The Redevelopment Overlay District appears on the Zoning Map as an "overlay district" imposed on top of other districts created by this Code and referred to in this Part as "Base Districts." Development of properties in the Redevelopment Overlay District must comply with all regulations of the base district in which they are located except to the extent that any such regulations are modified, waived or varied by a special permit granted in the overlay district. Where there is any conflict between the Redevelopment Overlay District and the base district, the provisions of the Redevelopment Overlay District shall control.
8-203: MAPPING RESTRICTIONS
The Redevelopment Overlay District shall not be mapped on the zoning district map except pursuant to application to amend said map filed by the City Council pursuant to Paragraph 11-601D(1) of this Code; provided, however, that notwithstanding the provisions of that Paragraph, no such application to map a Redevelopment Overlay District shall be filed unless accompanied by a written and graphic plan of redevelopment for the area proposed to be included in the Overlay District. Such a plan shall show the proposed final redevelopment as well as any intermediate stages or phases of redevelopment. Such a plan shall be attached to, incorporated into and approved as part of any ordinance granting approval of an application to map a Redevelopment Overlay District.
8-204: TIME LIMITATION
In addition to the plan of redevelopment requirements stated in Section 8-203 of this Part, the City Council, as a part of its application to amend the Zoning Map, also shall determine the period of time the proposed Redevelopment Overlay District shall be mapped, and shall establish a specific date upon which such mapping shall automatically expire. Such period of time shall be not less than three nor more than five years. Such period of time may be extended once by the City Council for an additional period of time not exceeding three years, but only pursuant to an application filed by the City Council pursuant to this Section and Section 8-203 of this Part and a showing in such application that such extension is necessary and appropriate in furtherance of the purposes stated in this Part.
49 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
8-205: NO VESTED RIGHT
Nothing in this Code nor in any ordinance granting zoning for, or a special permit pursuant to, a Redevelopment Overlay District shall be construed as creating any permanent right to obtain or retain such zoning or permit, and every expenditure in reliance upon such zoning or permit shall be made with full knowledge that the City reserves the unfettered right to grant, extend or repeal, or to refuse to grant, extend or repeal, any such zoning or permit at any time and that such zoning or permit is by its nature intended to be temporary and to create nothing more than a revocable permission to maintain a specified use, except to the extent provided in such an ordinance for zoning or a special permit. Every applicant for any permit pursuant to the provisions of this Part is charged with knowledge of this Section.
8-206: PERMITTED USES
The uses permitted in the base district shall be permitted in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those uses is prohibited as a condition of a special permit granted in the Overlay District.
8-207: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures permitted in the base district shall be permitted in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those uses is prohibited as a condition of a special permit granted in the Overlay District.
8-208: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses permitted in the base district shall be permitted in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those uses is prohibited as a condition of a special permit granted in the Overlay District.
8-209: SPECIAL PERMIT USES
A. Uses. Any use may be permitted in the Redevelopment Overlay District subject to the issuance of a special permit as provided in Section 11-602 of this Code; provided, however, that no such permit shall be recommended or granted except in accordance with the following standards and conditions:
1. Consistency with District Purposes and Plan. The relief granted by such permit shall be consistent with the purposes for which Redevelopment Overlay Districts may be established pursuant to Section 8-201 of this Part and with the Redevelopment Plan approved pursuant to Section 8-203 of this Part.
2. Limited Investment. The purpose of granting such permit shall be to allow a use that is intended to avoid the possibility of permanent investment in the subject property for uses, development or improvements found by the City Council to be inconsistent with the City’s long term goals and policies for the area as shown in the Redevelopment Plan approved pursuant to Section 8-203 of this Part.
50 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3. Temporary Nature. Any use, development or improvement authorized by such permit that does not comply with the final plan for redevelopment approved pursuant to Section 8-203 of this Code shall be of a temporary nature or limited life in the sense that it could be discontinued or relocated at a cost that the applicant certifies to be negligible and not requiring any compensation in the event its termination or relocation becomes necessary in connection with a private or public program to redevelop the area.
4. Termination. Unless the special permit shall establish a specific date or event upon which the permit shall terminate or the use, development or improvement shall be brought into compliance with the regulations of the base district every special permit shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s agreement to terminate the specially permitted use, development or improvement, and to surrender the special permit, upon not less than 12 months notice to do so given by the City Council.
5. Other standards, Considerations and Conditions. Every use, development or improvement authorized by such a permit shall satisfy and comply with all of the standards, considerations and conditions made applicable to special permit uses pursuant to Subsections 11-602E and 11-602F of this Code; provided, however that the prohibition against conditions intended to allow uses of a temporary nature shall not apply in the Redevelopment Overlay District.
B. Development Regulations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the modification, waiver or variation of the parking and loading requirements; sign regulations; buffer and landscaping requirements; use limitations; and bulk, space and yard requirements applicable in the base district subject to the issuance of a special permit as provided in section 11-602 of this Code; provided, however, that no such modification, waiver or variation shall be so permitted except in accordance with the standards and conditions set forth in Subsection 8-209B of this Section.
51 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
8-210: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the base district shall apply in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those requirements is modified, waived or varied pursuant to Subsection 8-209 B of this Section.
8-211: SIGN REGULATIONS
The sign regulations applicable in the base district shall apply in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those regulations is modified, waived or varied pursuant to Subsection 8-209 B of this Section.
8-212: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
The buffering and landscaping requirements applicable in the base district shall apply in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those requirements is modified, waived or varied pursuant to Subsection 8-209 B of this Section.
8-213: USE LIMITATIONS
The use limitations applicable in the base district shall apply in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those limitations is modified, waived or varied pursuant to Subsection 8-209 B of this Section.
8-214: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The bulk, space and yard requirements applicable in the base district shall apply in the Redevelopment Overlay District unless any one or more of those requirements is modified, waived or varied pursuant to Subsection 8-209 B of this Section.
52 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART III - OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
8-301: PURPOSE
The Open Space District is intended to recognize the existence of major open space and recreational areas in the City. The Open Space District is intended to apply to all public open space of notable quality and to major private open spaces such as golf courses and cemeteries. Any use of such spaces inconsistent with their existing, established character will require rezoning.
8-302: PERMITTED USES, CONDITIONAL USES, AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES
In interpreting the permitted and special use designations, reference should be made to the North American Industry Classification System, as amended by the City (see Appendix A) and Section 11-501 of this Code.
8-303: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures, including outdoor storage, are permitted in the Open Space District subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
8-304: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in the Open Space District subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
8-305: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Off-street parking and loading requirements applicable in the Open Space District are set forth in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
8-306: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in the Open Space District are set forth in Sec. 9-106 of this Code.
8-307: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
Requirements relating to buffering and landscaping of certain uses and structures, in the Open Space District are set forth in Section 9-107 of this Code.
8-308: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The building height, lot, yard and setback and floor area ratio requirements applicable in the Open Space District are set forth in the following table. Footnote references appear in Subsection 8-308 D at the end of the table.
(See Table on next page)
53 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
OS A. Maximum Height (whichever is less)(1)(7)
1. Feet
45
2. Stories
3 B. Minimum Lot Area & Dimensions (2)
1. Total Lot Area (square feet)
a. Neighborhood Playgrounds
5,000
b. All Other Uses
40,000
2. Lot Width (feet)
a. Neighborhood Playgrounds
NA
b. All Other Uses
200 C. Minimum Yard & Setbacks (3)(4)(5)(6)(8)(9)
1. Front and Corner Side Yards and Setback
30
2. Other Yards and Setbacks
20
3. Setback from any Single Family Residential District
40
D. Exceptions and Explanatory Notes:
1. Increased Height in Areas Remote from Single Family Districts. Maximum height may be increased one additional foot, up to a maximum of 10 additional feet, for every five feet by which the setback of the portion of the building in question from the nearest Single Family Residential District exceeds the setback required by Subparagraph 8-308 C3 of this Section.
2. Nonconforming Lots. See Subsection 10-105 for lot requirements with respect to nonconforming lots of record.
3. Yard Requirements for Uses Without Structures. Park, playground, and other recreational uses conducted on lots less than 30,000 square feet in area no yards or setbacks shall be required.
4. Visibility Across Corners. Any other provisions of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, in the Open Space District, on any corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, maintained, or allowed to grow above a height of 2 1/2 feet from grade within the area of a sight triangle as defined in Section 12-206 of this Code.
5. Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks are established for some signs by Subsections 9-106 J of this Code; those setbacks shall control over the yards and setbacks established in the Table.
6. Special Yard and Setback Requirements for Recreational Devices. Except for recreational devices on lots less than 30,000 square feet in area for which no yards or setbacks shall be required, the front and corner side yard requirements for
54 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
recreational devices shall be 20 feet. Recreational devices shall be setback a distance of 20 feet from all property lines.
7. Special Height Standards for Lights Accessory to Public Recreational Facilities. Light poles and fixtures accessory to public recreational facilities shall be allowed to exceed the OS District height limits as follows:
(a) Light poles and fixtures, up to a maximum height of 60 feet, shall be a permitted accessory structure.
(b) The provisions of Paragraph 8-309 D1 shall not be applicable in determining the maximum height of a light pole and fixture.
(c) Light poles and fixtures in excess of 60 feet may be approved by a special permit issued pursuant to Section 11-602 of this Code.
(d) All such light poles and fixtures shall otherwise comply with the applicable illumination standards of this Code.
(e) Light poles and fixtures shall satisfy the setback requirements for the OS District established in Section 8-308.
(f) Light poles and fixtures shall be equipped with features to reduce glare and light spill on adjoining properties, performing at standards greater than or equivalent to the MUSCO Level 8 lighting system.
8. Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required yard:
(a) Accessory uses, subject to the limitations of Section 9-101.
(b) Statuary, arbors, trellises and ornamental light standards having a height of ten feet or less.
(c) Awnings, canopies, eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall.
(d) Bay windows and balconies projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that such projections shall come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 22-1/2 degrees with the wall in question.
(e) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices and the like projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall.
55 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(f) Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than three feet and having a height of four feet or less.
(g) Flagpoles.
(h) Non-mechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
(i) Off-street parking and loading of vehicles, but only as expressly authorized and regulated in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
(j) Terraces.
(k) Recreational devices, except in front yards.
(l) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of Section 9-107 of this Code.
9. Platted Building and Setback Lines. See Subsection 12-101 F of this Code.
10. No Application to Existing Structures. This standard applies only to structures erected after the effective date of this Code; provided, however, that no structure existing on such effective date shall be expanded in violation of this standard.
56 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART IV - INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS DISTRICT
8-401: PURPOSE
The Institutional Buildings District is established to accommodate existing and future public buildings and buildings having purposes and impacts similar to public buildings. By creation of this special district, it is the intent of this Code to avoid the problems inherent in treating such buildings as permitted or special permit uses in zoning districts characterized by uses and structures bearing no similarity to public and institutional uses and buildings.
8-402: PERMITTED USES, CONDITIONAL USES, AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES
In interpreting the permitted and special use designations, reference should be made to the North American Industry Classification System, as amended by the City (see Appendix A) and Section 11-501 of this Code.
8-403: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the Institutional Buildings District subject to the provisions of Section 9-101 of this Code.
8-404: TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses are permitted in the Institutional Buildings District subject to the provisions of Section 9-103 of this Code.
8-405: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
The parking and loading requirements applicable in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
8-406: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sign regulations applicable in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in Section 9-106 of this Code.
8-407: 8-408 BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
Requirements relating to buffering and landscaping of certain uses and structures in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in Section 9-107 of this Code.
8-408: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
The building height, lot, yard and setback and floor area ratio requirements applicable in the Institutional Buildings District are set forth in the following Table. Footnote references appear in Subsection 8-408 D at the end of the Table.
(See Table on next page)
57 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
IB A. Maximum Height (whichever is less)(1)(2)(3)
1. Feet
45
2. Stories
3 B. Minimum Lot Area & Dimensions (1)(4)(5)(11)
1. Total Lot Area (square feet)
a. Libraries and Information Centers
85,000
b. Museums and Art Galleries
85,000
c. Other Public Buildings and Yards
85,000
d. Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
100,000
e. Membership Organizations
100,000
f. Elementary Schools
175,000
g. Hospitals
200,000
h. Secondary Schools
350,000
i. Colleges and Universities
500,000
j. Fire Protection Uses
75,000
k. All Others
85,000
2. Lot Width (feet)
a. All Uses
300 C. Minimum Yard and Setback Requirements (feet) (1)(6)(7)(8)(9)(11)
1. Front and Corner Side Yards and Setback
35
2. Other Yards and Setbacks
20
3. Setback from any Single Family Residential District
40
D. Exceptions and Explanatory Notes:
1. Exception for Residential Structures. When any residential structure is located in an Institutional Buildings District, it shall be subject to the bulk, space and yard regulations of the Residential District to which it is nearest adjacent.
2. Height Exceptions. Church spires and minarets may extend to a height of 70 feet. Publicly owned antennae and antennae support structures may extend to such height as the City Administrator may approve as necessary to carry out the public function in question. Light poles and fixtures in excess of the applicable maximum height requirement may be approved by a special permit issued pursuant to Section 11-602 of this Code.
3. Increased Height in Areas Remote from Single Family Districts. Maximum height may be increased one additional foot, up to a maximum of ten additional feet, for every five feet by which the setback of the portion of the building in question from the nearest Single Family Residential District exceeds the setback required by Subparagraph 8-408 C3 of this Section.
58 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
4. No Application to Existing Structures. These standard parts apply only to structures erected after the effective date of this Code. A structure erected prior to the effective date of this Code shall not be considered to be a non-conformity by reason of its failure to comply with these standards, but shall be allowed to continue on its existing zoning lot or any expansion thereof zoned or rezoned for Institutional Buildings use. Provided, however, that no such structure, other than houses of worship of religious organizations, shall be expanded in violation of the minimum setback standards.
5. Nonconforming Lots. See Subsection 10-105 for lot requirements with respect to nonconforming lots of record.
6. Yard Requirements for Uses Without Structures. On any lot occupied by a use without structures, the minimum front, side and rear yard requirements that would otherwise be required for such lot shall be provided and maintained.
7. Visibility Across Corners. Any other provisions of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, in the Institutional Buildings District, on any corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, maintained or allowed to grow above a height of 2 1/2 feet from grade within the area of a sight triangle as defined in Section 12-206 of this Code.
8. Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks are established for some signs by Subsections 9-106 J of this Code; those setbacks shall control over the yards and setbacks established in the Table.
9. Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required yard:
(a) Accessory uses, subject to the limitations of Section 9-101.
(b) Statuary, arbors, trellises and ornamental light standards having a height of ten feet or less.
(c) Awnings, canopies, eaves and gutters projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall.
(d) Bay windows and balconies projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall; provided that such projections shall come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 22-1/2 degrees with the wall in question.
(e) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices and the like projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall.
59 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(f) Outside stairways projecting from an exterior wall not more than three feet and having a height of four feet or less.
(g) Flagpoles.
(h) Nonmechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards.
(i) Off-street parking and loading of vehicles, but only as expressly authorized and regulated in Sections 9-104 and 9-105 of this Code.
(j) Terraces.
(k) Recreational devices, except in front yards.
(l) Fences, walls, and hedges, subject to the limitations of Section 9-107 of this Code.
10. Platted Building and Setback Lines. See Subsection 12-101 F of this Code.
11. Lot Dimensions and Yards for Electrical Substations
(a) Authority to Waive. The Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize the waiver of the lot dimension and yard requirements of the underlying district when approving special permits for electrical substations.
(b) Standards for Waiver. No such waiver shall be recommended or authorized except on the basis of need and impact on surrounding properties.
60 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE IX. DISTRICT REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
PART I - ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
9-102: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
A. Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section 9-101, accessory structures and uses are permitted in any zoning district in connection with any principal use lawfully existing within such district.
B. Definition. An accessory structure or use is a structure or use that:
1. Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal structure or use;
2. Is customarily found as an incident to such principal structure or use;
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of those occupying, working at or being served by such principal structure or use;
4. Is, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provision of this Code, located on the same zoning lot as such principal structure or use; and
5. Is under the same ownership and control as the principal structure or use.
C. Certificate of Zoning Compliance Required. When required by Subsection 11-401 C of this Code, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance evidencing the compliance of the accessory use or structure with the provisions of this Code shall be obtained before any such accessory use or structure is established or constructed.
D. Special Regulations Applicable to Particular Accessory Structures and Uses.
1. Accessory Structures and Uses.
(a) Except as permitted in this zoning code for a specific permitted use, no accessory building, structure or land shall be used for the keeping, propagation or culture of pigeons, poultry, rabbits, bees or livestock whether or not for profit.
(b) Any person desiring to construct and install an accessory structure proposed to cover at least twenty (20) percent of the required rear yard shall be required to submit a site drainage plan after an onsite inspection has been completed by the City and obtain approval from the Community Development Director and City Engineer.
(c) In no circumstance shall an accessory structure be larger than the principal structure regardless of the permitted size in Subsection 9-101 D(2)
(d) Accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall not be erected or altered in required yards, courts, or other open areas, except those that are permitted in this zoning code as obstructions in yards, courts, or other open areas.
61 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
The permitted accessory structures, and additional standards, are as follows:
(i) Not to exceed more than one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height from the ground to the peak of the roof;
(ii) Accessory buildings and structures shall be located not less than three (3) feet from a lot line of an adjoining lot;
(iii) Only covered porches or decks shall be allowed in any required front yard, and these accessory structures can only encroach a maximum of 10 feet in the required front yard and in no event may be located nearer than 15 feet from the closest edge of any adjacent sidewalk to the front yard. In the event when no sidewalk exists, the structure may not be located closer than 20 feet from the closest edge of the curb on any adjacent street to the front yard;
(iv) Patios constructed of concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, or any other impervious materials excluding driveways;
(v) Hot tubs, or any other structures (no more than 120 square feet); and
(vi) Attached accessory structures, seasonal rooms, covered porches or decks;
(vii) In no circumstance shall any accessory structure be located in a drainage easement or public utility easement without permission from the utility company and
(viii) One gazebo will be allowed and size regulated by 9-101D2(b).
2. Storage. Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this Code, outdoor storage shall not be allowed as an accessory use; where so permitted. Accessory structure storage structures shall comply with the structural guidelines of the City Building Code.
(a) Detached Garages. Detached garages shall comply with the following floor area square footage limitations. Any second garage being constructed on a lot will require the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission:
(i) Not more than 528 square feet on a lot less than or equal to 7,500 square feet;
(ii) Not more than 660 square feet on a lot between 7,501 – 9,999 square feet;
(iii) Not more than 800 square feet on a lot between 10,000 – 21,779 square feet;
(iv) Not more than 1,000 square feet on a lot greater than 21,780 square feet.
(v) No more than one (1) garage attached or detached on a lot less than 14,999 square feet.
(vi) No more than two (2) garages on a lot, one (1) must be attached and one (1) must be detached on a lot between 15,000 square feet and 21,779 sf.
62 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(vii) No more than two (2) garages on a lot, either attached or detached on a lot greater than 21,780 sf.
(b) Sheds. One shed per zoning lot maximum, and sheds shall comply with the following floor area square footage and height limitations:
(i) Not more than 120 square feet on a lot less than 7,500 square feet or less;
(ii) Not more than 168 square feet on a lot between 7,501- 9,999 square feet;
(iii) Not more than 192 square feet on a lot between 10,000 – 21,779 square feet;
(iv) Not more than one (1) percent of the total lot size on a lot greater than 21,780 square feet; and
(v) Not to exceed (14) feet in height from the ground to the peak of the roof.
3. Residential Recreational Facilities.
(a) Use. Residential recreational facilities shall be limited to use by the occupants of the principal residential use and their guests.
(b) Landscaping and Screening. See Subsection 9-107 of this Article for landscaping and screening requirements applicable to such facilities.
(c) Pools. No pool, or any equipment appurtenant thereto, shall be located:
(i) In any required front yard;
(ii) In any required corner side yard;
(iii) Less than six (6) feet from any property line if located in any required rear yard or required interior side yard; and
(iv) Less than ten (10) feet from any structure, garage, shed or principal house.
(d) Decks. No deck, or any equipment appurtenant thereto, shall be located:
(i) Less than three (3) feet from any side property line for all decks; and
(ii) Less than fifteen (15) feet from any rear property line for all decks.
(e) Fire Pit: No fire pit, or any equipment appurtenant thereto, shall be
located:
(i) Below ground fire pits and free standing fireplaces must be located a minimum of 25 feet away from any structure/combustible material or
(ii) Portable fire pits must be located a minimum of 15 feet from any structure /combustible material.
63 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Refer to Section International Fire Code Section 307 Open Burning, Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor Fireplace.
4. Accessory Parking Lots in Single Family Residential District. Except when approved as part of a special use permit, parking lots shall not be permitted as an accessory use in any single family residential district.
5. Off Street Storage of Recreational Vehicles, Boats, and Trailers. The following provisions of this section shall govern the off street storage of recreational vehicles, boats and trailers within all zoning districts. This provision shall not apply to any property specifically licensed and zoned for sales or storage of such vehicles.
(a) Definitions.
(i) “Storage” ”shall mean the off-street parking of a vehicle for a continuous period of time longer than seventy-two hours.
(ii) “Recreation vehicle” shall mean campers, motor homes, off road motorcycles, 3 or 4 wheeled all terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, jet skis and other vehicles intended for recreational use.
(b) Classification of Vehicles. Recreational vehicles, boats and trailers shall be classified as follows according to size, regardless of the use to which the vehicle is put or intended or designed to serve and regardless of any other classification system made applicable to vehicles by any other governmental body:
(i) Class I Vehicle. A recreational vehicle, boat or cargo trailer that does not exceed 26 feet in length, including the length of any trailer.
(ii) Class II Vehicle. A recreational vehicle, boat or cargo trailer that is greater than 26 feet and less than 40 feet, including the length of any trailer.
(iii) Class III Vehicle. A recreational vehicle, boat or cargo trailer that is 40 feet or greater, including the length of any trailer.
(c) Location on Lot. The parking of boats, recreational vehicles, and trailers shall not encroach onto sidewalks or other areas of public right-of-way. The parking of recreational vehicles, boats and cargo trailers shall be restricted to the locations of the lot identified as follows:
(i) Class I Vehicle. Any location on the lot.
(ii) Class II Vehicle. Within an enclosed garage, anywhere within a required rear yard, or anywhere within an interior side yard of a lot.
(iii) Class III. Nowhere on the lot.
64 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(d) Hard Surface Requirement. Boats, recreational vehicles or cargo trailers may only be stored on hard surface areas of the lot. The hard surface requirement shall only include concrete, asphalt, paver material, grasscrete or comparable materials. Parking on grass or other non-designated areas of the lot shall be prohibited. In the rear yard, only the wheels of the boat, recreational vehicle, or cargo trailer are subject to the hard surface requirement.
(e) Maximum Number Permitted. The maximum number of boats, recreational vehicles or cargo trailers permitted to be stored on any lot shall be limited to a total of two (2). For purposes of enforcement, multiple recreational vehicles on a single trailer shall be considered a single recreational vehicle. And, recreational vehicles stored within a garage will not be included toward the maximum of two (2) recreational vehicles per lot.
(f) State of Operability. No boat, recreational vehicle or cargo trailer incapable of being driven or used for the purpose or use for which it was designed, other than a vehicle awaiting timely repair at a repair facility shall be stored on any lot. Timely repair shall be a time period no longer than thirty days.
(g) General Storage Regulations. The following general regulations shall apply to the storage of boats, recreational vehicles and trailers.
(i) Permanent Location Prohibited. No vehicle shall have its wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent its mobility.
(ii) Residential Use Prohibited. No vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes.
(iii) Utility Hookups. No vehicle shall be connected to any public utility except for required servicing.
(iv) Unsafe conditions. No vehicle shall be parked or stored so as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition. The ground under or surrounding the location wherein a vehicle is stored shall be free of noxious weeds, debris, and combustible material.
(v) Inoperable Vehicles. No vehicle incapable of being driven or used for the purpose or use for which it was designed, other than a vehicle awaiting timely repair shall be stored in any parking lot or parking area. Timely repair shall be a time period of no longer than thirty days.
(vi) Licensing and Registration. All boats, recreational vehicles and trailers shall have current license plates and any required State or City registration displayed.
(vii) Storage Restricted to Owner of Lot. The allowable storage of any boat, recreational vehicle or trailer shall be limited to items legally titled to the owner or tenant of the lot.
65 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(viii) On Street Parking Restriction. No person shall park a boat, recreational vehicle or trailer on any City owned street for more than eight hours at one time and not between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(ix) Trip Preparation. All boats, recreational vehicles, and trailers may be parked in the street for a period no longer than 72 consecutive hours prior to a planned trip such parking is necessary for preparation of a trip or in returning from a trip. The owner of the boat, recreational vehicle, or trailer will be responsible for notifying Ordinance Enforcement that the vehicle will be located on the street no longer than 72 consecutive hours prior to the trip and no longer than 72 consecutive hours in returning from the trip.
(x) Gravel Driveway. No new gravel driveways or gravel storage surfaces maybe constructed for the purposes of storing a boat, recreational vehicle or trailer. No existing gravel driveway shall be enlarged, altered, or otherwise changed without obtaining a permit and complying with the regulations set forth in the Chapter 90.040 Driveway Construction and Curb Cuts.
(xi) Commercial, Manufacturing, and Multi-Family Lots. The storage of boats, recreational vehicles, or trailers is prohibited on commercial, manufacturing, and multi-family lots unless otherwise permitted in the Zoning Code.
6. Stables. Private stables shall not be allowed as an accessory use except in compliance with the following restrictions:
(a) Lot Area. A minimum lot area of two (2) acres shall be provided.
(b) Fenced Pasture Area. A minimum fenced pasture area of one (1) acre shall be provided for each horse. The fence shall be sufficient to contain the pastured horses.
(c) Location. The stable shall not be located within 100 feet of any property line.
(d) Sanitation. All feed shall be stored in rodent-proof containers. Manure in excess of ten (10) cubic yards shall be removed and properly disposed of. No manure shall be stored within 100 feet of any property line. All nuisance-causing conditions shall be immediately abated.
7. Antenna With Surface Areas of Ten (10) Square Feet or Less. Antenna and antenna support structures having a combined surface area not greater then ten (10) square feet, and no single dimension exceeding twelve (12) feet, shall be permitted as an accessory use.
8. Antenna, other than Amateur Radio Facilities, With Surface Areas Exceeding Ten (10) Square Feet. Except for amateur radio facilities permitted pursuant to Paragraph 9-101 D8 of this Section, antenna and antenna support structures
66 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
having a combined surface area greater than ten (10) square feet, or having any single dimension exceeding twelve (12) feet, shall be permitted as an accessory use only in compliance with the following regulations:
(a) Number Limited in Residential Districts. No more than one (1) such antenna and antenna support structure may be located on any zoning lot in any residential district.
(b) Height Limited. Unless attached to a building pursuant to Subparagraph (c) below, no such antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed 65 feet in height in the Industrial District or twelve (12) feet in heights in any other district; provided, however, that such antenna or antenna support structure may alone or in combination exceed these height limits only if so authorized by special permit where such a special permit is allowed by applicable zoning district regulations.
(c) Attachment to Buildings Limited. No such antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of the following conditions area satisfied:
(i) Size. The antenna and antenna support structure shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area or twelve (12) feet in any dimension.
(ii) Height. The antenna and antenna support structure shall not extend more than three (3) feet above the highest point of the building on which it is mounted or the maximum permissible building height, whichever is less.
(iii) Mounting. The antenna and antenna support structure shall not be attached or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The antenna and antenna support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and antenna support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
(iv) Color. The antenna and antenna support structure shall be of a color that blends with the roof or building side on which it is mounted.
(v) Grounding. The antenna and antenna support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
(vi) Other Standards. The antenna and antenna support structure shall satisfy such other design and contraction standards as the Community Development Director reasonably determines are necessary to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the antenna and antenna support structure.
67 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(d) Setback from Street. No such antenna or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the wall of the principal building to which it is accessory that is nearest to such street.
(e) Guy Wires Restricted. No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such antenna or support structure except when used to anchor the antenna or support structure to an existing building to which such antenna or support structure is attached.
9. Amateur Radio Facilities with Surface Area Exceeding Ten (10) Square Feet. Any antenna and antenna support structure having a combined surface area greater than ten (10) square feet or having any single dimension exceeding twelve (12) feet that is capable of transmitting as well as receiving signals and is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission as an amateur radio facility must satisfy each of the following conditions
(a) Number Limited. No more than one (1) such antenna support structure with a surface area greater than ten (10) square feet or any single dimension exceeding twelve (12) feet may be located on any zoning lot.
(b) Height Limited. No such antenna or antenna support structure shall, if ground-mounted, exceed 70 feet in height, or if attached to a building pursuant to Subparagraphs (c) below, the height therein specified.
(c) Attachment to Buildings Limited. No such antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(i) Height. The antenna and antenna support structure shall not extend more than 25 feet above the highest point of the building on which it is mounted.
(ii) Mounting. The antenna and antenna support structure shall not be attached to or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The antenna and antenna support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a street, including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and antenna support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
(iii) Grounding. The antenna and antenna support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
(iv) Other Standards. The antenna support structure shall satisfy such other design and construction standards as the Community Development Director reasonably imposes.
(d) Setback from Street. No such antenna or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the wall of the principal building to which it is accessory that is nearest to such street.
68 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(e) Setbacks from Adjacent Buildings. No such antenna or its support structure shall be located in any required side yard or nearer than one-half the height of the antenna and support structure to any habitable building on any adjacent property.
10. Uses Accessory to Hotels. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, the following uses shall be deemed to be accessory to hotels; provided that such uses are located entirely within the hotel building and with no principal exterior access:
(a) Gift shops
(b) Barber shops
(c) Beauty shops
11. Uses Accessory to Uses in the Institutional Buildings District. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, the following uses shall be deemed to be accessory to uses in the Institutional Buildings District:
(a) That are permitted uses in that district; or
(b) For which a special permit has been lawfully issued and is in full force and effect; provided that in every case, such uses shall be located entirely within the institutional building and with no principal exterior access:
(i) Eating places
(ii) Outdoor seating accessory to permitted eating places
(iii) Carryout eating places
(iv) Drinking places accessory to permitted eating places
(v) Florists
(vi) Tobacco stores and stands
(vii) News dealers and newsstands
12. Uses Accessory to Open Space Uses. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, the following use shall be deemed to be accessory to uses in the Open Space uses:
(a) That are permitted uses in that district; or
(b) For which a special permit has been lawfully issued and is in full force and effect; provided that such uses shall be located entirely within the open space and with no principal exterior access:
(i) Eating places
(ii) Outdoor seating accessory to permitted eating places
(iii) Carryout eating places
(iv) Drinking places accessory to permitted eating places.
69 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
13. Accessory Day Care Centers in the Commercial, Office and Industrial Zoning Districts. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, day care centers shall be considered permitted accessory uses in all Commercial, Office, and Industrial Districts subject to the following limitations:
(a) The accessory day care center shall be for the exclusive use of employees of the principal use. Day care operations serving those not employed on the premises shall be deemed a separate principal use, and so regulated in accordance with this Code.
(b) All requisite state and local licenses and permits regarding day care facilities shall be required for such operations.
(c) All regular day care activities, including any outdoor play areas, shall be located within the building setbacks for the district in which the principal use is located.
(d) The persons or organization operating the accessory day care center need not be employed by the owners or operators of the principal use.
14. Accessory Day Care Centers in the IB Zoning District. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, day care centers shall be considered permitted accessory uses in the IB, Institutional Building District subject to the following limitations:
(a) No building additions shall be permitted for such accessory day care centers, except as authorized for the principal structure in the IB District.
(b) All requisite state and local licenses and permits regarding day care facilities shall be required for such operations.
(c) All regular day care activities, including any outdoor play areas, shall be located within the building setbacks for the IB District.
(d) The persons or organization operating such accessory day care center need not be employed by the owners or operators of the principal use.
15. Exterior Lighting. Any permitted accessory lighting fixtures shall be so designed, arranged and operated as to prevent direct rays of light from being case onto any adjacent property or street and so as not to produce excessive sky-reflected glare. Except for street lights, no exterior light in or adjacent to any residential district shall be so designed, arranged or operated to produce an intensity of light exceeding one-half foot candle at any residential lot line.
16. Uses Subject to Special Restrictions. Where the District Regulations of this Code require compliance with any procedures or standards with respect to a specific use, such use shall not be established as an accessory use except in compliance with those procedures and standards.
70 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
E. Special Bulk, Yard and Space Regulations.
1. General Rule. Except as otherwise provided in this Subsections D and E, all accessory structures and uses shall comply with, and be included in calculating compliance with, all bulk, yard and space requirements applicable in the district in which they are located.
2. Special Height Limitation.
(a) General. No accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height measured from grade when located in any yard or setback required for any principal structure.
(b) Flagpoles. Notwithstanding the otherwise applicable height limitations in the district, flagpoles may extend to a height of ten (10) feet above the highest point of the roof of the principal structure.
(c) Antennas. Notwithstanding the otherwise applicable height limitations in the district, the height of any antenna with a surface area in excess of ten (10) square feet shall be governed by Paragraph 9-101 D of this Section.
3. Special Side and Rear Yard Regulations for Residential Recreational Facilities. Notwithstanding the otherwise applicable side and rear yard regulations established for principal structures and uses by the district regulations of this Code.
F. Use Limitations.
1. Every accessory structure or use shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the zoning district in which it is located.
2. No accessory structure or use shall be construed, established or maintained on any lot prior to the substantial completion of construction of the principal structure to which it is accessory.
9-102: HOME OCCUPATIONS
G. Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section 9-102, any home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a building as a dwelling shall be permitted to any dwelling unit.
H. Definition. A home occupation is a business, profession, occupation or trade that:
1. Is conducted for gain or support by a full-time occupant of a dwelling unit;
2. Is incidental and secondary to the use of such dwelling unit for dwelling purposes; and
71 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3. Does not change the residential character of such dwelling unit.
I. Use Limitations.
1. Employee Limitations.
(a) The entrepreneur of every home occupation shall be domiciled in the dwelling unit where such occupation is conducted. In addition, where a day care nursery is operated as a home occupation, the principal provider of day care shall be domiciled in the dwelling where such day care nursery is operated.
(b) No person who is not domiciled in the dwelling unit where a home occupation is conducted shall be employed in connection with, or otherwise participate in the operation of, such occupation. This limitation shall not apply to employees who do not work at the dwelling unit devoted to such occupation.
2. Structural Limitations.
(a) No alteration of any kind shall be made to the dwelling unit where a home occupation is conducted that would change its residential character as a dwelling unit, including the enlargement of public utility services beyond that customarily required for residential use.
(b) No separate entrance shall be provided in connection with the conduct of any home occupation in a principal structure.
3. Occupational Limitations.
(a) No activity shall be conducted on a residential lot unless it is conducted wholly within a principal dwelling unit or permitted accessory structure.
(b) No more than a total of 480 square feet of floor area (exclusive of garage floor area devoted to permissible parking of a vehicle used in connection with the home occupation) of any dwelling unit or any permitted accessory structure shall be devoted to the conduct of a home occupation.
(c) No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises of any home occupation except as part of a garage sale, and subject to the garage sale regulations in Paragraph 9-103 D1 of this Code.
(d) No routine attendance of patients, clients, subcontractors or employees associated with any home occupation shall be allowed at the premises of the home occupation except that attendance of up to six children, including family members, at any one time may be allowed at a day care nursery operated as a home occupation, and that attendance of up to two persons at any one time may be allowed for the purpose of receiving private
72 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
instruction in any subject or skill. “Routine attendance” means that the conduct of the home occupation required non-domiciled persons to visit the premises of the home occupation as part of the regular conduct of the occupation, without regard to the number, frequency or duration of such visits.
(e) No mechanical, electrical or other equipment that produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, emissions, odor or radiation outside the dwelling unit or any permitted accessory structure that is greater or more frequent than that typical of equipment used in connection with residential occupancy shall be used in connection with any home occupation.
(f) No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connection with any home occupation.
(g) No refuse in excess of the amount allowable for regular residential pick-up shall be generated by any home occupation.
(h) Vehicles used in connection with any home occupation shall be subject to the requirements of Paragraph 9-101 D4 of this Article.
4. Signage and Visibility.
(a) No sign other than as permitted pursuant to Paragraph 9-106 F3 shall advertise the presence or conduct of the home occupation.
(b) Except for the identification sign permitted in Subparagraph C4(a) above, no home occupation shall be in any manner visible or apparent from any public or private street.
5. Traffic Limitations. No home occupation shall generate more traffic than is typical of residences in the area.
6. Nuisance-causing Activities. In addition to the foregoing specific limitations, no home occupation shall cause any nuisance or be noxious, offensive or hazardous.
7. Licensing Requirements. Every home occupation shall be subject to applicable business licensing and inspection requirements.
9-103: TEMPORARY USES
J. Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section 9-103, temporary uses as hereinafter specified are permitted in the zoning districts hereinafter specified.
K. Definition. A temporary use is a use that:
73 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. Is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time; and
2. Does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
L. Certificate of Zoning Compliance Required; Special Standards for Issuance and Revocation.
1. Certificate Required. Except as provided in Paragraphs DI and D13 below, no temporary use shall be established or maintained unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance evidencing the compliance of such use with the provisions of this Code shall have first been issued in accordance with Section 11-401 of this Code; provided, however, that permitted temporary uses of publicly owned or leased buildings and property, other than those included in Paragraph D13 below, shall be exempt from this requirement.
2. Bases for Certificate Denial. Such a Certificate may be denied if the Community Development Director determines that the applicant has failed to comply with the standards, conditions or terms of any previously issued zoning certificate for a temporary use or that the permanent use of the subject property fails to comply in all respects with the provisions of all City Ordinances regulating the development, use and maintenance of the property. Such a certificate shall be denied if the Community Development Director determines that the public health, safety or welfare would be, or may reasonably be expected to be, impaired by the issuance thereof.
3. Conditions on Certificate. Such a Certificate may be conditioned upon such special requirements as the Community Development Director may determine are necessary to achieve the purposes of this Code and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
4. Revocation of Certificate. Such a Certificate shall be revoked if any of the standards and conditions imposed pursuant to this Section 9-103, or such certificate, are violated.
M. Permitted Temporary Uses. Subject to the specific regulations and time limits that follow, and to the other applicable regulations of the district in which the use is permitted, the following temporary uses, and no others, are permitted in the zoning districts herein specified:
1. Garage Sales. In any residential district, but only in compliance with the following terms and conditions:
(a) Garage Sale Defined. The term “garage sale” includes all general sales of goods open to the public, conducted from a residential premises including, but not limited to, all sales entitled “garage,” “lawn,” “yard,” “attic,” “porch,” “room,” “backyard,” “patio,” “flea market,” “rummage,” “estate,” or “moving” sale.
74 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(b) Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or allow a garage sale involving the sale of multiple new items of the same description without applying for and obtaining a permit therefore. Such permit shall be without charge and in a form acceptable to the Community Development Director.
(c) Certificate of Zoning Compliance. No Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be required for garage sales authorized pursuant to this Paragraph 1.
(d) Frequency. Garage sales shall be limited to a period not to exceed three consecutive days. No more than four garage sales shall be conducted from the same dwelling unit in any calendar years, and no more than one such sale shall occur in any 30-day period.
(e) Hours of Operation. No garage sales shall operate before 7:30 a.m. or after sunset on any day.
(f) Sign Limitations. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9-106 of this Code, only off-site directional signs not to exceed four square feet in area shall be permitted for the purpose of advertising garage sales. Such signs shall not be erected in excess of 24 hours prior to the commencement of the garage sale and shall be removed within two (2) hours after the termination of the sale.
(g) Location of Sale. No portion of any garage sale shall take place on any public or private landscaped area, on any public sidewalk, or on any public right-of-way.
2. Indoor and Outdoor Art, Craft and Plant Shows. In any commercial, open space or institutional building district; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the Community Development Director on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Any such sale shall be limited to a period not to exceed three consecutive days. In addition to the foregoing indoor and outdoor art, craft and plant shows shall be permitted in a residential district as part of a garage sale and subject to the garage sale regulations in Paragraph 9-103 D1 of this Code.
3. Christmas Tree Sales. In any commercial or manufacturing district and, when conducted by a not-for-profit religious, philanthropic or civic group or organization on property owned or leased by such group or organization, in any open space or institutional buildings district; provided, however, that any such use in any open space or institutional buildings district shall be conducted solely by the officers, directors, members, and employees of any such group or organization, and any proceeds of such Christmas Tree sales shall accrue solely to such group or organization; provided, further, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the Community Development Director on the basis of
75 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed 45 days. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with the yard requirements of this Code, except that no tree shall be displayed within the Sight Triangle defined in Subsection 12-206 S of this Code.
4. Contractors’ Office and Equipment Sheds. In any district when accessory to a construction project. No such use shall contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project.
5. Real Estate Offices, Including Model Units. In any district when such use is accessory to a new development. No such use shall contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit. Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of units or space in such development and to activities related to the development in which such office is located. No such office shall be used as the general office or headquarters of any firm.
6. Carnivals and Circuses. In any non-residential district, but only when sponsored by a not-for-profit religious, philanthropic or civic group or organization; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the Community Development Director on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed ten (10) days. Such use need not comply with the yard requirements of this Code except that structures or equipment that might block the view of operators of motor vehicles on any public or private street shall not be located within the Sight Triangle defined in Subsection 12-206 S of this Code. Such use need not comply with the maximum height requirements of this Code. The concessionaire responsible for the operation of any such carnival or circus shall:
(a) Submit in advance of the event date a site layout displaying adequate ingress and egress routes for emergency vehicles and no dean-end aisles; and
(b) Provide for a thorough clean-up of the site upon termination of the event.
7. Sales of Overstock, Seconds and Similar Goods in Districts Where Not a Permitted Use. In the I1 District when accessory to any use permitted or specially permitted in such district; but only in compliance with the following conditions:
(a) Existing Inventory Only. No products shall be sold except such products as are manufactured, warehoused or distributed in the normal course of business of the principal use operated on the zoning lot in question. No products shall be brought in from other sources for purposes of temporary sale.
76 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(b) No Outdoor Sales. Any area in which such a temporary retail use takes place, including the sale and display of products, shall be fully enclosed.
(c) Number and Duration of Sales Limited. Not more than four (4) such temporary uses shall be conducted on the same premises in any calendar year, or more than one (1) such sale in any calendar quarter. In each calendar quarter, one (1) such sale may be for a period of not more than three (3) successive days.
8. Tents. In any district, in connection with any permitted, accessory, temporary or special permit use no tent shall be allowed to remain for a period of more than four (4) days longer than the period during which the use with which it is associated is allowed to remain or, in the absence of any such period, ten (10) days. Unless waived in writing by the Community Development Director, every tent shall comply with bulk, yard and space requirements applicable to accessory uses pursuant to Subsection 9-101 E of the Article.
9. Civic Uses of Public Property. In the IB District or OS District, any civic use of any public building or property when authorized by the governmental agency owning or controlling such property; provided that no such use shall impose an undue adverse effect on neighboring streets or property.
10. Unique Events. In any district for a period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days; subject to such conditions and security requirements as the Community Development Director determines are necessary. Unique events shall include motion picture, video and television filming.
11. Electrical Substations. In any district; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the Community Development Director on the basis of need and impact on surrounding properties.
12. Temporary Location of Local Government Uses. The activities of units of local government and public school district may be temporarily located in any non-residential district, but only during periods of reconstruction, renovation or expansion of existing facilities for those activities at another location. No such temporary relocation shall be allowed without the prior approval by the corporate authorities by resolution duly adopted. The corporate authorities may, but shall not be required to, hold a public hearing prior to adoption of such approval resolution. Such approval by the corporate authorities shall be in lieu of any Certificate of Zoning Compliance and shall be subject to the special standards contained in Subsection C of this Section and the use limitations contained in Subsection F of this Section, all as determined and imposed by the corporate authorities, in its sole discretion.
N. Bulk, Yard and Space Regulations. Except as expressly provided otherwise in Subsection D above, every temporary use shall comply with the bulk, yard, and space regulations applicable in the district in which such temporary use is located.
77 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
O. Use Limitations.
1. General Limitations. Every temporary use shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the district in which it is located as well as with the limitations made applicable to specified temporary use by Subsection D above. No temporary use shall be permitted in any district if it would have a significant negative impact, including aesthetic impact, on any adjacent property or on the area as a whole.
2. Hours and Days of Operation. No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are designated by the Community Development Director, in the certificate required by Subsection C of this Section, on the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the character of the surrounding area.
3. Public Safety. No temporary use shall be permitted unless the Fire and Police Departments shall have first certified that such use will result in no additional, undue on-site or off-site threat to public safety. No temporary use shall be operated except in accordance with such restrictions and conditions as said Departments may require in connection with such certification. If required by the Community Development Director, operator of the temporary use shall employ a fire watch team and appropriate security personnel.
4. Traffic. No temporary use shall be permitted if additional vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.
5. Conflicts With Other Temporary Uses. No temporary use shall be permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized temporary use.
6. Parking. Before approving any temporary use, the Community Development Director shall make an assessment of the total number of off-street parking spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed temporary use, on the basis of the particular use, its intensity, and the availability of other parking facilities in the area, and shall approve such temporary use only if such off-street parking is provided. No temporary use shall be authorized that would, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, unreasonably reduce the amount of off-street parking spaces available for use in connection with permanent uses located on the zoning lot in questions.
Additional Conditions. Every temporary use shall, in addition, comply with, and the Community Development Director may impose, such other conditions as may reasonably be necessary to achieve the purposes of this Code or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
78 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART 1-B PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
9-104: off-street parking
A. Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this section 9-104 and paragraphs 9-101 d3, d4, d5 off-street parking is permitted as an accessory use in all districts. Off-street parking as a principal use is permitted only when expressly authorized by the regulations applicable to the district in question. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any person to provide off-street parking in excess of the requirements herein established but all such parking shall comply with the standards of this section.
B. General Requirements.
1. Applicability to Existing, New and Expanded Uses.
(a) General Applicability. Except as provided otherwise in this Paragraph B1, the provisions of this Section shall apply to, and off-street parking spaces sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this Section shall be provided for, all existing and new uses, in accordance with the provisions of Articles X and XII of this Code.
(b) Change in Existing Use. Whenever a use existing on the effective date of this Code is changed thereafter to a new use, parking facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new use; provided, however, that when any such new use is required to have no more than the same number of parking spaces required of such existing use, then such new use may be established with a deficiency in required parking spaces equal in number to not more than the number of spaces such existing use was deficient on the effective date of this Code.
(c) Increase in Use Intensity. Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or use is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking spaces, parking spaces as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
(d) Exception for Nonconforming Locations and Design. Nothing in this Paragraph B1 shall be construed to prohibit the continued utilization of any parking space as an accessory use to any structure or use for parking of a vehicle that may lawfully be parked in such space solely because such space does not satisfy the locational or design requirements of this Code, or any amendment to it, if such space was legally in use as an accessory use to such structure or use on the effective date of this Code or such amendment.
2. Location of Required Parking Spaces.
79 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) General Rule. Except as provided in Subparagraphs 2(b) through 2(d) below, parking spaces required by this Section shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use to which they are accessory.
(b) Parking for Townhouse, Two Family, and Multiple Family Dwellings. Not more than four (4) parking spaces located in a garage, driveway or other area reserved for exclusive use of the residents of an individual dwelling unit shall be counted toward the 4.5 spaces required pursuant to Subparagraph 9-104 F1(a)(5) below. At least one-half (1/2) space required for each dwelling unit shall be located in an area or areas available for use in common by at least three (3) such individual units. Such areas may include parking spaces located in parking areas or lots within the development in which such units are located, whether located on or off the lot on which such units are located; provided, however, that no such required space shall be located farther than 300 feet, measured along a paved established pedestrian circulation route, from the unit it is required to serve.
(c) Deficiency Spaces. When proposed to provide spaces to eliminate a parking deficiency existing on the effective date of this Code or when required to provide spaces required pursuant to Subparagraph 9-104 B1(b) or Subparagraph 9-104 B1(c) above, parking spaces required by this Section may be located at any location within an adjacent district in which the principal use in question is a permitted use or within the same zoning district as, and within 300 feet of, the zoning lot on which the use to be served is located, but only when such remote site is covenanted to remain so for so long as said parking spaces are required to meet the standards of this Code.
C. Design and Maintenance. Every parking lot and garage shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements herein set forth:
1. Location on Lot. Except as provided in the applicable district regulations of this Code, off-street parking spaces may be provided on surface lots, underground, under building, in single level parking garages, or in multiple level parking garages. Parking lots and areas shall comply with the yard requirements applicable in the district in which they are located except that parking areas in Single Family Residential Districts may be located in any required yard. See also Paragraph 9-101 D for additional regulations concerning the storage of vehicles in residential districts.
2. Screening and Landscaping. All parking lots and garages shall comply with the screening and landscaping requirements set forth in Section 9-107 of this Article.
3. Design.
80 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) Access to Street. All parking lots, areas and garages shall be so located and designed as to provide access to adjacent streets with the least interference with through traffic movements. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, driveways serving single family dwellings and driveways providing direct access from a parking lot to a street, may traverse any required yard; provided, however, that the surface area of any such driveway giving access from a parking lot or area through any such yard shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the area of such yard. No curb cut across public property shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width without the written approval of the Community Development Director. No such access shall be provided through a zoning district other than the district in which the parking lot is located. No such access shall be provided through a zoning lot other than the zoning lot on which the parking is located except across a permanent, recorded access easement in form and substance satisfactory to the Community Development Director.
(b) Turnaround Area. Every parking lot or garage, other than a parking lot or garage accessory to a single family dwelling, shall be provided with a turnaround area or other means to permit cars to exit the parking lot or garage without backing onto any street or sidewalk.
(c) Slope. No area of any parking lot or garage excluding access ramps, shall have a slope in excess of five percent (5%). No ramp shall have a slope in excess of either percent (8%).
(d) Lighting. Fixed lighting shall be provided for all parking lots and garages accommodating more than ten (10) vehicles. Such lighting shall be so arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams onto any public or private property or streets. All lighting shall be reduced to security levels at all times of non-use.
(e) Tree Planting Areas; Landscaped Islands. Trees located within planting islands in paved areas shall have a minimum landscaped area of 25 square feet of surface area and a depth sufficient to allow the bottom of the tree ball to be planted with a washed gravel layer at the bottom of the tree planting area to allow proper watering and drainage. If the soil is impervious, then a drainage pipe shall connect the tree planting area to a drainage structure. All islands shall be bordered by a six (6) inch high concrete barrier curb and shall be located and constructed in accordance with accepted engineering standards unless sustainable engineering practices are used to in place of the curb.
(f) Car Stops. Every parking lot and garage, except parking lots and garages accessory to a single family dwelling, shall be bordered by a six (6) inch high concrete curb and shall be provided with curbs, car wheel stops, guard rails, barrier fences or other suitable devices designed and located to protect required screening devices, landscaping, structures and other
81 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
vehicles from damage by vehicles using such lot or garage. This provision shall not be construed to require car wheel stops for every parking space, but only in those cases where the Community Development Director determines that such stops are necessary or desirable to achieve the purposes of this Subparagraph.
(g) Circulation Aisles. Each parking space shall be accessed by a circulation aisle of a width, in feet, as specified below:
Parking One-Way Two-Way
Angle Aisle Width Aisle Width
Parallel 14 24
45° 14 24
60° 16 24
75° 20 24
90° 24 24
(h) Back-up Area. Each parking space, except spaces accessory to a single family dwelling, shall be provided with a sufficient back-up area to permit egress in one (1) maneuver, consisting of one (1) backward and one (1) forward movement.
(i) Space Dimensions. Each off-street parking space, excluding its associated circulation aisle, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in feet:
I1 and O1 Zoning Districts: Parking Dimensions (in feet).
Parking Stall Stall Stall
Angle Width Length Height
Parallel 9 23 8
30° 8.5 18 8
45° 8.5 18 8
45° 8.5 18 8
60° 8.5 18 8
90° 8.5 18 8
All Zoning Districts except I1 and O1: Parking Dimensions (in feet).
Parking Stall Stall Stall
Angle Width Length Height
Parallel 9 23 8
30° 9 20 8
45° 9 20 8
60° 9 20 8
82 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
90° 9 20 8
In all zoning districts, except I1 and O1, the above-stated stall length dimensions for non-parallel stalls on the perimeter of a parking lot may be reduced to include only eighteen and one-half (18.5) feet of parking surface plus one and one-half (1 ½) feet of overhang into abutting landscaped areas; provided that such reduction does not reduce the size of any required yard below the requirements in the applicable district.
In all zoning districts, the above-stated stall width dimensions shall be increased to twelve (12) feet or to the width required by state law, whichever is greater, for required handicapped parking spaces.
(j) Landbanking To Reduce Long-Term Parking Space Dimensions. Except for parallel parking spaces, the above-stated stall dimensions may be reduced, in order to increase the amount of landscaped open space, to 18.5 feet in length and 8.5 feet in width in parking lots and structures accessory to institutional, office and manufacturing uses pursuant to a special permit granted in accordance with the procedures of Subsection E below, and where the City Council finds that the typical parking space in such lot or structure will be occupied by no more than one (1) or two (2) different vehicles during the course of the business day.
(k) Maintenance. All tree planting areas, landscaped islands, parking lots, garages and areas shall be property maintained at all times so as to be free of weeds, pot holes, broken curbs and other damaged or neglected features.
D. Use; Other Temporary Storage.
1. General. No off-street parking lot or area shall be used for any purpose other than the temporary storage of motor vehicles related to the premises, except that merchandise, equipment, or materials related to the use being made of the premises may be stored for a period of time not exceeding three (3) days in any seven (7) day period.
E. Landbanking of Required Parking.
1. Landbanking Authorized. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the City Council may, by special permit granted pursuant to Section 11-602 of this Code, reduce the total number of off-street parking spaces required to be paved pursuant to Subsection F of this Section or the stall length and width dimension required pursuant to Subparagraph 9-103C3(i) above, subject to acceptance by the property owner of the conditions set forth in Paragraphs E2 through E4 below; provided, however, that no such special permit shall allow landbanking of more than 50 percent (50%) of the parking spaces required to be provided accessory to any senior citizen housing development.
83 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
2. Termination of Landbanking. The City Council shall have the right, in its sole and absolute discretion, to require the property owner or his or her successor, at any time, to increase the stall length and width to the dimension required by Subparagraph 9-104 C3(i) above or to increase the number of parking spaces provided to serve said development up to the maximum required by Subsection F of this Section for the property in question as if no special permit for landbanking had been granted.
3. Alternate Plans Required. Every application for a special use permit to allow landbanking of required parking spaces shall be accompanied by alternate detailed parking plans. One plan shall show the full stall length and width required by Subparagraph 9-104 C3(i) above and the full number of parking spaces required pursuant to Subsection F of this Section; the other plan shall show the reduced stall length and width or the reduce number of parking spaces, or both, as the case may be, proposed to be provided pursuant to the special permit being sought and shall also show the landscaping treatment of areas proposed to be reserved for future parking requirements. Both such plans shall show the location on the site of all parking areas, the exact number of parking spaces to be provided, and complete details for:
(a) Wheel stops,
(b) Markings,
(c) Curbing,
(d) Surfacing,
(e) Screening and landscaping,
(f) Lighting,
(g) Signing, and
(h) Access.
The design plans for such parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
4. Open Space Covenant. As a condition of granting such special permit, the applicant shall file with the Community Development Director his unconditional agreement and covenant in form and substance satisfactory to the City Attorney that areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained as landscaped open space until and unless required to be used for off-street parking pursuant to such special permit. The Ordinance granting such permit, together with such agreement and covenant, shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
84 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
F. Required Spaces.
1. Specified Uses. For the following uses, the following minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided:
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE
USE
REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
a) Residential
(1) Single Family Detached Dwellings
2 per dwelling unit
(2) Senior Housing
1 per dwelling unit, PLUS 1 per 2 employees
(3) Multiple Family
2.5 per dwelling unit
(4) All Other Dwellings
4.5 per dwelling unit
b) Retail Space
(1) All Uses, except Gasoline Service Stations and Eating and drinking Places
1 per 250 square feet of net floor area
(2) Gasoline Service Stations
3 per service bay, PLUS 1 per employee
(3) Eating and Drinking Places
1 per 2 employees, PLUS 1 per 3 persons of design capacity
c) Finance, Insurance and Real Estate
All Uses
1 per 250 square feet of net floor area
d) Business and Professional Offices
(1) All Uses except as otherwise listed in this Subsection
1 per 250 square feet of net floor area
(2) Testing Laboratories
1 per 500 square feet of net floor area
e) Services
(1) All Services except as specifically listed below
1 per 250 square feet of net floor area
(2) Hotels and other Lodging Places
1 per lodging room PLUS 1 per 200 square feet of net floor area devoted to affiliated meeting, lobby, recreational and administrative uses, PLUS parking for affiliated eating and drinking places as herein specified.
(3) Motion Picture Theaters
1 per 3 persons of design capacity
(4) Bowling and Billiard Establishments
5 per lane PLUS 2 per table
(5) Physical Fitness Facilities
1 per 3 persons of design capacity
(6) Membership Sport & Recreation Clubs
1 per 3 persons of design capacity
(7) Health Service Offices
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area
(8) Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
1 per 3 beds PLUS 1 for each licensed
85 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
practitioner, not including nurses and assistants PLUS 1 for each additional 2 employees.
(9) Hospitals
1 per bed PLUS 1 for each licensed practitioner, not including nurses and assistants, PLUS 1 for each additional 2 employees
(10) Elementary Schools
1 per 2 employees
(11) Secondary Schools
1 per 5 students OR 1 for each 3 persons of auditorium design capacity, which ever is greater, PLUS 1 for each employee
(12) Libraries and Information Centers
1 per 500 square feet of public area PLUS 1 per 3 persons of auditorium design capacity
(13) Vocational and Correspondence Schools
1 per 200 square feet of net floor area
(14) Day Care Services
1 per employee PLUS 1 for each 10 children or non-employee adults
(16) Public Parks
None for the first acre; PLUS 5 for all additional area up to 5 acres; PLUS 5 for each acre in excess of 5 acres; PLUS one for each 5 persons of design capacity of any structure or facility located in the park
(17) Golf Courses, including all related facilities
80 for each nine holes
(18) Membership Organizations
1 per 250 square feet of net floor area OR 1 for each 4 persons or auditorium design capacity, whichever is greater
f) Public Administration
All Uses
1 for each 250 square feet or net floor area OR 1 for each 3 persons of design capacity, whichever is greater
g) Construction, Manufacturing, Transportation and Public Utilities
(1) Production and Assembly
1 per 600 square feet of floor area
(2) Warehouse Storage
1 per 900 square feet of floor area
(3) Office and Other Activities
1 per 250 Square feet of floor area
(4) Automated Warehouse
1 per 900 square feet of floor area
h) Uses Conducted Outside Structures
All uses except as otherwise specifically listed
1 space per 1,500 square feet of outdoor area devoted to such use PLUS spaces as above required for any aspect of the use conducted within a structure
86 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
2. Unspecified Uses. When the ultimate use of a structure is not known, the maximum number of spaces that might be required for any use to which the structure might reasonably be devoted shall be provided.
3. Computation of Required Spaces,
(a) Fractional Spaces. When determination of the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one (1) additional parking space.
(b) Capacity Calculations. When parking spaces are required on the basis of capacity, capacity shall be determined based on the occupancy standards established by the Building Code.
(c) Bench Seating. In stadiums, auditoriums, houses of worship and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of such seating facility shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off-street parking facilities under this Code.
(d) Population Calculations. When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of employees, customers, students or similar measure, the maximum number for which the structure is designed shall govern except that when the structure has no design capacity, the maximum number present at any one time shall govern.
G. Reduction of Required Number of Parking Spaces for Automated Warehouse.
1. Reduction Authorized. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the City Council may, by special permit granted pursuant to Section 11-602 of this Code, reduce the total number of off-street parking spaces required pursuant to Subsection F of this Section for Automated Warehouses to one (1) parking space for each 2,500 square feet of gross floor area subject to acceptance by the property owner of the conditions set forth in Paragraphs G2 through G4 below.
2. Alternate Plans Required. Every application for a special use permit to allow reduction of required parking spaces for Automated Warehouses shall be accompanied by alternate detailed parking plans. One plan shall show the number of parking spaces required pursuant to Subsection F of this Section; the other plan shall show the reduced number of parking spaces proposed to be provided pursuant to the special permit being sought and shall also show the landscaping treatment of areas proposed to be reserved for future parking requirements. Both such plans shall show the location on the site of all parking areas, the exact number of parking spaces to be provided, and complete details for:
(a) Wheel stops,
(b) Markings,
87 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(c) Curbing,
(d) Surfacing,
(e) Screening and landscaping,
(f) Lighting,
(g) Signing, and
(h) Access.
The design plans for such parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
3. Covenant. As a condition of granting such special permit, the applicant shall file with the Community Development Director his unconditional agreement and covenant in form and substance satisfactory to the City Attorney that should the property ever cease to be used as an Automated Warehouse, additional off-street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with the then applicable off-street parking requirements for such use to which the property is converted. The Ordinance granting such permit, together with such agreement and covenant, shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
H. OFFSTREET PARKING
1. Provision. Any project application requiring administrative review, site plan review or public hearing shall provide automobile parking and bicycle parking in off-street facilities following the minimum parking standards below.
2. Minimum Parking Requirements. Off street parking shall be regulated, as follows:
USE MINIMUM AUTOMOBILE PARKING REQUIREMENT REFERENCE SECTION 9-104 F MINIMUM BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENT Office 1 space for every 10 employees Retail 10% of required automobile parking spaces Restaurant 10% of required automobile parking spaces Civic 1 space for every 10 employees Lodging 1 space for every 10 employees Residential 1 per dwelling unit, single family residences excluded from requirements
For any facility use not specified above and not specifically excluded, the requirement for bicycle parking spaces shall be equal to 10% of required automobile parking spaces. In all situations there shall be a minimum of two
88 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
bicycle parking spaces regardless of the requirements specified above.
3. Bicycle Parking Space Design.
(a) Residential. Every residential facility shall provide the required minimum number of bicycle parking spaces in a sheltered environment. A space shall be considered sheltered if there is top-side protection from weather. Bicycle parking spaces may be located within a garage, storage shed, basement, utility room or similar area or may be located in front of the building along the street or near the rear access to the building. In those instances in which the building has no parking structure or other easily accessible storage unit, the bicycle parking spaces may also be sheltered from sun and precipitation under an eave, overhang, an independent structure, or similar cover. All bicycle parking spaces must be in an area that is accessible to all residents at all times.
(b) Retail and Restaurant. Individual commercial uses may provide their own parking or spaces may be clustered to serve up to six bicycles. Bicycle parking spaces should be located in front of the stores along the street, either on the sidewalks or in specially constructed areas such as pedestrian curb extensions or may be located to the rear of the building if an automobile parking lot is adjacent. Bicycle parking for a single location must be within 50 feet of the building entrance where possible. Clusters of bicycle parking that serve multiple destinations may be located up to 100 feet away from entrances.
(c) Office and Civic. Bicycle parking spaces shall be located in a sheltered environment. A space shall be considered sheltered if there is top-side protection from weather. Bicycle parking spaces may be located within a garage (if located in the facility in question), loading dock, indoor space, or may be located in front of the building along the street or near the rear access to the building. In those instances in which the building has no parking structure or other easily accessible storage unit, the bicycle parking spaces may also be sheltered from sun and precipitation under an eave, overhang, an independent structure, or similar cover. All bicycle parking spaces must be in an area that is accessible to all facility users during regular business hours which shall include at minimum the hours of nine o’clock in the morning to five o’clock in the afternoon of each weekday excluding federal holidays. Bicycle parking spaces may be located in an area requiring special security access such as a key, keycard or other access device if such access can be accomplished by the user during the specified hours. Users of bicycle parking spaces shall be granted access to the nearest entrances, exits, stairwells and elevators to the bicycle parking spaces.
89 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(d) Coordination with Pedestrian Needs. Bicycle parking shall not interfere with pedestrian passage, leaving a clear area of at least 48 inches between bicycles and other existing and potential obstructions.
4. Parking Waivers. The number of off-street bicycle parking spaces required may be reduced by an administratively granted Parking Waiver approved by the Community Development Director or her/his designee under the following conditions:
(a) The waiver requested is for 50% or less of the total required parking for the site to meet bicycle parking requirements;
(b) The waiver is not for residential parking requirements. Residential parking requirements cannot be waived;
(c) The applicant proves that adequate parking exists for such use, based on the unique number, type and use characteristics (i.e. peak hour or day) of those businesses or residences that currently use such a lot;
(d) Bicycle parking with adequate capacity to accommodate all or a portion of the number of required spaces exists within 100 feet;
(e) The owner of the building makes a payment equal to a onetime fee of $250 per bicycle parking space that cannot be provided on the subject lot. The fees collected for the payment in lieu of parking will be used only for the acquisition of land or construction of municipally owned or leased off street parking facilities for bicycles; landscape or streetscape; bike trails, lanes, or paths; or maintenance or illumination of off-street parking facilities. Fees shall be required for any application for parking waiver, regardless if a waiver has been previously granted.
9-109: OFF-STREET LOADING
A. Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section 9-105, off-street loading is permitted as an accessory use in all districts other than single family residential districts. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of any person to provide off-street loading in excess of the requirements herein established, but all such loading shall comply with the standards of this Section.
B. General Requirements.
1. Applicability to Existing, New and Expanded Uses.
(a) General Applicability. Except as provided otherwise in this Paragraph B1, the provisions of this Section shall apply to and off-street loading spaces sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this Section shall be provided for all existing and new uses in accordance with the provisions of Articles X and XII of this Code.
(b) Change in Existing Use. Whenever a use existing on the effective date of this Code is changed thereafter to a new use, loading facilities shall be
90 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
provided as required herein for such new use; provided, however, that when any such new use is required to have no more than the same number of loading spaces required of such existing use, then such new use may be established with a deficiency in required loading spaces equal in number to not more than the number of spaces such existing use was deficient on the effective date of this Code.
(c) Increase in Use Intensity. Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or use is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required loading spaces, loading spaces as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
(d) Exception Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Paragraph B1, no building or use lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment of it establishing loading requirements with respect to such structure or use, shall be required to provide any additional loading spaces pursuant to this Paragraph B1 unless and until the aggregate increase in units of measurement shall equal the full number of units for which one additional loading space would be required pursuant to Subsection 9-104 D of this Section, in which event loading spaces as required herein shall be provided for the total aggregate increase.
2. Location of Required Loading Spaces. Loading spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use they serve.
C. Design and Maintenance. Every loading space shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements herein set forth:
1. Location on Lot. All loading spaces shall comply with the yard requirements applicable to principal uses in the district which they are located except that open loading spaces may be located in a required rear yard. No loading space shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) public or private streets. No loading space shall be located closer to any public right-of-way than the façade of the building facing such right-of-way. No loading space shall open onto any building façade facing a public right-of-way. All loading spaces shall be located and arranged to provide logical and convenient access thereto from the use they serve.
2. Screening. All loading spaces shall comply with the screening requirements set forth in Section 9-107 of this Article.
3. Design.
(a) Access of Street. Loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to provide access to a street or alley in a manner that will create the least possible interference with through traffic movements. No curb cut across public
91 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
property shall exceed forty (40) feet in width without the written approval of the Community Development Director.
(b) Maneuvering Space. Every loading space shall be provided with sufficient maneuvering space on the zoning lot where it is located to allow vehicles to access and exit the space without having to make any backing movement on or into any public or private street.
(c) Surface, Drainage and Markings. Every loading space shall be faced with an asphalt or Portland cement binder pavement providing in all-weather, durable and dustless surface, and all such construction shall meet the minimum standards for structural materials established by the City.
(d) Lighting. Fixed lighting shall be so arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams onto any public or private property or streets. All lighting shall be reduced to security levels at all times on non-use.
(e) Space Dimensions. Each loading space, excluding required maneuvering areas, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in feet:
Standard 10W x 25L x 14H
Tractor-trailer 12W x 50L x 15H
D. Required Spaces.
1. General Requirement. Loading spaces or receiving areas shall be provided in sufficient number, of sufficient size and so located that no loading and unloading operations infringe upon any street or sidewalk.
2. Minimum Requirements. For the following uses, the following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided:
USE REQUIRED SPACES
Hotels 1 for 10,000 to 150,000 square feet of gross floor area PLUS 1 for each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof
Multiple Family Dwellings 1 for each building having in excess of 20,000 feet of floor area
Other Uses 1 for the first 150,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof PLUS 1 for each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
The first space required for any building having in excess of 10,000 square feet shall be sized to accommodate a tractor-trailer and, unless otherwise required by the Community Development Director, all other spaces may be standard size. The decision of the Director shall be based upon the anticipated needs of each particular building.
92 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART 1-C SIGN REGULATIONS
9-106 SIGN REGULATIONS
A. TITLE; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE AND INTENT.
1. Short title. The provisions of this Section shall hereafter be known and cited as the “Sign Regulations of the City of Oak Forest” or “Sign Regulations”, but are referred to internally as “Section.”
2. Findings of fact. The provisions of this Section are derived from a combination of statutory research into similar types of legislation enacted by corporate authorities throughout Illinois and other states and the need to enforce policies, plans and programs approved and enforced by the corporate authorities, as related to the following findings:
(a) To remain a healthy and vibrant community, the city must exercise its police power in a manner which promotes economic development, while preserving and protecting the aesthetic aspects of the community;
(b) The city’s land development codes, of which this Section is a part, are intended to maintain and improve the quality of life for all citizens of the city, through the implementation of an Official Comprehensive Plan;
(c) The city’s Sign Regulations must be updated and kept current so as to reflect the latest judicial and appellate decisions of the appropriate legal jurisdictions, as related to signs and constitutional protection;
(d) The city’s Sign Regulations must reflect the legal principle of content neutrality in its interpretation and enforcement of the regulations; specifically assuring the right of commercial and non-commercial messages to utilize the same means of conveyance regarding their messages;
(e) While recognizing the need for signs as a valid means of promoting and advertising commercial and non-commercial products, programs and points of view, the physical means used to convey such messages may not always prove to be feasible in light of the need for public safety, and as such, deserve to be regulated in a fair and expeditious manner through the provisions of this Section;
(f) Excessive signs, particularly when clustered in close proximity, can be classified as visual pollution and can serve as a distraction to pedestrians, motorists, and others and require stringent regulation and oversight as provided for by these provisions;
(g) The existence of nonconforming signs are detrimental to public welfare and the visual aesthetics of the city; and
(h) The unregulated placement of billboards can be detrimental to the visual aesthetics of
93 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
the city but must be balanced by legal requirements and considerations of equality of opportunity in terms of location and administrative review.
3. Purpose and intent. Given the findings documented in Paragraph A2 above, the purpose and intent of this Section are to establish reasonable regulations for the design, construction, installation, and maintenance of all signs in the City of Oak Forest in order to:
(a) Balance the right of individuals, institutions, and organizations to identify and promote their commercial businesses and convey their noncommercial messages, reinforcing the right of free speech and protecting against active or passive censorship, while fulfilling the city's obligation to protect the public against the unrestricted proliferation of signs;
(b) Protect public health, safety, and welfare;
(c) Reduce traffic hazards;
(d) Facilitate the creation of an attractive and harmonious community;
(e) Protect property values while preserving and promoting community aesthetics;
(f) Promote economic development;
(g) Preserve and protect the right of free speech as exercised through the use of signs containing both commercial and non-commercial content; and
(h) Focus the city’s regulatory efforts on the secondary aspects associated with signs, insofar as the secondary effects may adversely affect aesthetics, vehicular and pedestrian safety.
4. Application.
(a) It shall be unlawful to erect, use, display, enlarge, expand, alter, operate, maintain, locate, relocate, or remove any sign within the city except in conformance with the regulations of this Section.
(b) Any sign not expressly allowed by the regulations of this Section shall be prohibited. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, for any new zoning district created in the city, the applicable sign regulations for the new zoning district created in the city, the applicable sign regulations for the new zoning district shall be those that apply to signs in those districts defined in Article 3, Single Family Residential Districts, in this Code.
(Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
B. INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
94 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. Interpretation
a. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this Section and provisions of other ordinances, codes and/or regulations of the city, the provisions specified by this Section shall prevail.
b. Should a conflict be identified between any specific provisions of this Section, the more restrictive provision shall prevail unless otherwise stated in that singular subsection, paragraph, or subparagraph.
c. Where detailed in this Section, listed dimensional standards are the highest measure of maximum amounts allowed for the proposed conditions; however, such factors associated with the subject site or building, and other extenuating circumstances may reduce the allowable maximum dimensional standards in order to promote proportional signs with the associated structure and property.
2. Definitions. In the event of a conflict with this Section and within Section 12-206 of this Code (Definitions) the definitions herein shall apply.
a. A-Frame or sandwich board sign. A professionally made, portable, temporary sign, constructed of exterior grade, rigid, weather resistant and durable material such as metal or other non-combustible material and consisting of two sign faces placed together at an angle of 90 degrees or less to form an “A” shape structure which tapers from a wide base to a narrow top.
b. Address sign. A type of integral sign or other building sign which contains a sequence of numbers and/or letters used to identify the locations of buildings.
c. Attention-getting devices. Streamers, posters, balloons, ribbons, lights bulbs, light bands, spinners and attention-getting devices that move, blinking, electronic and/or flashing signs, signs which exhibit changing natural and/or artificial light or colored effects, and festoon lighting, signs (other than neon signs) which contain bare, unshielded light or tubes which are visible from a public street and/or a private residence.
d. Awning, or canopy sign. A building sign that is mounted or attached to an awning, or canopy.
(c) Banner sign. A temporary building sign consisting of cloth, canvas, fabric, or other lightweight material that is secured or mounted to a so as to limit movement of the material.
(d) Banner stand sign. A professionally made, portable, temporary sign constructed of exterior grade, rigid, weather resistant and durable material such as metal or heavy-duty plastic and consisting of a weighted base and an upright rigid banner.
95 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(e) Building sign. A sign which is securely attached to the exterior wall of a primary or accessory structure.
(f) Directional sign. A permanent monument or pole sign located on private property either within five (5) feet of a curb cut onto a public or private right-of-way, or within a parking lot not easily visible from said right-of-way.
(g) Electronic message center. A ground sign that has changeable, electronic copy composed of a series of lights that is used as an accessory display tool to the primary monument or pole sign cabinet.
(h) Exempt sign. A sign that does not require a permanent or temporary sign permit.
(i) Fence sign. A temporary ground sign made of non-durable materials that is typically securely attached to a permitted fence.
(j) Fence, permitted. A legally installed fence which has been issued a building permit and passed all required inspections or is otherwise required by the Oak Forest Building Code.
(k) Feather flag sign. A temporary ground sign typically made of non-rigid, cloth-like material which is attached to a single pole and is taller than it is wide.
(l) Flag sign. A piece of cloth or similar material typically attached by one edge to a freestanding pole or rope used as a symbol or as a signal.
(m) Governmental sign. A sign that is erected and maintained pursuant to, and in the discharge of, any governmental function, or required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation.
(n) Ground sign. A sign which is permanently or temporarily attached to the ground, via one or more support posts or other support structure and is not attached to any principal or accessory buildings on a property.
(o) Handheld sign. A type of portable sign that is not self-supported and is carried, supported or under the immediate control of a human being.
(p) Height, ground sign. The vertical distance from grade to the top of any exempt, temporary, or permanent ground sign, including any the base or structural support and any design development surrounding or enclosing the sign face.
(q) Illuminated tubing. A type of illumination which consists of one or more thin, cylindrical bulbs that contain multiple light-emitting diodes, commonly known as LEDs, or other lighting technology other than neon gas, used to emit a bright light. These are typically formed in the shape of the structure for which it serves as a border.
96 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(r) Interior illuminated sign. A window sign which consists of light emitting diodes, commonly known as LEDs, or other lighting technology other than neon gas, and is installed on the interior of a window, commonly used by commercial businesses. This definition shall not include interior neon signs or electronic message centers.
(s) Inflatable sign. A temporary sign made of flexible material or fabric that is made to take on a three-dimensional shape (to blow up like a balloon) when filled sufficient volume of air or gas.
(t) Integral sign. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations and commemorative tablets or other information which constitutes as a sign that is carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
(u) Maximum height, building sign. The vertical distance from grade to the tp of any exempt, temporary, or permanent building sign.
(v) Minimum height, building sign. The vertical distance from grade to the bottom of any exempt, temporary, or permanent building sign.
(w) Mixed use. The use of a property being a combination of residential and non-residential uses, with the non-residential use constituting of at least sixty percent (60%) or more of the first floor of the primary structure of the building.
(x) Mobile sign. A type of portable sign that is attached to, or carried by, any motor vehicle, bicycle or other similar apparatus.
(y) Monument sign. A permanent ground sign that is mounted to or part of an independent base affixed to the ground and designed as an integral part of that base.
(z) Moving or animated sign. Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of movement or rotation, excluding electronic message center signs as defined above.
(aa) Neon sign. An illuminated sign primarily constructed of exposed neon tubing.
(bb) Neon sign, interior. A neon window sign which is installed on the interior of a window, commonly used by commercial businesses.
(cc) Neon tubing. A type of illumination which consists of one or more thin, cylindrical bulbs that contain neon gas, used to emit a bright, vibrant light, and are typically formed in the shape of the structure of which it serves as a border.
(dd) Pole sign. A permanent ground sign that is supported by one or more columns, uprights, poles or braces that extend from the ground or from an object on or in the
97 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ground.
(ee) Political election sign. A type of yard or pin sign that announces or supports political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election.
(ff) Portable sign. A type of temporary sign which is not attached to the ground, building, structure, or fence and is designed to be easily moved from place to place.
(gg) Post sign. A ground sign which may be installed on a temporary or permanent basis is constructed of finished wood, PVC, or other durable material, and is supported by one or two posts in the ground that are a minimum of three (3) inches in width.
(hh) Projecting sign. A sign that is affixed to any building or structure that projects outward from the building or structure by more than 12 inches.
(ii) Public utility sign. A sign that is erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including, without limitation, any sign indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines, and similar devices.
(jj) Rope lighting. See “illuminated tubing”.
(kk) Sign. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention by any means including words, printed text, letters, figures, designs, symbols, pictures, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images for the purpose of delivering a message.
(ll) Sign face. A flat, two-dimensional surface, including the backing of a sign, which is measurable by a commonly recognized geometric figure containing a sign.
(mm) Sign walker. A person holding a handheld sign on private property.
(nn) Temporary sign. A sign that is professionally constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, or other light material, is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and is neither installed permanently in the ground nor permanently affixed to a building, structure, wall, fence, or other permanent, temporary, or exempt sign.
(oo) Wall sign. A building sign that is affixed directly to or otherwise inscribed on an exterior wall, including doors, of any building. Supports or braces from a wall sign to the roof shall not cause a wall sign to be considered to be a roof sign under this Section.
(pp) Window display. The display of actual merchandise, products, and goods sold, as well as the means or material necessary to display those items, including, without limitation, the following:
98 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
i. Stands;
ii. Mannequins;
iii. Platforms;
iv. Lighting; and
v. Backdrops, or a temporary structure that has been suspended from a ceiling, set on the ground, or otherwise supported and does not fully enclose a window area.
(qq) Window sign. A building sign that is painted on or applied or attached to a window, or that is located within the interior of a structure and that is plainly visible and is erected, constructed or maintained for the primary purpose of being viewed from the exterior of that structure. A window display, as defined by this Section, shall not be considered to be a window sign.
(rr) Yard or pin sign. A temporary ground sign made of non-durable materials that is typically staked in the ground by metal or plastic supports.
(Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
C. PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW.
1. General requirements for a sign permit. Except as provided in Subparagraph F(1) of this Section, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, relocate or structurally alter, within the City of Oak Forest, any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this Section, without first obtaining a building permit from the Building Commissioner.
2. Authority. The Building Commissioner may, in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this Subsection C, grant zoning approval of signs authorizing the construction and maintenance of signs subject to the regulations and standards contained in this Section.
3. Procedure.
a. Application. An application for a sign permit shall be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the lot on which the sign is proposed to be located on a form provided by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee and shall require the applicant to provide the following information at a minimum:
i. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner or owner’s representative, and the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign;
ii. A site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the location of the building, structure and lot upon which the proposed sign is to be attached or erected;
iii. Photographs or drawings depicting the proposed sign and its relationship to the building to which it is to be mounted or the surrounding area;
iv. Drawings of the proposed sign depicting the specifications and method of construction and attachment or erection, as the case may be, to the building or ground;
v. One accurate color sketch or rendering depicting the proposed colors proposed to be used on the sign and the existing surrounding materials;
99 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
vi. Written consent of the owner, or the authority to act on behalf of the owner, of the building, structure and lot on which the sign is to be erected;
vii. If required by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee, a copy of an electrical permit;
viii. If required by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee, a copy of an insurance policy or bond;
ix. If required by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this Section and all other laws and ordinances of the city;
x. A survey indicating the lot lines and a drawing that shows the mounting technique and the underground details of the sign installation; and
xi. Any other information the Building Commissioner or his or her designee shall require to show full compliance with this Section and all other laws and ordinances of the city.
b. Fees. Sign permit fees shall be in the amounts established from time to time in the Building Code.
c. Action by the Building Commissioner.
i. For permanent signs. Within 30 days following the proper filing of a completed application, the Building Commissioner shall either grant the sign permit or, by written notice stating the reasons therefore, grant the application with modifications or conditions, deny the application, or, where applicable, refer the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its review pursuant to Subsection D of this Section. The failure of the Building Commissioner to act within 30 days, or such further time to which the applicant shall agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the sign permit.
ii. For temporary signs. Within 5 business days following the proper filing of a completed application, the Building Commissioner shall either grant the sign permit or, by written notice stating the reasons therefore, grant the application with modifications or conditions, or deny the application.
4. Standards for sign permits. No sign permit shall be granted pursuant to this Section unless the applicant shall establish, at a minimum, the following conditions.
(a) Compliance with this Section. The proposed sign shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Section.
(b) Sign dimensions and maximums. Where detailed in this Section, listed dimensional standards are the highest measure of maximum amounts allowed for the proposed conditions; however, such factors associated with the subject site or building, and other extenuating circumstances may reduce the allowable maximum dimensional standards in order to promote proportional signs with the associated structure and property.
100 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(c) Conditions on sign permits. As part of a sign permit, the Building Commissioner may impose any conditions and limitations concerning the construction and maintenance of the sign as may be necessary or appropriate to ensure satisfaction of the standards set forth in this Section C of and the purposes and objectives of this Section and to minimize any adverse effects upon other property in the vicinity. These conditions shall be expressly set forth in the sign permit. Violation of any condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Section and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the sign permit and the imposition of fines as authorized by law
5. Expiration of permits.
a. Permanent signs.
(i) Sign permits for any sign other than a temporary sign shall remain in effect until such time that the structural elements other than the sign face are changed, modified or altered so as to deviate from the terms or conditions of the sign permit.
(ii) Any change, modification or alteration shall require the issuance of a new sign permit.
(b) Temporary signs. Sign permits for temporary signs shall remain in effect for the applicable time period defined in Paragraph 9-106(F)(2) of this Section and be removed immediately upon the expiration of the sign permit or otherwise required time period.
5. Revocation of permit. Any sign permit issued pursuant to this Subsection C of this Section may be revoked or suspended by the Building Commissioner if the holder of the sign permit violates the terms of the sign permit or any other provision of this Section.
6. Final inspection.
(a) Within 14 days following the completion of construction of the sign, the owner shall schedule with the Building Commissioner, or his or her designee, a final inspection of the sign.
(b) If the owner fails to schedule a final inspection, or if Building Commissioner or his or her designee determines at the final inspection that the sign fails to comply with this Section, the Building Commissioner shall have the authority to revoke the sign permit and require that the sign is removed.
(Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
D. SIGN PLANS.
1. Intent. The intent of the regulation of a Minor or Major Sign Plan is to ensure that properties with multiple buildings, buildings with multiple occupants or tenants, and/or a
101 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
building facing more than one right-of-way, to provide signs that are well designed and consistent throughout that building or property, while providing some flexibility in the design of the signs that are approved through a Minor or Major Sign Plan.
2. Applicability. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, an approved Minor or Major Sign Plan shall govern the installation and maintenance of all signs requiring a sign permit on the building or property, or portion thereof, for which the Minor or Major Sign Plan has been approved.
(a) Minor Sign Plan. A Minor Sign Plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for its review and approval in accordance with this Subsection D for:
(i) Any property containing more than one building for which an application has been submitted requesting approval of more than one sign or sign type on that property;
(ii) Any property that has frontage along two or more streets for which an application has been submitted requesting approval of more than one sign type on that property;
(iii)Any multiple tenant building for which an application has been submitted requesting approval of more than one sign type on that building or property; and
(iv) Any property on which directional signs are requested.
(v) Any newly constructed building that contains multiple storefronts with ground floor entrances;
(vi) Any existing building that contains multiple storefronts with ground floor entrances for which a building permit application has been submitted requesting approval of exterior facade improvements in accordance with Section 11-505 of this Code relating to all of the multiple storefronts with ground floor entrances; and
(vii) Any development, new or existing, which is considered a special use in Appendix, Table of Uses.
(b) Major Sign Plan. A Major Sign Plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for its review and approval in accordance with this Subsection D for any development which requires a combination of signs whose quantity, type and/or location that does not otherwise meet the requirements of this Section and is not otherwise classified as a permitted variation in Paragraph 11-403(E)(1) of this Code.
3. Application contents.
(a) An application for approval of a Minor or Major Sign Plan shall include details regarding the design and location of all proposed signs for all signs, including signs where no permit is required.
(b) The Minor or Major Sign Plan shall clearly define the areas of the building or property for which approval of a Minor or Major Sign Plan is requested. At a
102 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
minimum, the following details shall be provided in the application submittal for approval of a Minor or Major Sign Plan:
(i) Sign design, material(s), anchorage and support(s);
(ii) Sign location(s);
(iii)Sign color(s);
(iv) Sign dimensions; and
(v) Method of illumination.
4. Minor Sign Plan Procedures.
(a) Application. An application for a Minor Sign Plan shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph D3 of this Subsection. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, no application for a Minor Sign Plan shall proceed for review by the Community Development Director in accordance with Subsection 11-101(F) of this Code unless he or she has determined that it is in proper form.
(b) Simultaneous Application. Where applicable, an application for approval of a Minor Sign Plan may be filed and reviewed in conjunction with an application for Site Plan Approval, pursuant to Subparagraph 11-504(E)(1) of this Code.
(c) Procedure. Upon determination that the application for a Sign Plan is in proper form, the Community Development Director shall proceed to review said application in accordance with the procedure outlined in this Paragraph 9-106(D)(4) of this Code.
i. Action by Community Development Director. Following receipt by the Community Development Director of a properly completed Minor Sign Plan application, the Community Development Director or his or her designee shall review said application, in terms of the standards established by Paragraph 6 of this Subsection. He or she shall then either approve the Minor Sign Plan as submitted, approve the Minor Sign Plan with conditions, or deny the Minor Sign Plan.
ii. Decision. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of said properly completed application, he or she shall then notify the applicant in writing of his or her decision and forward it to the Building Department. The failure of the Community Development Director to act within said thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision approving the Minor Sign Plan as submitted.
(d) Appeals. Within 45 days following a denial of a Minor Sign Plan by the Community Development Director, the applicant may seek approval of the Minor Sign Plan by filing an application for appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-402 of this Code. Any such appeal shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of this Subparagraph.
(i) Decision. After hearing an appeal of the Community Development Director’s decision on a Minor Sign Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall either:
(a) Approve the Minor Sign Plan and direct the Community Development Director to forward any applicable sign permits to the Building Department if,
103 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
based on the application, the testimony, and other information presented at the meeting, and all other reliable and relevant evidence, documents and information, the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the proposed sign, including illumination plans if applicable, complies and is consistent with the provisions of this Section; or
(b) Deny the Minor Sign Plan if the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the Minor Sign Plan and consideration of the testimony and other evidence presented at the meeting, as well as other reliable and relevant evidence, documents and information reveal that the applicant has not satisfied the conditions of this Section.
(c) The Planning and Zoning Commission’s decision shall be forwarded in writing to the applicant and the Building Department within 30 days of the decision.
(ii) Conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a Minor Sign Plan subject to any conditions the Planning and Zoning Commission shall deem necessary to protect the public welfare and to achieve the purposes of this Section.
5. Major Sign Plan Procedures.
(a) Application. An application for a Major Sign Plan shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph D3 of this Subsection. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, no application for a Major Sign Plan shall proceed to a public meeting until the Community Development Director has first reviewed the said application in accordance with Subsection 11-101(F) of this Code and determined that it is in proper form.
(b) Notice. Notice of the public meeting shall be provided in accordance with the following provisions.
(i) Setting Hearing or Meeting; Time Limitation. Upon determining that the application for a Major Sign Plan is in proper form, the Community Development Director shall fix a reasonable time and place for such meeting before the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such meeting shall be commenced no later than 60 days, and shall be concluded no later than 120 days, unless the applicant shall agree to an extension or unless the hearing or meeting agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission is completely committed during that time.
(ii) Persons Entitled to Notice. Upon the meeting date being set, notice of the public meeting shall be given to the following parties:
(a) To the applicant and to the owner, if the owner is not the applicant, by mail or personal delivery.
(b) To the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and applicable Departments and Officials of the City of Oak Forest, by mail or personal delivery.
(c) To the general public, by posting of the meeting agenda in a physical public place within 48 hours of the meeting date and time as required by what is commonly known as the Open Meetings Act of Illinois (5 Illinois Compiled Statutes/120).
(iii) Content of Notice. Such notice shall include the date, time and place of such meeting, a description of the matter to be heard or considered, and the address or particular location
104 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
of subject property.
(c) Meeting before the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the application at a public meeting duly noticed in accordance with Subparagraph (b) of this Paragraph. At the meeting, the applicant and all interested parties shall have an opportunity to be heard and to present testimony and documentary evidence relating to the proposed signs.
(d) Decision. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall either:
(i) Approve the Major Sign Plan and direct the Community Development Director to forward any applicable sign permits to the Building Department if, based on the application, the testimony, and other information presented at the meeting, and all other reliable and relevant evidence, documents and information, the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the proposed sign, including illumination plans if applicable, complies and is consistent with the provisions of this Section; or
(ii) Approve the Major Sign Plan with conditions and direct the Community Development Director to forward any applicable sign permits to the Building Department if, based on the application, the testimony, and other information presented at the meeting, and all other reliable and relevant evidence, documents and information, the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the proposed sign, including illumination plans if applicable, complies and is consistent with the provisions of this Section; or
(iii)Deny the Major Sign Plan if the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the Major Sign Plan and consideration of the testimony and other evidence presented at the meeting, as well as other reliable and relevant evidence, documents and information reveal that the applicant has not satisfied the conditions of this Section. The Planning and Zoning Commission’s decision shall be forwarded in writing to the applicant and the Building Department within 30 days of the decision.
(e) Appeals. Within 45 days following a denial of a Major Sign Plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant may seek approval of the Major Sign Plan by filing an application for appeal to the City Council in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-402 of this Code. Any such appeal shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of this Subparagraph.
(i) Decision. After hearing an appeal of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s decision on a Major Sign Plan, the City Council shall either:
(a) Approve the Major Sign Plan and direct the Community Development Director to forward any applicable sign permits to the Building Department if, based on the application, the testimony, and other information presented at the meeting, and all other reliable and relevant evidence, documents and information, the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the proposed sign, including illumination plans if applicable, complies and is consistent with the provisions of this Section; or
105 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(b) Deny the Major Sign Plan if the City Council determines that the Minor Sign Plan and consideration of the testimony and other evidence presented at the meeting, as well as other reliable and relevant evidence, documents and information reveal that the applicant has not satisfied the conditions of this Section. The City Council’s decision shall be forwarded in writing to the applicant and the Building Department within 30 days of the decision.
(ii) Conditions. The City Council may approve a Major Sign Plan subject to any conditions the City Council shall deem necessary to protect the public welfare and to achieve the purposes of this Section.
6. Standards. No Minor or Major Sign Plan shall be approved by either the Community Development Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission unless they shall find that the Sign Plan incorporates signs that are:
(a) Unified and consistent throughout the building or property;
(b) Compatible with the design and materials of the building or buildings, and consistent with the area surrounding the building or property;
(c) Not contrary to the intent of this Section;
(d) To be erected and maintained in accordance with the intent of this Section;
(e) In compliance with the standards for sign permits set forth in Section C of this Section;
(f) Reasonably necessary, and the degree of the exception is the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the sign; and
(g) Will not cause adverse effects upon the neighboring properties, or the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
E. GENERAL STANDARDS. The following standards shall apply to all allowed exempt, temporary, and permanent signs and all other signs allowed in accordance with these Sign Regulations.
1. Illumination.
a. Location and Design of Light Source. Whenever an external artificial light source is used for a sign, such source shall be located, shielded and directed so as not to be directly visible from any public street or private residence. No receptacle or device housing a permitted light source for a sign shall protrude more than twelve (12) inches from the face of the sign or building to which it is attached; provided, however, that a receptacle or device housing a permitted light source for a sign may be located more than twelve (12) inches from the face of the sign if such light source is ground mounted, locked in place, and cannot be redirected. Decorative serpentine
106 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
fixtures associated with awnings and canopies which have received Design Review Permit approval may extend beyond twelve (12) inches with approved anchoring and electrical installation by the Building Commissioner.
b. Level of Illumination. In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any internal or external artificial light source, exceed 175-foot candles when measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face at a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of such face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located, shielded, and directed as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent property or streets.
c. Signs Adjacent to Residential Areas. Any illuminated sign located on a lot abutting or across a street from, and visible from, any residentially zoned area shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except that such sign may remain illuminated during such time as the activity to which the sign pertains is open for business so long as such sign is not a public or private nuisance.
2. Design Standards.
a. Visual compatibility. The proposed sign shall be visually compatible with the building or lot on which the sign is proposed to be located and surrounding buildings and structures in terms of height, size, proportion, scale, materials, texture, colors, and shapes.
b. Quality of design and construction. The proposed sign shall be constructed and maintained with high-quality design and materials and a good relationship with the design and character of the neighborhood.
c. Appropriateness to the site. The proposed sign shall be appropriate to its location in terms of design, landscaping, and orientation on the lot, and will not create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, detract from the value or enjoyment of neighboring properties, or unduly increase the number of signs in the area.
d. Sign Colors. No sign face shall employ more than four (4) colors plus black and white, unless otherwise expressly addressed in this Section.
3. Electrical Elements. All wiring, fittings, and materials used in the construction, connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Oak Forest Building Code.
No metal sign illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring and no electrical fixtures attached to any sign shall be lower than nine (9) feet from grade unless it is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site.
4. Structural Elements. The construction and structural components of all signs shall be in
107 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
accordance with the standards and regulations of the Oak Forest Building Code. All permanent signs shall be constructed of fire-resistant materials and shall be capable of withstanding wind pressures of at least thirty (30) pounds per square foot of surface area and of receiving dead loads based on the actual weight of the structure. In no case shall the structural elements of a pylon sign extend above the top of the sign face.
5. Minimum Elevation of Certain Signs. The bottom of every awning, canopy, and wall sign shall be elevated at least eight (8) feet above grade. Whenever possible wall signs on the same façade shall maintain the same top and bottom elevations above grade.
6. Obstruction of Access Ways. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required access way.
7. Obstruction of Window Surface. No sign shall project over, occupy or obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation by any applicable provision of the Oak Forest Building Code.
8. Traffic Safety.
a. Confusion With Traffic Signals. No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape, content, color, or illumination it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign, sign or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
b. Obstruction of Sight Triangles Prohibited. No sign, nor any part of a sign other than a supporting pole or brace no greater than eighteen (18) inches in width or diameter shall be located lower than eight (8) feet from grade within the area of any “sight triangle” as defined in Subsection 12-206(S) of this Code.
9. Signs of Right-of-Way. Except as provided in this paragraph, no sign except governmental signs authorized in this Section shall be placed in or extend into or over any public property or right-of-way.
10. Sign Measurement.
a. Area to be Included. The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless such structure or bracing is made part of the sign face.
b. Area of Signs With Backing. The area of all signs with backing shall be measured by computing the area of the sign backing.
c. Area of Signs Without Backing. The area of all signs without backing shall be measured by computing the area of the smallest regular geometric figures that can separately encompass all words, letters, figures, emblems and other elements of the sign message.
108 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
d. Area of Signs With and Without Backing. The area of all signs formed by a combination of elements with and without backing shall be measured by counting the area of such elements measured in accordance with the foregoing subparagraphs.
11. Signs on Lots With Multiple Users. Where more than one user occupies a zoning lot, the owner of the lot shall be responsible for allocating allowed signs among such users.
12. General Safety. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no sign shall be located in an area or in any manner so as to create a nuisance or a threat to public safety and welfare.
109 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
F. ALLOWED SIGNS.
The sign regulations contained in this Subsection F shall govern all allowed signs, except for those falling under a Subsection G, Special Areas of Control. Where a sign is not allowed in this Subsection F, Subsection G shall allow any and all other sign allowances. Should this Section be in conflict in any way with Subsection G, Subsection G shall apply. The following terms are used in the tables in order to further explain or abbreviate the Sign Regulations.
SFR Single Family Residential
MFR Multi-Family Residential
NR Non-Residential
MU Mixed Use
ROW Right of Way
1. Exempt Signs. Exempt signs do not require a sign permit.
a. General Standards for Exempt Signs.
a. All exempt signs, except for flag signs, shall be non-illuminated unless otherwise stated.
b. All exempt ground signs shall be no closer than five (5) feet from the paved portion of any street or back of curb where no sidewalk is present, no closer than two (2) feet from a sidewalk, and shall be on private property.
c. All exempt ground signs shall not be allowed within any sight triangle, as defined in Section 12-206(S) of this Code.
d. All exempt signs shall be securely anchored to either the ground or building wall to which they are attached so as to withstand weather conditions.
b. Signs Exempt in All Zoning Districts.
a. Political Election or Campaign Sign. In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1-12, as amended from time to time, political election or campaign signs meeting the following requirements are allowed:
1. The sign(s) shall meet all General Standards within 9-106(F)(1)(a) of this Code.
2. The sign(s) shall be located on private properties with permission from the property owner.
3. The sign(s) shall not exceed five (5) feet in overall height when measured from grade.
4. The sign is not above the roof line when located on a building.
5. The number and size of such signs shall meet the requirements as stated in Table 9-106(F)(1)(c) of this Code.
b. Address signs.
1. All address signs may be illuminated in accordance with Section 9-106(E) of this Code.
2. All address signs are allowed in accordance with Section 151.001, International Building Code, and 151.002, International Residential Code, in the Oak Forest Municipal Code, as amended from time to time.
c. Governmental Signs. All governmental signs shall be allowed with a sign permit.
d. Public Utility Signs. All public utility signs shall be allowed without a sign permit.
c. Signs Exempt on Residential Properties. This Subparagraph shall apply to properties which are in a residential zoning district, as defined in Article 3,
110 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Single Family Residential Districts, and Article 4, Multi-Family Residential District, of this Code, and to properties which are in any other zoning district defined in this Code of which are used by a nonconforming use as defined in Article 10, Nonconformities, of this Code. This shall include any non-residential use on properties the zoning districts defined by the aforementioned Articles 3 and 4 of this Code. Any sign not expressly allowed by this Subparagraph (2)(c) of this Subsection (F) or elsewhere in this Section shall be prohibited.
Table 9-106 F.1.c – EXEMPT SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES Sign Type Land Use Max Area (ft2) Number Height (ft) Additional Regulations WALL Integral SFR 1 1 per primary structure 4 (bottom of sign from grade) ---- MFR 3 GROUND
Yard
SFR
6
4 per property
4
 Any combination of yard, post, or fence signs may be used to count toward the total number of allowed ground signs being four (4).
MFR
4 per primary structure Post SFR 6 1 per property 4  Any combination of yard, post, or fence signs may be used to count toward the total number of allowed ground signs being four (4). MFR Refer to Subsection 9-106(G), Special Areas of Control.
Flag
All uses
24 per flag
1 pole per property; 2 flags per pole
Pole height of 15 feet
---- Fence SFR/MFR 6 1 per fence facing public or private ROW 6 feet or no taller than the top of the fence, whichever is less  Any combination of yard, post, or fence signs may be used to count toward the total number of allowed ground signs being four (4).
d. Signs Exempt on All Other Properties. This Subparagraph shall apply to properties which are in all other zoning districts, as defined in Article 5, Commercial Districts; Article 6, Office Districts; Article 7, Industrial Districts; and Article 8, Special Districts; of this Code. The uses of such properties in the aforementioned zoning districts shall be in compliance with Appendix A, Table of Uses. Any nonconforming uses on properties in any of the aforementioned zoning districts shall otherwise adhere to the exempt sign allowances stated in Table 9-106(F)(1)(c) of this Code. Any sign not expressly allowed by this Subparagraph (1)(d) of this Subsection (F) or elsewhere in this Section shall be prohibited.
111 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Table 9-106 F.1.d – EXEMPT SIGNS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES Sign Type Land Use Max Area (ft2) Number Height (ft) Additional Regulations
Window
NR/MU
No more than 25 percent of the total window surface area per elevation facing ROW.
 Window signs, interior neon window signs, and interior illuminated signs shall be included toward the total allowed area. WALL Integral NR/MU 3 1 per primary structure 4 (bottom of sign from grade) ---- GROUND
Yard
NR/MU
6
1 per property; 2 per property with greater than 75 ft. of public ROW
4
---- Flag All uses 24 per flag 1 pole per property; 2 flags per pole Pole height of 15 feet ----
Handheld
NR/MU
--
1
--
 One person may carry one (1) handheld sign of a reasonable size able to be carried for no longer than two (2) hours, three (3) times per day.
 Sign walkers must not obstruct the view or path of travel of any pedestrian or motorist.
 Sign walkers must be no farther than fifty (50) feet from the primary entrance of the building to which they correspond.
 Sign walkers must stay on the private property of the building to which they correspond or on a public sidewalk at all times.
2. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs on properties with residential uses do not require a temporary sign permit. Temporary signs on properties with non-residential uses require a temporary sign permit.
a. Special Circumstances. Special circumstances shall be defined as one-time events occurring on a property for which time limits vary depending on the land use of the property on which the one-time event occurs, as well as the definition of the one-time event. The allowable special circumstances shall be defined as follows:
i. Grand Opening. For the purposes of this Section, “grand opening” shall mean when a new business or other non-residential establishment opens for the first time at a physical location within the city and receives a Certificate of Occupancy. Expansions of tenant spaces are eligible for temporary grand opening signs. The time limit shall be thirty (30) days.
ii. Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Residential Purposes. For the purposes of this Section, “temporary or seasonal use on properties used for residential purposes” shall mean a private residence or group of private residences at a physical location within the city that plans or plan to observe a one-time annual event such as, for example, national or religiously affiliated holiday, which is typically less
112 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
than thirty (30) days. The time limit shall be 45 days or the duration of the use, whichever is less, and may only be three times per calendar year. A seven-day period must lapse between the end of one such use on a property before a subsequent use may take place.
iii. Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Non-Residential Purposes. For the purposes of this Section, “temporary or seasonal use on properties used for non-residential purposes” shall mean a non-residential establishment at a physical location within the city that plans to operate for a specific period of time, or plans to conduct a one-time event for a specific period of time related to their legal conforming use on their property, which is typically less than ninety (90) days. Examples include, but are not limited to, temporary offices, carnivals, and holiday-related retail sales. The time limit shall be thirty (30) days or the duration of the use, whichever is less, and may only be three times per calendar year. A thirty-day period must lapse between the end of one such use on a property before a subsequent use may take place.
iv. Prior to Installing a Permanent Sign. For the purposes of this Section, “prior to installing a permanent sign” shall mean when a business or other non-residential establishment at a physical location within the city is in the process of installing a new permanent sign or signs. A sign permit application for the new permanent sign or signs must be submitted in order to be eligible for a temporary sign permit. The time limit shall be thirty (30) days.
v. Special Event. For the purposes of this Section, “special event” shall mean an event held at a physical location within the City with a valid permit from the city. Special events include, but are not limited to, charitable events and tent sales. The time limit shall be no more than fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of the event and immediately upon the ceasing of the event.
vi. Garage Sale. For the purposes of this Section, the term “garage sale” shall be as it is defined in Subparagraph 9-103(D)(1)(a) of this Code. The time limit shall be no more than 3 days before and immediately upon the termination of the garage sale permit.
vii. Personal Event. For the purposes of this Section, the term “personal event” shall be defined as a personal event or occasion such as a birth, graduation, or other celebration. The time limit shall be fourteen (14) days.
b. General Standards for Temporary Signs.
i. All exempt signs shall be non-illuminated unless otherwise stated.
ii. All exempt ground signs shall be no closer than five (5) feet from the paved portion of any street or back of curb where no sidewalk is present, no closer than two (2) feet from a sidewalk, and shall be on private property.
iii. All exempt ground signs shall not be allowed within any sight triangle, as defined in Section 12-206(S) of this Code.
iv. All exempt signs shall be securely anchored to either the ground or building wall to which they are attached so as to withstand weather conditions.
v. All temporary signs shall be allowed in addition to all signs allowed by Paragraphs (F)(1) and (F)(3) of this Section.
vi. Properties on which a special circumstance is occurring and are used for non-residential purposes cannot install more than two temporary sign types per temporary sign permit.
113 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Table 9-106 F.2.c – TEMPORARY SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES Sign Type Land Use Max Area (ft2) Number Height (ft) Allowed Special Circumstances Additional Regulations GROUND Yard SFR 16 1 per property 6  Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Residential Purposes  Garage Sale  Personal Event
Allowed special circumstances listed in this Table 9-106(F)(2)(c) may occur concurrently. MFR 1 per building
Fence
SFR/MFR
16
1 per individual property’s frontage facing a Primary Street, as identified by Exhibit A of this Section.
6 feet or no taller than the top of the fence, whichever is less
 Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Residential Purposes Inflatable SFR/MFR N/A No limit. 15  Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Residential Purposes
Table 9-106 F.2.d – TEMPORARY SIGNS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES Sign Type Land Use Max Area (ft2) Number Height (ft) Allowed Special Circumstances Additional Regulations Banner NR 32 1 per non-residential establishment  Must not extend above the roofline  Bottom of sign must be at least 8 feet above the ground  Grand Opening  Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Non-Residential Purposes  Prior to Installing a Permanent Sign  Special Event  Shall not cover any window, vent, or other building appurtenance or opening  Shall not warp around the corner of a building.
Yard
NR/MU
16
1 per public or private ROW frontage per property
6
 Grand Opening
 Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Non-Residential Purposes
 Prior to Installing a Permanent Sign
 Special Event
---
114 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
A-Frame Sign NR/MU 6 1 per first floor non-residential establishment entrance 5 Special Circumstances do not apply; daily during hours of operation only; must be removed at the time of business or other non-residential use closing  Must be within eight (8) feet of customer entrance to a building and on a sidewalk.  Must allow for clear passage on sidewalk in accordance with American with Disabilities Act regulations.  Must be renewed annually.
Banner Stand Sign
NR/MU
6
1 per first floor non-residential establishment
5
 Grand Opening
 Temporary or Seasonal Use on Properties Used for Non-Residential Purposes
 Prior to Installing a Permanent Sign
 Special Event
 Must be on a weighted stand within five (5) feet of the primary entrance or no closer than 2 feet from a public sidewalk and be on private property.
 Must allow for clear passage on sidewalk in accordance with American with Disabilities Act regulations. Feather Flags NR/MU 20 Installed in the ground: 1 per 50 ft. of public or private ROW, with each being 50 ft. apart 9  Grand Opening  Prior to Installing a Permanent Sign  Special Event  Must be secured into the ground or on a weighted stand within five (5) feet of the primary building entrance and on a sidewalk.  Must allow for clear passage on sidewalk in accordance with American with Disabilities Act regulations.
Placed near the primary building entrance:
1 per entrance
115 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
e. Primary Streets on which Certain Signs may face public right-of-way. Exhibit A, below, titled City of Oak Forest Primary Street Map, shall identify certain public rights-of-way toward which certain signs may face as allowed elsewhere in this Section 9-106 of the Zoning Ordinance. Any street not explicitly named as a Primary Street shall not be considered a Primary Street. Any properties with frontage on a street or streets not considered a Primary Street shall not have the same allowances as those with a frontage or frontages on a Primary Street, unless otherwise stated.
EXHIBIT A
116 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3. Permanent Signs. Permanent signs require a sign permit. All requirements shall be deemed as maximums unless authorized stated. The following table shall determine which permanent sign types are permitted on which properties by right, by special use permit approval, or not permitted, based on the zoning district of the property of the requested sign permit. Such signs shall only be allowed on properties in the specified zoning districts which are in compliance with Appendix A, Table of Uses, of this Code. On properties which are used for residential purposes in a non-residential zoning district, the requirements for residential zoning districts shall apply. The following terms are used in the table in order to further explain or abbreviate the sign regulations.
S Special use permit required, for review in accordance with 11-504 of this Code
P Permitted by right
-- Not permitted
Table 9-106 F.3 – Permanent Signs as determined by Zoning District Sign Type R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 O1 I1 OS IB
Monument Signs
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Pole Signs
-
-
-
-
-
-
S
S
S
S
P/S
S
S
Electronic Message Centers
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Directional Signs*
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Wall Signs
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Projecting Signs
-
-
-
-
-
-
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Awning and Canopy Signs
-
-
-
-
-
-
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Exceptional & Unique Signs
-
-
-
-
-
-
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
*may require Sign Plan approval if the maximum quantity is exceeded.
a. Monument signs.
i. Materials required. Monument signs shall have a surface or facing of incombustible materials with bases constructed of decorative durable materials, such as brick, stone, or decorative masonry block; provided, however, that structural trim composed of combustible material, may be used.
ii. Secured letters or fixtures. All letters, figures, characters or representations in a cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, and/or superimposed upon any monument sign, shall be safely or securely built and/or attached to the sign structure.
iii. Quantity. One monument sign shall be allowed per street frontage on a zoning lot with 100 or more lineal feet of continuous street frontage.
iv. Height and area limitations. Monument signs shall not exceed a height greater than 10 feet above grade. Monument signs shall not exceed 100 square feet on one side (200 square feet on two sides) in surface area for the first monument sign. Any monument sign beyond the first monument sign shall not exceed fifty-percent the area of the first sign.
v. Location. Monument signs shall be erected no less than two feet from the property line of the subject property on which the sign is erected. Monument
117 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
signs shall not encroach into a sight triangle as defined in Subsection 12-206 of this Code. No monument sign shall be closer than two feet away from any other sign, building and/or structure.
1. Residential districts. Monument signs shall be located near a public, common entrance to the residential development, as approved by a special use permit.
vi. Landscaping. Monument signs shall be landscaped at their base in a manner harmonious with the landscape concept for the whole site. Landscaping shall form an attractive, dense cluster at the base of the sign that is equally attractive in winter and summer. Planting beds shall extend one and a half (1.5) feet from the sign base on all sides. The landscape area shall be curbed at the perimeter when the sign is incorporated into a hard-surfaced parking area. Shrubs or other monument covers shall be a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the height of the base at planting without blocking the sign copy for the purpose to cover or soften the base. If the proposed sign base is visually enhanced, the Community Development Director may grant partial relief of the landscaping requirement.
vii. Electronic message centers.
1. Quantity. One electronic message center per lot may be allowed as a component of any monument sign as an accessory tool to the primary sign provided it meets the standards in this Subparagraph.
2. Area. The electronic message center area shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the area of the monument sign to which it is part. The electronic message center area shall be integrated into the design of the overall monument mounted sign.
3. Design. Electronic message centers must be accessory to the primary monument sign cabinet and are not allowed to be installed above said primary monument sign cabinet.
b. Pole signs.
i. Materials required. Pole signs shall have a surface or facing of incombustible materials. Structural trim composed of combustible material, however, may be used. The pole or poles and other support structures shall be fully enclosed with decorative durable materials, such as brick, stone, or decorative masonry block or metal, and be of a shape other than a cylindrical pole. Ordinary or traditional cylindrical poles shall be prohibited as support structures.
ii. Secured letters or fixtures. All letters, figures, characters or representations in a cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, and/or superimposed upon any ground sign, shall be safely or securely built and/or attached to the sign structure.
iii. Quantity.
1. Lots with Interstate Highway Frontage. On zoning lots which directly front interstate highway right-of-way, or indirectly front interstate highway right-of-way by only being separated by a frontage road, one pole sign shall be allowed per frontage on a zoning lot with 100 or more lineal feet of continuous frontage.
2. All Other Lots. On zoning lots where existing conditions do not provide sufficient space or visibility for the installation of a monument sign in compliance with Subparagraph 9-106(F)(4)(a) of this Subsection, one pole sign shall be allowed with a special use permit per frontage on a zoning lot with 100 or more lineal feet of continuous frontage.
iv. Height limitations. Pole signs shall not exceed the following maximum heights:
1. Lots with Interstate Highway Frontage. Pole signs on zoning lots which
118 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
directly front interstate highway right-of-way, or indirectly front interstate highway right-of-way by only being separated by a frontage road, shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) feet in height from grade to the top of the sign cabinet.
2. All Other Lots. Pole signs on zoning lots which do not directly or indirectly front interstate highway right-of-way as described above in Subparagraph 9-106 F(4)(b)(iii)(1) shall be limited to no more than fifteen (15) feet in height from grade to the top of the sign cabinet.
v. Area limitations. Pole signs shall not exceed 100 square feet on one side (200 square feet on two sides total) in surface area for the first pole sign. Any pole sign beyond the first pole sign shall not exceed fifty percent of the area of the first sign.
vi. Location. The final location of any pole sign shall be a minimum of two feet from all property lines of the subject property on which the sign is erected, including the vertical plane of the cabinet or sign face edge, and comply with the “sight triangle” requirement of Subsection 12-206(S) of this Code. The bottom portion of any pole sign shall be at least 8 feet from the adjoining ground level. The location of the sign shall not obstruct the view of motorists and pedestrians. No pole sign shall be closer than two feet away from any other sign, building and/or structure.
vii. Landscaping. Pole signs shall be landscaped at their base in a manner harmonious with the landscape concept for the whole site. Landscaping shall form an attractive, dense cluster at the base of the sign that is equally attractive in winter and summer. Planting beds shall extend one and a half (1.5) feet from the sign base on all sides. The landscape area shall be curbed at the perimeter when the sign is incorporated into a hard-surfaced parking area. Shrubs or other ground covers shall be at least 25% of the height of the pole sign, or six feet in height, whichever is less, for the purpose to cover or soften the base of the sign. If the proposed sign base is visually enhanced, the Community Development Director may grant relief of the landscaping requirement.
viii. Design. Pole signs shall implement a unique design theme consisting of various shapes and styles.
ix. Electronic message centers. An electronic message center may be allowed as a component of any pole sign subject to special use permit approval. Any electronic message center component as part of a pole sign shall be not displayed lower than 8 feet in height nor higher than 10 feet in height with any departures from these standards subject to a specific special use permit approval condition.
c. Electronic Message Centers.
i. Location.
1. The subject property of the electronic message center sign shall have no less than 100 feet of R.O.W. frontage on which the sign is to be located.
2. The sign is prohibited within 100 feet of a principal residential structure if any part of the sign face would be visible from the principal residential structure.
ii. Display.
1. The copy, logo or display of the sign shall remain static and unchanging for a period of no less than 10 seconds.
2. Anything displayed on the lines of text on the sign shall be displayed monochromatically, and shall not change in color, intensity, brightness, shade or color gradient.
3. The message shall not consist of flashing, scintillating, chasing or
119 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
animated lights, or include animated pictorial graphics.
4. The illumination of the sign shall not exceed an intensity of 0.5 foot-candles as measured with a portable hand-held sensor at either the property line or ten (10) feet from the sign, whichever is lesser.
5. The sign shall incorporate automatic dimmer software or solar sensors with maximum settings of 5,000 nits during daylight and 500 nits between dusk and dawn. If the city finds that the sign causes glare or otherwise impairs the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle, the owner of the sign, within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the city, shall reduce the intensity of the sign to a level acceptable to the city.
iii. Operations.
1. The sign shall only operate between one-half hour before the premises are opened, or 6:00 A.M., whichever is earlier and one-half hour after premises are closed to the public, or 11:00 P.M, whichever is later.
2. If at any time, more than thirty (30) percent of the display lights malfunction or are no longer working, the owner of the sign shall make repairs to the sign within thirty (30) days or the sign will require removal. All electronic message center signs must be equipped with a default mechanism that will stop the messaging or freeze the image in one position when a malfunction in electronic programming occurs.
d. Directional signs.
i. Materials required. Refer to Subparagraphs 9-106 F(4)(a)(i) and F(4)(b)(i).
ii. Secured letters or fixtures. Refer to Subparagraphs 9-106 F(4)(a)(ii) and F(4)(b)(ii).
iii. Quantity. One directional sign shall be allowed per right-of-way frontage on a zoning lot with 100 or more lineal feet of continuous street frontage. One additional directional sign may be allowed in a parking lot accessory to a primary structure and must be located within a landscape island in compliance with Section 9-107 of this Code. Additional signs above what is allowed by this Subparagraph (d) shall require Sign Plan approval.
iv. Height and area limitations. Directional signs shall not exceed a height greater than four (4) feet above grade. Directional signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face.
v. Location. Directional signs shall not be closer than two (feet) to any property line, pavement area, or curb or closer than five (5) feet to any other permanent ground sign. Directional signs must be within five (5) feet of a driveway serving as ingress and/or egress to a right-of-way or within a landscape island compliant with Section 9-107 of this Code.
e. Wall signs.
i. Materials required. Wall signs shall have a surface or facing of incombustible materials; provided, however, that structural trim composed of combustible material, may be used.
ii. Secured letters or fixtures. All letters, figures, characters or representations in a cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to and/or superimposed upon any wall sign, shall be safely or securely built and/or attached to the sign structure.
iii. Placement. Wall signs shall be placed and designed so as to fit within the horizontal and vertical elements of a building. Wall signs must not cover, wholly or in part, any window, door, architectural feature, or opening in a wall. Wall signs must be attached to a wall at a height of not less than 8 feet above ground
120 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
level. Wall signs may only be located on walls parallel to a street, or those which provide a customer pedestrian building entrance parallel to a parking area. Accessory wall signs may also be located on:
1. walls which do not provide a customer pedestrian building entrance but are parallel to a parking area;
2. walls which are parallel to the main point of ingress and egress to a non-residential development; or
3. walls with a secondary customer pedestrian building entrance.
iv. Projection. Wall signs shall not project beyond the end, tip, cornice, or roofline of the wall to which it is attached, nor extend more than six inches in depth from the wall to which they are attached.
v. Height. The vertical dimension of any sign face for a wall sign shall be no more than seven (7) feet; except the vertical dimension of a sign face for an accessory wall sign located under Subparagraph 9-106 F(4)(e)(iii) shall be no more than four (4) feet.
vi. Total maximum area. Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph:
1. no wall sign facing an interstate highway right-of-way may exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area; and
2. no other wall sign may exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area.
vii. Single-tenant buildings or tenant spaces with thirty (30) feet or less of frontage.
1. Total number of wall signs. One wall sign is allowed for each single tenant building or tenant space with thirty (30) feet or less of frontage.
2. Total wall sign width. The width of a wall sign on a single tenant building or tenant space with thirty (30) feet or less of frontage must be no more than seventy-five (75) percent of the total length of the frontage to which it is attached.
viii. Single-tenant buildings or tenant spaces with greater than thirty (30) feet of frontage.
1. Total number of wall signs. No more than one primary wall sign and two accessory wall signs are allowed for a single tenant building or tenant space with greater than thirty (30) feet of frontage. No more than one accessory wall sign may be located under Subparagraph 9-106 F(4)(e)(iii).
2. Total wall sign width. The total width of all wall signs on single-tenant buildings or tenant spaces with greater than thirty (30) feet of frontage shall be no more than fifty (50) percent of the total length of the frontage to which they are attached; however, an accessory sign located under Subparagraph 9-106 F(4)(e)(iii) shall be no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total length of the frontage to which it is attached.
ix. Accessory wall sign area. Accessory wall signs not located under Subparagraph 9-106 F(4)(e)(iii) are limited to twenty (20) percent of the total maximum area allowed.
x. Corner units of multi-tenant buildings, or single tenant buildings on corner lots. When a corner unit of a multi-tenant building or a single-tenant building on a corner lot faces two streets,
1. the total maximum width for wall signs on each frontage is limited to the width allowed for the shorter frontage; and
2. the wall signs on each frontage must be substantially similar.
f. Projecting signs.
i. Area limitations. Except by special permission of the City Council, projecting signs shall be limited in area as follows:
1. Horizontal projecting signs, where the width is greater than height, shall
121 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
not exceed 50 square feet on each side; and
2. Vertical projecting signs, where height is greater than width, shall not exceed 100 square feet on each side.
ii. Thickness limitation. The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting sign shall not exceed 18 inches.
iii. Location of projecting signs. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least 10 feet above the public sidewalk over which it is erected, no more than two feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the point of the sign nearest the wall, and at least one foot from the curb line. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least 15 feet above the public driveway, alley or thoroughfare over which it is erected.
iv. Illumination requirements. Projecting signs may be illuminated every night between sunset and 10:00 p.m. or the close of business day, whichever is earlier, by at least five watts per square foot of sign surface, but in no case less than 60 watts for each sign surface.
g. Awning and canopy signs.
i. Materials; awnings. Awnings may be constructed of cloth or metal; provided, however, all frames and supports shall be of metal. All new awnings shall be subject to review in accordance with Section 11-505 of this Code.
ii. Materials; canopies. Canopies may be constructed of a cloth or metal hood; provided, however, all frames and supports shall be of metal. In the C-3 District, awnings may be made of cloth; provided, however, all frames and supports shall be of metal. All new canopies shall be subject to review in accordance with Section 11-505 of this Code.
iii. Illumination. In all non-residential districts except the C-3 District, awnings may be both internally and externally illuminated subject to all other applicable standards. In the C-3, any illumination must be provided by lighting cast down from above the awning or canopy via decorative serpentine fixtures, subject to review in accordance with Section 11-505 of this Code.
iv. Location of awnings and canopies.
1. Heights above sidewalk; awnings. No portion of an awning shall be less than eight feet above the level of the sidewalk or public thoroughfare over which it is erected.
2. Height above sidewalk; canopies. No portion of a canopy shall be less than nine feet above the level of the sidewalk or public thoroughfare over which it is erected.
v. Setback from curb line. No awning or canopy shall be allowed to extend beyond a point one foot inside the curb line.
vi. Width. No limitation on the width of awnings or canopies. Full compliance with the wind pressure and dead load requirements is required.
vii. Awnings to be rolled. When applicable, awnings shall be rolled or folded against the building wall except when serving as a protection from sun, rain, snow or other inclement weather.
g. Exceptional & Unique Sign. Signs not explicitly covered by this Section may be allowed with Special Use Permit approval only within the context of the following considerations:
i. The sign is integral to or will act as a visual enhancement to the architectural and aesthetic character to the building or lot upon which it is located;
ii. The sign is needed to provide advertising for a specific and unique aspect related to a particular business or lot;
iii. The sign utilizes technology or standards not presently covered by this Section;
122 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
iv. The sign or elements of the sign are not explicitly prohibited under Subsection H of this Section;
v. The sign will not present visual, noise, smell or other nuisance conditions to the surrounding properties or the city as a whole; and
vi. The sign will not impact negatively on the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding properties or the city as a whole.
(Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
G. SPECIAL AREAS OF CONTROL.
Signs on properties within one of the special areas of control listed below shall adhere to the standards of this Subsection G. Properties primarily used for residential purposes within one of the defined special areas of control shall be exempt from permitting requirements. Properties used for any non-residential use or for a combination of residential and non-residential uses shall require a temporary sign permit. All signs on properties within special areas of control shall adhere to the general standards herein. All regulations in this Subsection shall be maximums unless otherwise stated. The following terms are used in the tables in order to further explain or abbreviate the Sign Regulations.
SFR Single Family Residential
MFR Multi-Family Residential
NR Non-Residential
MU Mixed Use
NP (or blank) Not Allowed.
ROW Right of Way
1. General Standards for Special Areas of Control.
a. All signs shall be non-illuminated unless otherwise stated.
b. All ground signs shall be no closer than five (5) feet from the paved portion of any street or back of curb where no sidewalk is present, no closer than two (2) feet from a sidewalk, and shall be on private property.
c. All ground signs shall not be allowed within any sight triangle, as defined in Section 12-206(S) of this Code.
d. All signs shall be securely anchored to either the ground or building wall to which they are attached so as to withstand weather conditions.
e. All signs allowed by this Subsection shall be in addition to the number of signs authorized by Subsection H of this Section.
f. A-frame signs shall not be allowed for use during in climate weather conditions.
2. Properties for sale or lease. Yard or post signs meeting the following requirements shall be allowed on real property which is actively being offered for sale or for lease:
123 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Table 9-106 G.2 – Properties for sale or lease Land Use Sign Face Area (ft2) Number Sign Height (ft) Additional Regulations
SFR
6
1 per public or private ROW frontage
6
MFR
16
1 per primary structure, per public or private ROW frontage
6
 Must be made of durable, non-combustible material.
NR/MU
3. Properties with model homes. The following sign types meeting the following requirements shall be allowed on real property which is actively registered with the City Clerk’s office as a model home or model unit. All signs must be removed at the time of expiration of the model home or model unit registration.
Table 9-106 G.3 – Properties with model homes or units Land Use Sign Type Area (ft2) Number Height (ft) Additional Regulations
SFR
Feather Flag
15
2 per property
7
 A-Frame signs shall only be displayed during daily hours of operation.
 Feather flag signs must be secured into the ground or on a weighted stand within five (5) feet of the primary entrance.
 Non-illuminated attention-getting devices are allowed.
A-Frame
6
1 per property
5
Yard or Post
16
1 per property
6
MFR
Feather Flag
20
2 per building
9
A-Frame
6
1 per primary entrance to the building
5
Yard or Post
16
1 per building
6
MU
Feather Flag
20
2 per building
9
A-Frame
6
1 per primary entrance to the leasing office
5
Yard or Post
16
1 per building
6
124 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
4. Properties undergoing construction. Yard or post signs meeting the following requirements shall be allowed on real property which has an active and open building permit with the Building Department. All signs shall be removed immediately upon receiving a Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Commissioner.
Table 9-106 G.4 – Properties undergoing construction Land Use Sign Type Area (ft2) Number Height (ft) Additional Regulations
SFR
Fence
12
1 per property
4
 Fence signs shall adhere to the height maximum herein, or not exceed the top of the fence to which they are attached.
Yard or Post
MFR
Fence
12
1 per building
4
Yard or Post
NR/MU
Fence
32
1 per property
7
Yard or Post
H. MAINTENANCE AND GENERAL SIGN PROHIBITIONS.
1. Maintenance Standards.
(a) Safety. The owner or operator of a sign and the owner of the lot on which the sign is located shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain the sign(s), including its (their) illumination sources, in compliance with this Section and all applicable laws, in a safe, secure, neat and orderly condition, and in good working order, at all times.
(b) Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. The owner or operator of a sign and the owner of the lot on which the sign is located shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain the sign, including normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement of non-bearing sign elements and electrical wiring and fixtures which may be performed on any sign. This shall include prevention of development of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the physical appearance of the sign. However, any repair or replacement shall, whenever possible eliminate or reduce any nonconformity in the element being repaired or replaced and provided further, however, that this Paragraph (H) of this Section shall not override the authority of this Section. The area around any ground sign shall be kept clean and free of all rubbish, overgrown grass, other overgrown and poorly maintained landscaping, and weeds.
(c) Sign Face Changes. Provided that the sign is otherwise in compliance with this Subsection H as determined by the Building Commissioner and is a legal conforming sign, sign face changes may be completed without a sign permit. Sign face changes on signs which are considered nonconforming, as determined in Paragraph (I)(2) of this Section 9-106 of the Code, may be completed upon review by the building commissioner to ensure that the sign structure is not altered, enlarged, or moved.
125 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
2. General prohibitions.
(a) No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected, relocated or maintained in a manner so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(b) No sign or other advertising structure shall:
(i) Obstruct free and clear vision at any street intersection;
(ii) Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its position, shape or color; or
(iii)Make use of the words "STOP," "LOOK," "DRIVE-IN," "DANGER" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that interferes with, misleads or confuses pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(c) No sign or other advertising structure shall be allowed to constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate design, construction, repair or maintenance.
(d) No signs may have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights, or other illuminating devices, which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color; rotating beams, beacon or flashing illumination resembling an emergency light.
(e) No sign or other advertising structure shall display any matter in which the dominant theme of the material, taken as a whole, appeals to a prurient interest in sex, or is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social value.
(f) No sign or other advertising structure shall be painted on or attached to a motor vehicle used primarily for the display of the sign. This Section shall not prohibit the identification of a business and/or its products or services on those vehicle(s) owned and operated by the business and parked or located in a manner appropriate to the normal course of business.
(g) No sign or other advertising structure shall have visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, except for the movable hands of street clocks, or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means.
(h) No sign designed to be moved from place to place (freestanding or on wheels), that is not otherwise permanently affixed to the ground, a building or other permanent structure shall be allowed, unless other explicitly allowed in this Section.
(i) No signs attached to trees, public utility poles, standpipes, gutter drains or fire escapes, other than warning signs issued by government officials or public utilities, shall be allowed.
126 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(j) No neon tubing or illuminated tubing shall be allowed on any sign, building, fence, or other permanent or temporary structure or on the interior of any window, unless otherwise allowed as an interior illuminated sign or interior neon sign in this Section.
(k) No streamers, posters, ribbons, balloons, lights bulbs, light bands, spinners, attention-getting devices that move, blink or flash signs shall be allowed.
(l) No signs or decorative elements shall be allowed on roofs.
(m) Signs which are painted directly onto an exterior wall of any building, structure, fence, or sign are prohibited.
(n) No sign or other advertising structure shall be illuminated with lights, which glare into or upon the surrounding area of any residential premises or distract operators of vehicles and/or pedestrians accessing and/or using the public right-of-way.
(o) Any sign comprised of plywood or similar material is prohibited.
(p) No sign, except governmental and public utility signs authorized in this Section, shall be placed in or extend into or over any public property or right-of-way.
(q) The erection of billboard shall be prohibited. Existing billboards must comply with the requirements of Section I of this Section. (Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
I. NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
1. Authority to Continue. Except as provided in Subsection F of this Section, any lawfully existing nonconforming sign may be continued so long as it otherwise remains lawful, subject to the regulations contained in Subsections B through E of this Section.
2. Alteration, Enlargement, Moving. No nonconforming sign shall be changed or altered in any manner that would increase the degree of its nonconformity; be enlarged or expanded; be structurally altered to prolong its useful life; or be moved in whole or in part to any other location where it would remain nonconforming. A change in sign message that does not otherwise violate the provisions of this Code shall not be deemed to be prohibited by this Subsection.
3. Change of Sign. A nonconforming sign that has been changed to eliminate its nonconformity, or any element of its nonconformity, shall not thereafter be change to restore such nonconformity or nonconforming element.
4. Damage or Destruction. Any nonconforming sign, or any nonconforming element of a sign capable of change or discontinuance separate from other elements of the sign, damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of 35 percent (35%) or more of its replacement cost of the current assessed value shall not be restored but shall be removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this Code.
5. Termination of Certain Signs.
127 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
a. Signs subject to Immediate Termination. The following nonconforming signs, or sign features, shall be terminated within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Code by removal of the sign or by alteration of the sign to eliminate the specified feature:
i. Attention-getting devices
ii. Moving or animated signs, except governmental signs or public utility signs as allowed by Subsection F of this Section.
iii. Portable signs, excluding A-frame or sandwich board signs and banner stand signs as allowed in accordance with Subsection F of this Section.
iv. Temporary signs, except as expressly allowed by Subsection F of this Section.
v. Any sign on a tree or utility pole, whether on public or private property.
vi. Any sign on public property, except governmental or public utility signs authorized in Section 9-106 of this Code.
vii. Any sign constructed or erected without a valid permit.
viii. Any other sign expressly prohibited by Paragraph (H)(2) of this Section or not otherwise expressly allowed by this Section.
b. Termination of obsolete signs. No sign or other advertising structure shall advertise a business or product which is no longer in existence on the premises where a sign is located. Any such sign which is not in conformance with this Section on which property the previous use has ceased operation shall be immediately taken down and removed from the subject property.
c. Termination by abandonment.
i. Any nonconforming sign that is not used for a period of 30 consecutive days, regardless of any intent to resume or to not abandon the use shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Every sign shall be immediately removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this Section.
ii. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section I, any period of discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes, material shortages, or “acts of God,” and without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this Section I.
d. Termination by change of business ownership. Any nonconforming sign advertising identifying or pertaining to a business on the premises on which it is located shall be terminated upon any change in the ownership or control of such business.
e. Special provisions regarding nonconforming billboards. It is the policy of the city to avoid unnecessary and costly litigation resulting from requiring removal of a nonconforming billboard. The following procedures have been adopted to provide for a negotiated, mutually beneficial, cost-effective method of removing, or otherwise bringing into compliance with the provisions of this division, nonconforming billboards.
128 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
i. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section I or elsewhere in this Section, an owner or operator of a nonconforming billboard shall not be subject to the amortization or other nonconforming use provisions of this Section.
ii. A nonconforming billboard shall be removed upon:
1. The recommendation of the Community Development Director to the City Council; and
2. The City Council approving the recommendation by resolution duly adopted.
iii. An owner or operator of a nonconforming billboard required to be removed under this division (4) shall receive a written notification from the Community Development Director that his, her or its billboard has been designated for removal and shall be asked to declare the value of the billboard in writing from an independent licensed appraiser. The notification shall not be deemed a final administrative action, nor shall it be deemed a final order, but shall only serve to begin a negotiated process for removal of a nonconforming billboard.
iv. The city will use the appraisal as a basis for preparing an amortization agreement that will establish a period of time that the billboard may remain in operation and, as appropriate, a cash settlement payable at the end of the amortization period. The owner or operator shall cooperate in the negotiations to arrive at an agreed upon amortization and, as appropriate, cash settlement for removal of a nonconforming billboard.
v. In the event that the city and owner or operator of a billboard cannot agree to the terms of an amortization agreement, the city shall reserve the right, but have no obligation to, seek the condemnation of a nonconforming billboard in a court proceeding.
vi. An amortization agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Cook County Recorder against the lot upon which the nonconforming billboard is located. (Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
J. UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
1. Should the Building Commissioner determine a sign or other advertising structure is in violation of the provisions of this Section, thus becoming a prohibited sign, Building Commissioner or his or her designee shall give written notice to the permittee and/or the owner of the property upon which the structure is located.
2. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to fully comply with the provisions set forth in this Section within ten days after the notice, the Building Commissioner may undertake the removal or alteration as is necessary to bring the structure into compliance and assess the removal or alteration costs to the permittee or owner.
3. The Building Commissioner may cause any sign or other advertising structure which presents an immediate peril to person or property to be removed or altered immediately and without notice. (Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
K. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not affect the other
129 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
provisions, or application thereof, of this Section which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Section are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
L. PENALTY.
1. Any person violating any provision of this Section for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of the City of Oak Forest Code of Ordinances.
2. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to any fee, deposit, charge, surcharge, interest, insurance or bond requirement or equitable remedy provided in this Zoning Code.
3. Whoever violates the provisions contained herein may, in addition to the penalty provided above, be imprisoned not more than six months and have his or her business license suspended or revoked. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2381, Ch. 2 (part), passed - -1999)
4. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of the Zoning Code is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for a criminal violation. The violation shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000 and/or six months in jail, and if an injunction must be sought, attorneys' fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the sexually oriented business. (2000 Code, § 17.44.040) (Ord. 2420 § 4, passed - -1999)
5. Any person or corporate entity violating any of the provisions of Sections A through P of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, be subject to a $750 fine. For the purposes of this Section, each day the violation is committed, or allowed to continue, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-11-0068O, passed 11-28-2006)
130 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART I-D BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
9-107: BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
A. General Landscaping and Maintenance Requirements. Except for accessory uses expressly permitted to be located in required yards, all yards and open space between and about structures and off-street parking and loading areas and lots shall be landscaped and kept free of accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse, debris and other unsightly or nuisance-creating materials. All landscaping shall be continually maintained by the owner or other person responsible for maintenance of the premises, and all planting areas shall be kept free of weeds. Undeveloped areas shall be mowed and kept free of accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse, debris and other unsightly or nuisance-creating materials until developed. Developed areas shall be maintained in compliance with all site plans and landscaping plans approved pursuant to the Code, and all buffers and landscaping shall be maintained and replaced in accordance with such plans.
B. Foundation Landscaping
1. Scope.
(a) General. The requirements of this Subsection B shall apply in all districts other than (i) single-family residential districts, (ii) multiple family residential districts where only single family detached dwellings are developed, (iii) the I1 Industrial District and (iv) the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area. The provisions of this Subsection B shall not apply to buildings developed prior to August 16, 1999.
(b) Exception for Inadequate Growing Conditions. If the Community Development Director determines that a building has no areas with adequate growing conditions to support a healthy foundation landscaped area, such building shall be exempt from the requirements of this Subsection B.
2. Area Required.
(a) Width. Each principal and accessory building shall have a landscaped area located along the foundation of each building with a minimum width of ten (10) feet when the building height is more than the lesser of three stories or 35 feet, and a minimum width of five (5) feet when the building height is less than the lesser of three stories or 35 feet. All such minimum widths shall be measured from the edge of the building.
(b) Distance. The landscaped area shall be provided abutting each building and any attached structures, including decks and terraces, for a combined distance of not less than fifth (50) percent of the exterior perimeter of each such building and any attached structures, including decks and terraces.
3. Plant Materials Required. All such landscaped areas shall contain any combination of shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreen trees, shrubs, flowering
131 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
plants, ground cover plants, and other native or ornamental grasses and plants. All areas adjacent to a building or structure that are not paved and not otherwise landscaped as required by this Subsection shall be sodded and maintained with a grass cover or other plant material.
4. Design. All such landscaped areas shall be designed to meet the following standards, as applicable to the lot:
(a) screening from view any mechanical equipment, air conditioning units and other equipment not located within the building; service areas; and loading docks;
(b) provide visual relief along large expanses of building walls and accent building entrances and architectural features; and
(c) enhance walkways, entrances, outdoor seating areas, and other pedestrian areas.
C. Parking Lots and Garages.
1. Parking Lot Screening.
(a) Every parking lot visible from a right-of-way or any public or private street shall, to the extent hereinafter specified, be buffered and screened for a height of not less than two (2) to three (3) feet above grade. Visibility from the right of way needs to be considered for security purposes.
(b) Every parking lot adjoining any lot located in any residential district, the Institutional Buildings District, or the Open Space District shall be screened from view from any office, commercial or industrial district lot for a height of not less than six (6) feet above grade.
(c) Location and Materials. All parking lot screening required by this Section shall be located between the edges of the parking lot and the property line and be no less than three (3) feet in width.
2. Parking Lot Interior Landscaping.
(a) Trees. In addition to the requirements set forth in Paragraph A above, every parking lot containing ten (10) or more parking spaces shall contain at least one (1) tree, of three (3) inches or greater in diameter, for each eight (8) parking spaces provided.
Such trees may be provided by the preservation of existing trees or the planting of new trees and shall be planted at a sufficient distance from each other for healthy growth based on current standards generally observed by professionals in the arboriculture, forestry, landscaping, and landscape architecture professions. No existing or new tree located more than five (5) feet outside the perimeter of the paved parking area shall be counted in meeting the requirements of this Paragraph. More than fifty (50%) percent
132 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
of the trees required by this Paragraph shall be located in landscaped islands within the interior of the paved parking lot.
(b) Relief. A parking lot, new construction or existing, with site constraints may ask for relief from the subsection, 9-107.C.2.a, but shall provide as many trees it is seeking relief from planting to the city in lieu of. Each tree must meet the specifications and standards set forth in these guidelines and the city code of ordinances. Such relief shall be granted through the design review process.
(c) Other Requirements. All islands shall be generally dispersed throughout the interior of the parking lot and shall be not less than one hundred (100) square feet in area and shall be of such dimensions that shall support the healthy growth of trees and other landscaping therein, based on current standards generally observed by professionals in the arboriculture, forestry, landscaping, and landscape architecture professions. All such islands, created curbs or other traffic flow regulators shall be landscaped with shrubs, flowering plants, ground cover plants, sodded lawn or mulch. No material in islands interior to parking lots other than trees shall be more than thirty (30) inches in height above adjacent pavement.
3. Parking Garage Design. Every parking garage, other than garages accessory to single family dwellings, constructed after the effective date of this Code shall comply with the following design standards:
(a) The exterior walls of the garage shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height.
(b) The exterior surface of the garage shall be constructed of the same materials as, or materials architecturally and aesthetically compatible with, the principal building to which it is accessory.
(c) The foundation landscaping requirements of this Section 9-107.
D. Loading Spaces. Every loading space visible from any lot zoned for residential use, whether or not such residential use is within the City, shall, except as necessary for access, be screened on all sides visible from any such lot by an opaque fence (but not including chain link fences), wall or densely planted evergreen hedge of not less than six (6) to eight (8) feet in height.
E. Perimeter Landscaped Open Space. Except as expressly provided otherwise in the district regulations requiring a perimeter landscaped open space, all required perimeter landscaped open space shall extend along the entire length of the lot line in question and shall have a width equal to fifteen (15) feet or the depth of the yard required along the lot line in question, whichever is greater. Such space shall be broken only by required access drives. Such space shall be suitably surfaced with grass, groundcover or decorative paving material, or a combination thereof; shall contain landscaping such as
133 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ornamental trees and shrubs or appropriate screening devices such as decorative walls, fences (but not including chain link fences) or berms, or a combination thereof. The landscaping and screening treatment of such space shall be so designed and maintained as to preserve unobstructed vision of the street and sidewalk at points of access and as not to interfere with, or be damaged by, work within any public or utility easement unless the Community Development Director shall determine that no other location is reasonably feasible.
F. Special Protective Requirements for Non-Dwelling Uses Abutting Residential Use. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 9-107, in any case where a lot to be devoted to any use other than a dwelling abuts or is across a right-of-way from any lot zoned for residential use, whether or not such lot is within the City, the use and development of the lot to be devoted to the non-dwelling use shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Special Building Setback for Buildings Over fourteen (14) Feet in Height. All buildings over fourteen (14) feet in height shall be set back from any front or corner side yard line facing a residential district a distance equal to the setback normally required or to the front yard required in the adjacent residential district, whichever is greater, and from any other yard line a distance equal to the yard normally required or 25 feet, whichever is greater.
2. Special Landscaping and Screening of Special Front and Corner Side Setbacks. Any front or corner side yard setback required pursuant to Paragraph 1 above shall be treated as a perimeter landscaped open space.
3. Special Landscaping and Screening from Residential Uses and Districts. Any side or rear lot line, and all lot lines of any industrial use, abutting a dwelling use or a residential district shall be buffered by a perimeter landscaped open space of at least five (5) feet in width along such lot line, which shall be sufficient to provide a total visual screen at least six (6) feet in height along the entire length of such line. Industrial uses abutting or across a right-of-way from any lot zoned for residential use shall, in addition to the other requirements provided in this Paragraph, be screened by an eight (8) foot fence (but not including chain link fences) located within the perimeter landscaped open space.
4. Additional Perimeter Open Space for Outdoor Activity Areas. Any area of permitted outdoor activity likely to produce visual or auditory disturbance or annoyance on any abutting residential lot whether or not located within the City shall be separated from said lot by a perimeter landscaped open space at least twenty (20) feet wide or by a buffer found by the Community Development Director to be reasonably sufficient to create a visual barrier, to absorb and diffuse noise, and to ensure the private enjoyment of said lot.
5. The provisions of this Subsection 9-107 F shall not apply to any use established prior to the effective date of this Code.
G. Enclosure of Uses Required. Except where otherwise expressly authorized by this Code, all permitted uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure.
134 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
H. Roof Top Mechanical Equipment. Except for antennae mounted on roofs pursuant to the provisions of this Code, all mechanical equipment located on the roof of any building constructed after the effective date of this Code shall be fully screened by a parapet wall or other screening structure constructed of materials compatible with the principal building façade to the height of such equipment.
I. Refuse Containers; Outdoor Storage.
1. Screening. All refuse containers and all areas permitted outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a screening fence (but not including chain link fences), wall or densely planted evergreen hedge of a height sufficient to screen such containers or storage areas from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets.
2. Location. No refuse containers or storage areas shall be located between any principal structure and either its front or corner side lot line.
3. Exemptions. The requirements of Paragraph 1 hereof shall not apply to standard receptacles permitted for use by single family dwellings or to receptacles accessory to schools. None of the requirements of this Subsection shall apply to receptacles placed and maintained for use by the general public to avoid littering or to receptacles temporarily placed on construction sites for the purpose of collecting construction debris.
J. Screening and Landscaping Within Sight Triangles. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no landscaping, fencing or other screening shall be erected or maintained at a height in excess of two and one-half (2 ½) feet within the area of any sight triangle as defined in Subsection 12-206 of this Code.
K. Fences and Walls.
1. When located in a required yard, fences shall be installed with the finished side facing the neighboring property.
2. Barbed wire fencing shall not be used, except in the I1 – Industrial District where necessary for safety measures.
3. Except where a greater height is expressly authorized for screening purposes pursuant to this Section or when all fences and walls erected as a permitted obstruction in any required yard shall be subject to the following height limitations:
Location
Maximum Height of Fence
Single Family Residential Districts
The corner side yard of a lot, except when the fence is determined to negatively impact the safety or aesthetics of the streetscape
6 feet
The corner side yard of lot, safety and aesthetic impact
3 feet
All other yards when abutting a residential use
6 feet
All other yards when abutting a nonresidential use
8 feet
135 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
All Other Districts
Front and corner yards
3 feet
All other yards
8 feet
PART II - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS FOR PARTICULAR USES
9-201: PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES
A. Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section 9-201, all uses and structures are subject to the following standards, regulations, and requirements at all times in those zoning districts in which they are permitted or special permit uses.
B. Location. Personal wireless services antennas shall be located on lawfully pre-existing antenna support structures or other lawfully pre-existing buildings or structures wherever possible. No special use permits authorizing construction of a new antenna support structure or addition to or expansion of an existing antenna support structure or existing building or structure shall be authorized unless the applicant is able to demonstrate that no lawfully pre-existing antenna support structure or lawfully pre-existing building or structure is available, on commercially reasonable terms, and sufficient for the location of an antenna necessary for the provision of personal wireless services.
C. Design of New Antenna Support Structures for Co-Location. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council for good cause shown every new personal wireless services antenna support structure of a tower design shall be designed, constructed and installed to be of a sufficient size and capacity to allow the location of additional personal wireless services antennas to accommodate at least one additional personal wireless service provider on such structure in the future. Any special permit for such a support structure may be conditioned upon the agreement of the applicant to allow co-location of other personal wireless service providers on commercially reasonable terms specified in such special permit.
D. Tower Design. Every new personal wireless services antenna support structure that is of a tower design shall:
1. Be a monopole rather than latticework, unless otherwise authorized by the City Council for good cause shown;
2. Not be illuminated or have any signs installed thereon unless otherwise required by federal law or regulations; and
3. Be separated from any principal building by a distance that is not less than 110 percent of the height of the tower. For the purposes of this requirement, this distance shall be measured horizontally from the center of the base of the supporting structure of the tower to the point where the ground meets a vertical wall of such principal building.
Any deck on such a tower shall be centered on the tower and the radius from the center of the tower to the outside of the deck shall not exceed six feet. Each side of the deck shall not exceed six feet vertically.
136 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
E. Antennas on Buildings. Antennas that are installed are to conform with one of the following:
1. Such antennas shall be located only on a lawfully pre-existing building and shall not exceed the following dimensions:
(a) Omni-directional or whip antennas shall not exceed six (6) inches in diameter and twelve (12) feet vertically; and
(b) Directional or panel antennas shall not exceed three (3) feet horizontally and six (6) feet vertically;
or
2. Such antennas and any necessary antenna support structure are fully enclosed or shielded from view from any point located off the zoning lot on which they are located by a structure otherwise permitted on the zoning lot and all electronic equipment is fully enclosed in a structure otherwise permitted on the zoning lot.
All such antennas shall not exceed the maximum height authorized by applicable zoning district regulations, and shall not extend above the highest point of the building or structure to which they are attached or more than two (2) feet from the exterior of any wall or roof of the building to which they are attached. In no event shall a total or more than six (6) antennas of the types and sizes described in Paragraph 1 of this Subsection be located on any building in the C-3 District.
F. Color. Every personal wireless services antenna and antenna support structure shall be neutral colors that are harmonious with, and that blend with, the natural features, buildings and structures surrounding such antenna and antenna support structures; provided, however, that directional or panel antennas and omnidirectional or whip antennas located on the exterior of a building that will also serve as an antenna support structure shall be of colors that match, and cause the antenna to blend with, the exterior of the building.
G. Landscaping and Fencing. In addition to any other applicable requirements of Section 9-107 of this Code, all ground-mounted antennas, antenna support structures, related electronic equipment and equipment enclosures shall be subject to the following:
1. In order to minimize the visibility of such facilities, a natural screen or fence shall be erected if not already provided, so as to provide the maximum reasonable achievable screening as determined by the Community Development Director.
2. Any natural screen shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height when planted, with dense plantings spaced no more than two (2) feet apart.
3. Any fence shall be a minimum of four feet in height, except where fence height is otherwise limited by Section 9-107 of this Code, and shall be of a style of construction that provides a visual shield of the facilities.
137 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
H. Protection Against Climbing. Every personal wireless services antenna and antenna support structure shall be protected against unauthorized climbing or other access by the public.
I. Equipment Enclosures. All electronic and other related equipment and appurtenances necessary for the operation of any personal wireless services antenna shall, whenever possible, be located within a lawfully pre-existing structure or completely below grade. When a new structure is required to house such equipment, such structure shall be harmonious with, and bled with, the natural features, buildings and structures surrounding such structure. Any free-standing structure that is not attached to or within an existing building or located completely below grade shall not exceed a maximum heights of fifteen (15) feet.
J. Licenses and Permits. The operator of every personal wireless services antenna shall maintain all licenses and permits required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of such antenna. In addition, any such operator shall provide copies of such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof, when requested by the Community Development Director.
K. Compliance with Plans. Every personal wireless services antenna and antenna support structure shall comply with all plans approved by the City.
L. Limited to Applicant. Every ordinance granting approval of a special permit for a personal wireless services antenna or antenna support structure shall state that any assignment or transfer of the special permit or any of the rights thereunder may be made only with the approval of the City Council.
M. Term Limitation. Every ordinance granting approval of a special permit for a personal wireless services antenna or antenna support structure may provide that:
1. where the provider of personal wireless services is not the owner of the land on which such antenna or structure is located, the term of the special permit is limited to the term of the lease or other agreement granting rights to use the land; and
2. the special permit shall be subject to review by the City Council, at ten year intervals, to determine whether the technology in the provision of personal wireless services has changed such that the necessity for the special permit at the time of its approval has been eliminated or modified, and whether the special permit should be modified or terminated as a result of any such change.
Abandonment and Removal. When one or more antennas, an antenna support structure, or related equipment are not operated for the provision of personal wireless services for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or more, such antenna, antenna support structure, or related equipment may be deemed to be abandoned by the City. The owner of such an antenna, antenna support structure, or related equipment shall remove such items within ninety (90) days following the mailing of written notice that removal is required. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt required, by the City to such owner at the last known
138 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
address of such owner. If two or more providers of personal wireless services use the antenna support structure or related equipment to provide personal wireless services, then the period of non-use under this provision shall be measured from the cessation of operation at the location of such antenna support structure or related equipment by all such providers.
9-202: AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIPS (NEW & USED)
A. Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section 9-202, all uses and structures are subject to the following standards, regulations, and requirements at all times in those zoning districts in which they are permitted or special permit uses.
B. Location. Automobile dealerships shall be located on a zoning lot with a minimum lot frontage of 160 feet and a minimum lot area of one (1) acre, or 43,560 square feet. No special use permits authorizing construction of an automobile dealership, the addition to or expansion of an existing automobile dealership, or renovation of an existing structure to be used as an automobile dealership, shall be authorized unless the applicant is able to demonstrate compliance with the minimum area requirement of this paragraph and of the remaining requirements of this Section 9-202, on commercially reasonable terms, and sufficient for the location of an automobile dealership (new or used) for the provision of automobile sales. Additionally, automobile dealerships shall not be located on either side of Cicero Avenue as bound by 155th Street, to include the first zoning lots on either side of Cicero Avenue directly north of said street, and the centerline of 160th Street to the south.
C. Design of Outdoor Storage of Automobile Inventory. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council for good cause, every automobile dealership shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be of a sufficient size and capacity to allow the placement of automobiles in an organized manner that accommodates adequate circulation and provides for a reasonable amount of inventory on the zoning lot, subject to the requirements stated in Paragraph 9-202(D).
D. Design Standards for Parking. Every automobile dealership shall comply with the following design standards, in addition to any other applicable requirements of Sections 9-107 of this Code that these design standards do not otherwise govern. These standards shall take precedence over any other such requirements of this Code that would otherwise apply.
1. Number of parking spaces. The minimum number of parking spaces for automobile dealerships shall be the total of the below required minimums:
(a) For employees and customers: minimum of one (1) space per 250 square feet of net floor area.
(b) For automobile inventory: maximum as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Minimum parking space and circulation dimensions. The minimum requirements below shall apply.
139 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Parking Space Dimensions
PARKING ANGLE
SPACE WIDTH
SPACE LENGTH
SPACE HEIGHT
Parallel
9
22
N/A
30
9
33.6
18
45
9
26.9
12.7
60
9
22.9
10.3
90
9
18
8
Circulation Aisle Dimensions
PARKING ANGLE
ONE-WAY
TWO-WAY
Parallel
12
12
30
12
12
45
13
14
60
18
19
90
20
22
3. Enclosures for automobile inventory. In lieu of meeting the requirement of Subparagraph 9-202(E)(1), this subparagraph shall apply at the discretion of the Community Development Director and as conditioned upon approval of the special permit. In order to provide security for such facilities, parking bollards painted a neutral color, shall be installed along the edge of the parking lot at a minimum of four (4) and one-half (1/2) feet apart along the front and corner side yards and have a minimum height of two (2) feet.
E. Landscaping. Every automobile dealership shall comply with the following landscaping requirements, in addition to any other applicable requirements of Section 9-107 of this Code that these design standards do not otherwise govern. These standards shall take precedence over any other such requirements of this Code that would otherwise apply.
1. Parking lot buffering. All parking lot buffering shall be located between the edges of the parking lot and the property line. Landscape materials shall be installed directly along the edge of the parking lot as deemed appropriate by the Community Development Director.
2.
(a) For properties along 159th Street. Along front and corner side yards, the distance between the interior edge of the sidewalk and edge of the parking lot shall be no less than ten (10) feet. The area designated for the screening shall be no less than four (4) feet in width. The remainder of the area between the interior edge of the sidewalk and edge of the parking lot shall be landscaped with sodded lawn. Where contextually appropriate, the corner side yard parking lot buffering may be reduced to that as required in Subparagraph 9-202(E)(1)(b) of this Section, at the discretion of the Community Development Director.
(B) For properties along Cicero Avenue. Along front and corner side yards, the distance between the interior edge of the sidewalk and edge of the parking lot shall be no less than four (4) feet and shall be designated for
140 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
landscape screening materials. Parking bollards shall be installed in accordance of the requirements of this section.
3. Interior parking lot landscaping. Every automobile dealership containing fifteen (15) or more parking spaces shall contain at least one (1) tree, of at least three (3) inches or greater in diameter, for each ten (10) spaces provided. This number of parking spaces shall consist of the total number of spaces provided for employee and customer parking and the total number of spaces provided for automobile inventory. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required trees, or an amount lesser than as deemed reasonable by the Community Development Director and as conditioned upon approval of the special use permit, shall be located in landscaped islands within the interior of the paved parking lot.
F. Other Standards. In general, automobile dealerships (new and used) shall be designed to accommodate adequate facilities for storm water management, including landscaping, permeable materials, and other infrastructure as deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. Any and all other improvements and their applicable plans shall be submitted for review as deemed necessary by the Community Development Director prior to a public hearing being scheduled.
G. Licenses and Permits. The operator of every automobile dealership shall maintain all licenses and permits required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of the dealership. In addition, any such operator shall provide copies of such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof, when requested by the Community Development Director.
H. Compliance with Plans. Every automobile dealership shall comply with all plans approved by the City.
I. Compliance with Laws. Every automobile dealership shall comply with this Section, and all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
J. Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions. Whenever any automobile dealership (new or used) is made subject to conditions or limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon initially meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the Community Development Director so stating and shall file such affidavit biannually. Such affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the Community Development Director, to recover the City’s actual direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.
K. Term Limitation. Every ordinance granting approval of a special permit for an automobile dealership provide that where the city determines the owner or operator of the automobile dealership is not in full compliance with this section and with any and all conditions required at the time of special use permit approval, the lack of compliance shall be ground for revocation of the special use permit in accordance with paragraph 11-702(d) of this code.
141 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART III - SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES
9-301: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the municipality in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or communication, including sexually oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this Chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution or exhibition of entertainment that is obscene.
9-302: DEFINITIONS
EMPLOYEE shall mean a natural person who performs any service or work on the premises of a sexually oriented business, including but not limited to providing entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. EMPLOYEE does not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS shall mean urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public or employee-only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial purpose. It shall not mean lactation as part of breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant.
MUNICIPALITY shall mean the City of Oak Forest, Illinois.
NUDITY or NUDE shall mean exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device, costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any specified anatomical areas.
PATRON shall mean any natural person who is not an employee.
SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE shall mean exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED AMUSEMENT DEVICE shall mean any machine or device which is designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement or entertainment, and may be operated
142 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, electronic key, credit card, debit card or any similar item, or the use of which is made available for any valuable consideration, and which displays a natural person, people, or characters as in cartoons and animation, live or by any medium, including without limitation film, motion picture machine, projector, filmstrip, videotape, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software, engaged in specified sexual activity or displaying specified anatomical areas.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall mean any of the following when done in a place where the public is invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial purpose including sale and rental, regardless of who pays or receives the consideration therefore, and regardless of the form of consideration:
1. Exhibition or display of a natural person or people in the state of nudity or semi-nudity, or engaged in specific sexual activities, or excretory functions;
2. Premises with a sexually oriented amusement device;
3. Rental or leasing of a hotel room, motel room or similar room for a period not exceeding ten hours, but not including dining rooms, banquet rooms, ball rooms, conference rooms and similar facilities unless they are used or to be used for specified sexual activities or excretory functions;
4. Offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex, when one or more of the persons is nude or semi-nude, and also the offering of physical contact which constitutes specified sexual activities regardless of the sex of the person performing or receiving the contact;
5. Offering of products, services or activities by or with a natural person or people when one or more of the people, whether a patron, agent, employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
6. Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a natural person, or created image or character, as in cartoons and animation, by any medium, including without limitation film, videotape, closed-circuit television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software, which is:
7. Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas;
8. Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas, including without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use of the designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”;
9. The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified
143 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of the specified anatomical areas;
10. The term SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall exclude the following:
(a) The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicide or other non-prescription contraceptives, unless displayed and offered to others on the premises of a business which would otherwise be considered a sexually oriented business;
(b) The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified sexual activities, and which are in fact dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the State of Illinois;
(c) The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified sexual activities if they are displayed and offered to others on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the State of Illinois is employed to dispense prescription drugs, instruments or devices;
(d) Breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant;
(e) The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any format, which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association of America of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed substantially in their entirety;
(f) Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state or local governmental funds;
(g) The display and offering to others of items which would otherwise qualify as a sexually oriented business pursuant to this Section, if and only if the display and offering are done for a commercial purpose, and all of the following apply to the business displaying and offering such items to others:
(i) Less than 20% of its gross income comes from the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items;
(ii) Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof;
(iii) Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination
144 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
thereof, including without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use of the designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”;
(iv) Less than 20% of its display space is used for the sale, rental or exhibition of the items described in paragraph (1)(a) and (b) above;
(v) Less than 20% of the items it offers to others are the items described in subsection (1)(a) and (b) above; and
(vi) The items described subsection (1)(a) and (b) above are segregated from all other displays and retail areas of the premises by a solid partition from floor to ceiling with no openings or windows and with entrance and egress by means of a solid door posted with a sign not less than one foot by one foot with the words “UNDER 18 NOT ADMITTED” lettered on the sign, except that magazines characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof may be displayed on racks or other display cases only if the magazine is encased or otherwise covered up and concealed from common view of anything other than the magazine title or text or other materials which would not be described as sexually oriented.
(vii) Certain uses which fall within the definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS may also constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or federal law, such as obscenity or child pornography. Even if such illegal uses constitute a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS under the definition set forth in this Chapter, they shall not be permitted uses in any district.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS shall mean the human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the female breast if less than a fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by make-up, paint, or similar matter applied directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES shall mean any of the following, actual or simulated:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state of semi-nudity;
2. The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by the use of any portion of manipulator’s body, whether covered or uncovered, or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the person receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
3. Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual;
4. Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
145 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
9-303: SPECIAL USE
Any other ordinance or section of any ordinance notwithstanding, and subject to the setback requirements of Section 9-304, sexually oriented businesses shall be a special use only in the I1 Industrial District. Sexually oriented businesses shall not be a permitted use in any district.
9-304: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
No sexually oriented business shall be located within 450 feet of the property boundary of any other sexually oriented business, and any school, day care center, cemetery, public park including any lineal recreational area like a bike path, public housing, place of religious worship, lot zoned for residential purposes, and lot used for residential purposes.
9-305: RESTRICTIONS ON USE
All sexually oriented businesses shall be conducted entirely within a fully enclosed business. No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation from outside the building of any image, material or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, whether by display, decoration, sign, window or any other means.
9-306: SIGNAGE
No sexually oriented business shall advertise by way of billboard, sign boards or sign, within 450 feet of any school, day care center, cemetery, public park including any lineal recreational area like a bike path, public housing, and place of religious worship.
9-307: OTHER REGULATIONS
The restrictions set forth in this Chapter shall supersede any other restrictions found in other ordinances or other sections of any ordinance as applied to sexually oriented businesses, if the terms of the restrictions are in conflict.
9-308: AMORTIZATION
If at the time this Chapter becomes effective, any sexually oriented business exists in a location not permitted by this Chapter or is otherwise not in compliance with this Chapter, then the sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal non-conforming use. However, notwithstanding any other ordinance or section of any ordinance to the contrary, the legal non-conforming sexually oriented business shall come into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter within one year of the effective date of this Chapter. No sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal non-conforming use after one year after the effective date of this Chapter.
146 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART III - B MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
9-309: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The City has not in the past been a primary location of several massage establishments, investigations have consistently found that the overwhelming majority of massage establishments are legitimate businesses, serving the needs of residents and clients from surrounding communities. However, from time to time, businesses have opened purporting to be massage establishments, only to be found later to be illicit operations that harm the public health, safety, and welfare, as well as casting a negative image for legitimate massage establishment businesses. Therefore, the purpose of Part III B is to ensure that massage establishments are operated in a manner conducive to the public health, safety, and welfare, and to protect and promote the business image of reputable massage therapy establishments.
9-310: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS: ACCESSORY USES
From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, massage establishments shall only be permitted as a special accessory use to a principal use in the following zoning districts: C1, C2 C3 Districts and O1 District.
9-311: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Any person seeking to obtain approval under this Chapter to operate an accessory massage establishment must, in addition to the application and supporting materials filed with the village business office for a business license, provide the following minimum information:
A. Written authorization from principal business operator to apply for approval to operate an accessory massage establishment;
B. Sketch plan of proposed massage establishment depicting, among other things:
1. Number of massage therapy rooms or beds;
2. Reception and waiting area;
3. Bathroom facilities, if different from principal use; and
4. Dimensions of space devoted to massage establishment, including (i) total square footage of such space, and (ii) certification that such space does not exceed 25% of the total gross floor area of the principal business, and
C. Term of any lease or other occupancy arrangement with principal use operator.
147 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
9-312: BULK REGULATIONS
No massage establishment, including, without limitation, any reception area, waiting area, office area, and bathroom, shall occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area of the principal use.
9-313: SPECIAL NON-CONFORMING USE PROVISIONS
A. Any lawfully existing massage establishment operating as a standalone business on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations set forth in Subsection B below.
B. No lawfully existing massage establishment operating as a standalone business on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be permitted to:
1. Extend such use, including its accessory uses, to any structure or land area other than that occupied by such use on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment that causes such use to become nonconforming;
2. Extend such use, including its accessory uses, within a building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Code or any amendment that causes such use to become nonconforming; and
3. An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal hours of operation on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment that causes such use to become nonconforming.
148 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART IV - DESIGN GUIDELINES
9-401: DESIGN REVIEW PERMIT REQUIRED.
Unless a Design Review Permit shall have first been obtained pursuant to Section 11-505 of this Code, no person shall perform, cause, or permit any construction, alteration, remodeling, removal, movement, or demolition of any building, structure, or other improvement of or on any property, and no person shall be entitled to the issuance of a permit authorizing any such work.
For purposes of this Section 9-401, all work described in the preceding sentence shall, collectively, be defined as “Improvement Work.”
A. Exemptions.
1. No Design Review Permit shall be required for Improvement Work related directly to the repair of fire, storm, or other catastrophic damage; provided that the Improvement Work contemplates substantially the same material and configuration as existed prior to the fire, storm, or other catastrophic damage, and is otherwise in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances.
2. No Design Review Permit shall be required for any Improvement Work that is determined to be within the Level I Design Review, as described in Subsection 9-401B of this Code.
B. Modified Design Review Process. The process for securing the issuance of a Design Review Permit for Improvement Work shall be as set forth in Section 11-505 of this Code, except as follows:
1. Applications. All applications for a Design Review Permit for Improvement Work shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for a determination of whether a Level I, Level II, or Level III design review is appropriate and required. The determination of the Community Development Director shall be final unless a written appeal there from is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission, in which case the determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final.
2. Design Review Process Levels.
(a) Level I. The Level I design review is for Improvement Work that consists exclusively or primarily of ordinary and routine maintenance and repair activities that may require a building permit pursuant to the City’s Building Code. Examples of Level I activities include, without limitation, the following: repainting a building or sign exactly as the original; replacing a front door with one similar to the original; replacing light fixtures on the outside of a building with the same type of light fixture; changing the signage on an awning while keeping the awning itself the same; adding window air conditioning units to the rear or side of a building; resurfacing or re-striping a parking lot; replacing a roof, door, or window with the same type of roof, door or window; or replacing or repairing steps with the same
149 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
type of step. The Level I design review shall consist only of written notification to the Community Development Director prior to the commencement of the applicable Improvement Work. The issuance of a Design Review Permit shall not be required for any such Improvement Work.
(b) Level II. The Level II design review is for Improvement Work that consists of either (i) ordinary and routine maintenance or repair activities that would require a building permit pursuant to the City’s Building Code or (ii) minor replacement work activities. Examples of Level II activities include, without limitation, the following: replacing a sign with a different type of sign; replacing a roof, door, or window with a different type of roof, door, or window; adding an awning to a building; replacing an awning with an awning of a different style or material; painting a building or sign with a different color than the original; or replacing steps with a different type of step.
The Level II design review shall consist of review by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the procedures set forth in Subsections 11-505D of this Code; provided that no action by the City Council shall be necessary or required. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have final authority to grant a Design Review Permit with respect to all Improvement Work within the Level II design review.
(c) Level III. The Level III design review is for any and all Improvement Work that, as a result of its substance, detail, scope, and complexity, requires a more comprehensive review than that allowed by a Level I or Level II design review.
The Level III design review shall consist of all of the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 11-505D of this Code.
9-402: BUILDING AND STRUCTURE DESIGN
Applicable to all Commercial and Multi-Family Districts or any new single family construction (Level II), buildings and structures and all major exterior renovations, additions and façade changes shall conform to the following regulations:
A. Buildings and structures shall be consistent with the architectural character, scale and in harmony with the vicinity and of adjacent property.
B. Building materials shall be selected for suitability in the context of the neighborhood. Buildings shall use the same materials or those which are architecturally harmonious for all building walls and other exterior components that are wholly or partially visible from public ways.
C. Building materials shall be of durable quality.
150 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
D. Brick, other masonry materials or other attractive materials approved by the Design Review Committee shall be used for all sides of all non-residential development, multi-family, duplex, townhouse and other non-single family residential dwelling units, and shall be installed per City Building Code specifications. The use of stucco, e.i.f.s (i.e. dryvit), wood, glazed tile or decorative concrete block shall be limited to accent the building.
E. Flat roofs and mansard roofs are discouraged except where such roofs are the predominant style in the neighborhood.
F. Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets shall be consistent in proportion and style with the predominant style of the neighborhood.
G. Exterior lighting should be a part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with the building design.
H. Signs shall be part of the architectural concept and shall conform to the regulations set forth in this Article IX, Part I-C.
I. Color schemes should consider the character and quality of structures in the area. Excessively bright colors should be used only for accent. Materials and colors should withstand the weather for a twenty-five (25) year period.
151 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE X. NONCONFORMITIES
10-101: PURPOSE.
A. This Article regulates and limits the continued existence of uses, structures, including pre-code structures in Section 10-104, lots and signs established prior to the effective date of this Code that do not conform to the regulations of this Code applicable in the zoning districts in which such uses, structures, lots and signs are located.
The zoning districts established by this Code are designed to guide the future use of land within the City by encouraging the development or maintenance of desirable residential, commercial, office and industrial areas with appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses and thus to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The continued existence of nonconformities is frequently inconsistent with the purposes for which such districts are established and thus the gradual elimination of such nonconformities is generally desirable.
B. General Scope and Scheme of Regulation. Separate restrictions are established for nonconforming uses of land and nonconforming uses of structures designed for a permitted use, nonconforming uses of structures not designed for a permitted use, nonconforming “pre-code” structures, nonconforming lots of record, and nonconforming signs. The degree of restriction made applicable to each category of nonconformity is generally related to the degree of incompatibility with permitted uses and the amount of investment typically associated with nonconformities of that type. Pursuant to Section 11-503 of this Code, provision is made for relief from some of the restrictions of this Article where practical difficulties exist.
In the cases of nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming uses in structures designed for a permitted use and nonconforming signs, the degree of incapability is frequently great, the investment is comparatively small and the economic life is short. In these cases, elimination of the nonconformity is required after a relatively short, but reasonable, amortization period. In the case of nonconforming uses in structures not designed for any conforming use, the degree of incompatibility is also frequently great, but so too is the investment and economic life of the structure.
In such cases, while eventual elimination is required, a more extended period is allowed in which to amortize the investment. While the regulations of this Article allow such nonconformities to continue without specific limitation of time, they restrict further investment that would make more permanent their location in inappropriate districts.
C. Exception for Repairs Pursuant to Public Order. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Article prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damages or destroyed structures or signs.
152 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
D. Nonconforming Accessory Uses and Structures. No use, structure of sign that is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after such principal use or structure shall have been terminated, unless it shall thereafter confirm to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
E. Inventories and Certificates of Nonconformity.
1. Burden of Owner to Establish Legality of Nonconformity Burden of Owner to Establish Legality of Nonconformity. The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is lawfully existing under the provisions of this Article shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the City.
2. Inventory and Notice of Nonconforming Uses and Signs Subject to Termination. Within a reasonable time after the effective date of this Code, or any amendment thereto creating new nonconformities, and pursuant to Subsection 11-101 M of this Code, the Community Development Director shall inventory all nonconforming uses and determine the names and addresses of the owners of record thereof and shall also inventory all signs and determine the names and addresses of the owners thereof or, in any case where such a determination is impractical, the owner or lessee of the premises on which such signs is located.
For each such nonconformity inventoried, the Community Development Director shall determine the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the date, if any, on which such nonconformity is required to be terminated pursuant to the provision of this Article.
Upon making such determination, the Community Development Director shall notify the aforesaid owner or lessee in writing of his determination. Such inventory and notices shall be kept on file by the Community Development Director and shall be a matter of public record.
Compilation of the inventory required pursuant to this Paragraph and giving notice pursuant to this Paragraph shall not be deemed conditions precedent to the running of any amortization period specified in this Article, nor shall the failure of the Community Development Director to carry out such tasks in any manner relieve the owner of a nonconformity of his duty to terminate such nonconformity in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
The determinations of the Community Development Director made pursuant to this paragraph shall be subject to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in the same manner as other rulings and interpretations.
3. Certificate of Occupancy for Legal Nonconformities. The owner, or any person receiving notice, of any nonconforming use, structure, lot or sign may at any time apply to the Community Development Director for a Certificate of Occupancy to confirm the legality of such nonconformity as of a specified date. Such application shall be filed and processed pursuant to the provisions of Section 11-402 of this Code.
153 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Any person receiving a notice of a nonconforming use or sign pursuant to Paragraph E2 above shall be required, within sixty (60) days of the receipt of such notice, to apply to the Community Development Director for such a Certificate of Occupancy with respect to the nonconformity identified in said notice. Unless an appeal from the determination of the Community Development Director contained in said notice has been filed, such application shall be accompanied by an affidavit admitting such determination. Such affidavit shall be kept on file b y the Community Development Director and shall be a matter of public record.
If, upon reviewing an application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a nonconformity, the Community Development Director shall determine that the use, structure, lot or sign in question was lawfully existing tat the time of the adoption of the provision creating the nonconformity in question, and remains lawful existing subject only to such nonconformity at the time of such application, and that any required affidavit is in order, the Community Development Director shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy evidencing such facts and setting forth the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the date, if any, upon which such nonconformity is required to be terminated; otherwise, the Community Development Director shall decline to issue such Certificate and shall declare such building, structure, lot or sign to be in violation of this Code.
10-102: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND NONCONFORMING USES IN STRUCTURES DESIGNED FOR A PERMITTED USE
A. Authority to Continue. Except as provided in Subsection 1 of this Section, any lawfully existing nonconforming use not involving the use of a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or located in a structure designed for a use permitted in the district in which it is located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations contained in Subsections B through H of this Section, and in Subsections D and E of Section 10-101.
B. Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental repair replacement, and installation or relocation of non-bearing walls, non-bearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use but devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of Subsections C through I of this Section.
C. Structural Alteration. No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be structurally altered unless the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of Paragraph 9-104 B(1) and 9-105B(1) shall control.
D. Enlargement of Structure. No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming
154 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner, including the interior addition of floor area, unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. No such enlargement shall create any new parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of paragraphs 9-104 B(1) and 9-105 B(1) shall control.
E. Extension of Use. A nonconforming use of land or of a structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use in a structure designed for a permitted use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activity shall include, without being limited to:
1. An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, to any structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming.
2. An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, within a building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Code or any amendment thereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; and
3. An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal hours of operation on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming.
F. Moving. No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of the land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless such use shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
G. Change in Use. A nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to the nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use in a structure designed for a use permitted in the district tin which it is located, shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which the use or structure is located. When such a nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to any non-permitted use. For purposes of this Subsection G, a use shall be deemed to have been so changed when an existing nonconforming use shall have been terminated and a permitted use shall have commenced and continued for a period of five (5) days. Any change of use in violation of this Subsection shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the lawfully existing nonconforming use.
155 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
H. Damage or Destruction. Any structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and that is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 25 percent (25%) of the cost of replacement of such structure new shall not be restored unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and unless such restoration is accomplished without creating any new parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity or increasing the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity existing prior to such damage or destruction. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased the provisions of Paragraphs 9-104 B(1) and 9-105B(2) shall control.
Where any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the owner thereof to the extent 25 percent (25%) or less of the cost of replacement of the current assessed value of the structure new, repair or restoration of such structure may be made; provided, however, that no repairs or restorations shall be made that would create any new parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any parking, loading, bulk yard or space nonconformity existing prior to such damage or destruction, nor shall any repairs or restoration except in conformity with the applicable zoning district regulations be made unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one (1) year after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance with Subsections B, C and D of this Section.
I. Termination of Certain Uses.
1. Termination by Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to the nonconforming use of land, or when a nonconforming use of a part or all of a structure that was designed for a use that is permitted in the zoning district in which such structure is located, is discontinued or abandoned for a period of three consecutive months, regardless of intent to resume or not to abandon such use, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure shall comply with the use regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure is located.
Any period of such discontinuance caused by government action, strikes, material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this Paragraph.
2. Termination of Amortization. Any nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to the nonconforming use of land, or any nonconforming use in a structure located in any residential district and designed for a use permitted in that district that has not been terminated
156 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
pursuant to any other provision of this Code shall be terminated no later than five (5) years after the effective date of this Code.
10-103: NONCONFORMING USES IN STRUCTURES NOT DESIGNED FOR A PERMITTED USE.
A. Authority to Continue. Except as provided in Subsection I of this Section, any lawfully existing nonconforming use located in a structure not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which it is located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations contained in Subsections B through H of this Section and in Subsections D and E of Section 10-101.
B. Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of non-bearing walls, non-bearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is located; provider, however, that this Subsection shall not be deemed to authority any violation of Subsections C through I of this Section.
C. Structural Alteration. No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is located shall be structurally altered unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity nor increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased the provision of Paragraphs 9-104 B(1) and 9-105 B(1) shall control.
D. Enlargement of Structure. No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the distinct in which such structure is located shall be enlarged or added to in any manner, including the interior addition of floor area, unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of Paragraphs 9-104 B(1) and 9-105 B(1) shall control.
E. Extension of Use.
1. Prohibited Extensions. A nonconforming use in a structure not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is locates shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged or increased in intensity by:
(a) An extension of such use to any structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; or
157 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(b) An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal hours of operation on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming.
2. Permitted Extensions. A nonconforming use in a structure not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is located may be extended throughout any part of such structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; provided, however, that such extension shall not be allowed unless off-street parking and loading spaces required for such extension can be, and are, provided in accordance with the requirements and restrictions of Section 104 and 9-105 of this Code. No such extension shall be deemed to affect the duty to terminate such use pursuant to Subsection 1 of this Section.
F. Moving. No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district tin which such structure is located shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
G. Change in Use. A nonconforming use in a structure not designed or intended for use permitted in the district in which such structure is located shall not be changed to any use other than a nonconforming use of a more restricted classification or a use permitted in the zoning district in which the structure is located. When a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted nonconforming use or to a permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a less restricted nonconforming use. For purposes of this Subsection G, a use shall be deemed to have been so changed when an existing nonconforming use shall have been terminated and a more restricted nonconforming use or a permitted use shall have commenced and continued for a period of five days. Any change of use in violation of this Subsection shall be deemed to an abandonment of the lawfully existing nonconforming use.
H. Damage or Destruction. Any structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is located that is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent (50%) of the cost of replacement of such structure new shall not be restored unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and unless such restoration is accomplished without creating a new parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity or increasing the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity of such structure existing prior to such damage or destruction. In determining whether a parking or loading nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of Paragraphs 9-104B(1) and 9-105B(1) shall control.
Where any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the owner thereof to the extent of 50 percent (50%) or less of the cost of replacement of the current assessed value of the structure new, repair or restoration of such structure may be made; provide, however, that no repairs or restorations shall be made that would create
158 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
any new parking, loading, bulk, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard or space nonconformity of such structure existing prior to such damage or destruction nor shall any repairs or restoration except in conformity with the applicable zoning district regulations be made unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance with Subsections B, C and D of this Section.
I. Termination of Certain Uses.
1. Termination by Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of a part or all of a structure that was not designed or intended for any use permitted in the zoning district in which such structure is located is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such use, such use shall not thereafter be re-established or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such structure shall comply with the use regulations of the district in which such structure is located.
Any period of such discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes, material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this Paragraph.
2. Termination by Amortization. Any structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is located that has not been terminated pursuant to any other provision of this Code shall be either converted or a conforming use or shall be demolished and removed no later than the date provided in the following schedule:
Assessed Valuation on the Effective Date Conversion or Removal Within
Of this Code or any Amendment hereto Following Stated Period after Said
Creating such Nonconformity Effective Date
Less than $5,000 5 years
$5,000 more: 25 years or 40 years from date of
 Fireproof or non-combustible building permit, whichever is later
Construction
 Exterior Masonry Wall 20 years or 30 years from date of
Construction building permit
 Frame Construction 10 years or 20 years from date of
Building permit, whichever is later
159 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
10-104: PRE-CODE STRUCTURES
A. Authority to Continue. Any pre-code structure that is devoted to a use that is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions in Subsections B through E of this Section and Subsection D of Section 10-101.
B. Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed on any pre-code structure; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be deemed to authority any violation of Subsections C through E of this Section.
C. Structural Alterations and Enlargements.
1. All Districts. Any pre-code structure may be altered or enlarged, provided that such alteration or enlargement conforms to all applicable height, yard, setback, floor area ratio, and all other requirements of the zoning district in which the structure is located.
2. Exceptions for Single-Family Detached Dwellings in Single-Family Residential Districts. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, in the case of single-family detached dwellings in single-family residential districts, the following exceptions shall apply:
(a) Side yard vertical extensions. Any portion of a pre-code structure that is nonconforming with respect to a required side yard may be altered or enlarged by extending vertically within its existing perimeter walls; provided, however, that (i) no such extension shall be located nearer to the side lot line than the minimum side yard requirement for such yard in the zoning district in which it is located, and (ii) if all of the side yards that are provided for the pre-code structure do not comply with all of the applicable side yard requirements, including any minimum total side yard requirement, of the zoning district in which it is located, then the maximum height of such alteration or enlargement shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in the R2, R3 and R4 Districts and 27 feet in the R5 District; and
(b) Side yard horizontal extensions. Any portion of a pre-code structure that is nonconforming with respect to a required side yard may be altered or enlarged by extending horizontally between the required front and rear yard lines at a distance from the side lot line equal to at least the minimum existing distance between said side lot line and said nonconforming portion; provided, however, that (i) no such extension shall be located nearer to the side lot line than the minimum side yard requirement for such yard in the zoning district in which it is located, and (ii) if all of the side yards that are provided for the pre-code structure do not comply with all of the applicable side yard requirements, including any minimum total side yard requirement, of the zoning district in which it is located, then the maximum height of such alteration or enlargement shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in the R2, R3 and R4 Districts and 27 feet in the R5 District.
160 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
The exceptions in this Paragraph 2 shall not apply to any alteration or enlargement of any pre-code structure that requires the removal of more than forty percent (40%) of the total linear feet of the existing exterior walls of the pre-code structure as measured around the exterior perimeter of the structure.
D. Moving. No pre-code structure shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
E. Damage or Destruction. Any pre-code structure that is damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the owner thereof, to any extent, may be repaired or restored, provided, however, that no repair or restoration shall be made that would create any new nonconformity unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion; and further, provided, that if such pre-code structure is within the flood plain, it must comply with the requirements of Part II of Article VIII of this Code.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance with Subsection C of this Section.
10-105: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
A. Authority to Utilize for Dwellings. In any district in which dwellings are a permitted dwelling of the type permitted in the district in which the lot is located and that complies with the requirements of the district in which the lot is located, including floor area ratio, lot coverage and yard requirements, except the lot area, lot width and lot depth requirements, may be erected a legal nonconforming lot of record or any parcel or tract of land created by real estate tax divisions prior to _______________.
B. Other Uses of Nonconforming Lots. In any district in which dwellings are not permitted, a legal nonconforming lot of record may be used for any use permitted in the district in which it is located if, but only if, the development of such lot meets all requirements of the district in which it is located, including floor area ratio except lot area, width and depth requirements.
161 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE XI. ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
PART I - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS AND BODIES
11-101: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
A. General Powers. The Community Development Director will be charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code. In addition to the jurisdiction, authority and duties conferred on the Community Development Director by other provisions of State statutes and City codes and ordinances, the Community Development Director will have all powers necessary to such administration and enforcement, and will, in particular, have the jurisdiction, authority and duties hereinafter set forth.
B. Rules; Regulations; Application Forms. The Community Development Director will, consistent with the express standards, purposes and intent of this Code, promulgate, adopt and issue procedural rules, regulations and forms as are in the Director’s opinion necessary to the effective administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code.
C. Staff Assistance to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Community Development Director will make staff and consulting assistance available to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Director, or his delegate, will in that capacity:
1. Attend the meetings of each body;
2. Inform each body of all facts and information at the Director’s disposal with respect to any matter brought before the body;
3. Assist each body by performing research and making recommendations on matters brought before each body; and
4. Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the Director by this Code and by the direction of the City Council.
D. Records. The Community Development Director will, subject to City record retention policies, maintain:
1. Permanent and current records of this Code, including all maps; amendments; special permits; planned development and site plan approvals and denials; interpretations; and decisions rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Attorney and the Director, together with relevant background files and materials and final disposition of the City Council;
2. A current file of all Certificates of Zoning Compliance, all Certificates of Occupancy and notices of violations, terminations, discontinuance or removal, issued by or entrusted to the Director’s office, for such times necessary to ensure continuous compliance with the provisions of this Code; and
3. A current file of all nonconforming uses and signs in the City, by location and type of use.
162 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
E. Zoning Text; Zoning Map. The Community Development Director will prepare and have available for public sale on or before March 31 of each year:
1. The compiled text of this Code in book or pamphlet form, including all amendments thereto through the preceding December 31; and
2. The official Zoning Map, showing the zoning districts, divisions and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31.
The Director will, at all other times, maintain, and have available for reproduction, at least one up-to-date copy of both the Zoning Code text and the Zoning Map, showing all amendments through the most recent meeting of a City Council for which official minutes have been approved.
F. Applications: Receipt, Processing, Referral to Interested Parties and Agencies. The Community Development Director will receive all applications required to be filed pursuant to this Code. Upon receipt of any such application, the Director will see to its expeditious processing, including its prompt referral to and retrieval from each official department, board or commission of the City, or other government, with any interest or duty with respect to such application. Unless otherwise provided, the Director may waive any application requirements that require the submission of supporting information where the applicant demonstrates to the Director that the information required is not relevant to the application submitted.
G. Investigation of Applications. Whenever the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council will, by general rule or specific direction, so request, the Director will conduct or cause to be conducted such surveys, investigations and field studies, and will prepare or cause to be prepared such reports, maps, photographs, charts and exhibits, as will be necessary and appropriate to the processing of any application filed pursuant to this Code.
H. Zoning Certificates. Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 11-301 and 11-302 of this Article, the Community Development Director will review all applications for Certificates of Zoning Compliance and Certificates of Occupancy and approve or disapprove such applications and issue or refuse to issue such certificates based on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this Code.
I. Interpretations. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 11-401 of this Article, the Community Development Director will issue his written interpretation of the meaning and applicability of specific provisions of this Code. Any interpretation of this Code that may be rendered by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Director will be kept on file with the Director and will be a public record of the City open to inspection by interested parties at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice.
J. Approval of Site Plans. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 11-504 of this Article, the Community Development Director will have authority to review and approve or deny applications for site plan approval in this cases specified in Paragraph 11-504 C(1).
163 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
K. Planned Development and Site Plan Modifications. Pursuant to the provisions of Paragraph 11-503 K(1) and Subsection 11-504 I of this Article, the Community Development Director will have authority to permit adjustments to final plans for planned developments and to site plans.
L. Extensions of Time.
1. The Community Development Director may, upon written request, for good cause shown and without any notice or hearing, grant extensions of any time limit imposed on an applicant or permitee by this Code unless an ordinance or resolution expressly provides otherwise. The total period of time granted by such extension or extensions will not exceed the length of the original period or 90 days, whichever is less. The Director will inform the City Council of all extensions granted pursuant to this Subsection.
2. The City Council may, upon written request, for good cause shown, and without any notice or hearing, grant extensions of any time limited imposed on an applicant or permitee by this Code provided an ordinance or resolution, as appropriate, is duly adopted by a two-thirds vote of the City Council. The total period of time granted by such extension or extensions will be specifically stated in the ordinance or resolution.
M. Inspection and Enforcement. In furtherance of the enforcement of this Code, the Community Development Director will undertake regular and continuing programs of inspection of work approved and under way and of existing structures and uses as may be feasible and proper; will undertake additional inspections as may be necessary to the performance of his duties under this Code; will receive from any person complaints alleging, with particularity, a violation of this Code; and when appropriate will cause investigations and inspections as may be warranted by a complaints to be made.
Upon finding the existence of any violation of this Code, the Community Development Director will take or direct all actions necessary or appropriate to punish and abate such violation.
N. Reports. The Community Development Director will, from time to time, prepare and submit a report to the City Council, and the Planning and Zoning Commission concerning the administration of the land use and development regulations of the City, setting forth information and statistical data as may be of interest and value in advancing and furthering the goals and purposes of such regulations and setting forth the Director’s recommendations for the improvement of these regulations and their administration.
11-102: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
A. Established. The Planning and Zoning Commission established by Section 32.340 of the Oak Forest Municipal Code is the Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission referred to in this Code. The provisions of this Code with respect to the Planning and Zoning Commission will be deemed supplementary to the provisions of Sections 32.340-32.349 of the Oak Forest Municipal Code. Reference should be made to said sections for a complete description of the membership, term of office and rules of procedure of the
164 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Planning and Zoning Commission. The distinctions made in this Code between the Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission are established for the purposes of defining the authority of the Planning and Zoning Commission and in what capacity it is operating on a particular form of relief provided under this Article XI.
B. Dissolution. The Corporate Authorities may, in their sole and absolute discretion, dissolve the Planning and Zoning Commission and establish a distinct Zoning Board of Appeals and distinct Plan Commission. At the time of any such dissolution, current members of the Planning and Zoning Commission will be appointed to the newly formed Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission and the remaining seats open on the Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission will be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
11-103: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. Necessary Vote. The concurring vote of at least four members of the Board of Appeals will be necessary on any motion to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed to it; to decide in favor of the applicant any application made; or to effect any variation from the provisions of this Code. Any lesser vote on any such motion, even if a majority of those voting, will be considered a final decision denying the appeal, application or variation.
B. Record and Decisions. The transcript of testimony, if any; the minutes of the Staff Secretary; all applications, requests, exhibits and papers filed in any proceeding before the Zoning Board of Appeals; and the decision of the Board shall constitute the record. The Board may rely on the personal knowledge of its members, on its inspections of the property and on any reports available to it; provided, however, that the Board shall make the particular knowledge, inspection or report a matter of record at the public hearing and afford every party reasonable time to respond to it.
Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be by written resolution which shall include findings of fact; shall refer to all the evidence in the record and to the exhibits, plans or specifications upon which such decision is based; shall specify the reason or reasons for such decision; shall contain a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact setting forth the specific relief granted or denying relief; and shall expressly set forth any limitations or conditions imposed on any relief granted or work or use authorized.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall take no final or binding vote on a decision unless it shall first have before it the written resolution herein required; provided, however, that where special circumstances warrant it, the Board may take final action prior to the preparation of such resolution but in such event it shall, before take such action, first state its findings and conclusions as above required at a meeting open to the public and shall, in addition, state the special circumstances.
In any case where this Code provides that the failure of the Zoning Board of Appeals to act within a fixed period shall be deemed to be a denial of an application, such failure shall, notwithstanding the absence of required findings and conclusions, be considered to
165 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
be a decision of the Board rendered on the day following the expiration of such fixed period.
C. Appeals. An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken in the manner provided in Article III of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure pertaining to Administrative Review.
D. Jurisdiction and Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals will have the following jurisdiction and authority:
1. Subject to the provisions of Section 11-402 of this Article, to hear and decide appeals from, and to review orders, decisions or determinations made by the Community Development Director and to that end shall have the powers of the Community Development Director with respect to such order, decision or determination.
2. To hear, review and offer its recommendations to the City Council on applications for variations requested pursuant to Paragraph 11-403 E2 of this Article.
3. To hear, review and decide on applications for variations requested pursuant to Paragraph 11-403 E1 of this Article.
4. Subject to the provision of Section 11-501 of this Article, to initiate changes and amendments to this Code.
11-104: PLAN COMMISSION
A. Necessary Vote. The concurring vote of at least a majority of the currently appointed Commissioners will be necessary to adopt any motion to recommend approval of any matter or application. Any lesser vote on any such motion, even if a majority of those voting, will be considered a final decision to recommend denial of such matter or application.
B. Record and Decisions. The transcript of testimony, if any; the minutes of the Staff Secretary; all applications, requests, exhibits and papers filed in any proceeding before the Plan Commission; and the decision and report, or reports, of the Commission shall constitute the record.
Every recommendation or decision of the Plan Commission upon an application filed pursuant to this Code shall be by written resolution which shall include findings of fact; shall refer to all the evidence in the record and to the exhibits, plans or specifications, upon which such recommendation or decision is based; shall specify the reason or reasons for such recommendation or decision; and shall contain a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact setting for the recommendation or decision of the Commission. Every resolution shall expressly set forth any limitations or conditions recommended or imposed by the Commission.
In reaching its recommendation or decision on any such application, the Plan Commission may rely on the person knowledge of its members, on its inspections of the
166 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
property and on any reports available to it; provided, however, that the Commission shall make the particular knowledge, inspection or report a matter of record at the public hearing and afford every party reasonable time to respond to it.
The Plan Commission shall take no final or binding vote on any recommendation or decision pertaining to an application pending before it unless it shall first have before it the written resolution herein required; provided, however, that where special circumstances warrant it, the Plan Commission may take final action on any such application prior to the preparation of such resolution but in such event it shall, before taking such action, first are its findings and conclusions as above required at a meeting open to the public and shall, in addition, state the special circumstances warranting such action.
In any case where this Code provides that the failure of the Plan Commission to act within a fixed period shall be deemed a recommendation for grant or denial of an application, such failure shall, notwithstanding absence of required findings and conclusions, be considered to be a decision of the Commission rendered on the day following the expiration of such fixed period.
As to other matters brought before the Plan Commission, the Commission shall prepare such report as it shall deem appropriate to the subject matter.
C. Jurisdiction and Authority. In addition to the jurisdiction conferred on it by Chapter 2 of the Oak Forest Municipal Code, the Plan Commission shall have the following jurisdiction and authority:
1. To prepare and recommend a Comprehensive Plan, including an Office Map, to the City Council, which, upon its adoption by the City Council, shall be known as the “Official Comprehensive Plan” of the City of Oak Forest.
2. To review, prepare and recommend to the City Council changes in and amendments to the Official Comprehensive Plan, including the Official Map.
3. To initiate, hear, review and offer its recommendations to the City Council on applications for amendments of this Code.
4. To hear, review and offer its recommendations to the City Council on applications for special use permits.
5. To hear, review and offer its recommendations to the City Council on applications for planned development approval.
6. To aid and assist the City Council and the departments of the City in implementing general plans and in planning, developing and completing specific project.
7. To review and report on any matters referred to it by the City Council or the Community Development Director.
167 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PLANNING DOCUMENTS AND PROCEDURES
11-105: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
A. Authority. The Plan Commission shall have authority to prepare and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive Plan of the City and the unincorporated areas surrounding the City and from time to time to prepare and recommend amendments thereto, any or all of which the City Council may adopt as the “Official Comprehensive Plan of the City of Oak Forest,” all in accordance with the procedures set out in this Section.
B. Definition. The “Official Comprehensive Plan” shall be defined as a compilation of policy statements; goals; standards; maps; recommended planning, regulatory, fiscal and public works programs; together with pertinent data relative to the past, present and future trends of the City with respect to its population, housing, economic, social and environmental development patterns; its land, water and natural resources and use; its transportation facilities, public facilities and utilities; and any other matter relative to the present and future patterns of life within the City or within the unincorporated areas lying within one and one-half miles of its boundaries as they may from time to time exist, prepared and recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission with the advice and assistance of the Community Development Director and the Director’s staff and adopted by the City Council by ordinance duly enacted, together with such amendments thereto as may be adopted from time to time.
Said term shall also refer to any internally consistent and complete portion of such a compilation relating to any one or more of the aforesaid subjects or to any specific portion of the aforesaid geographical area.
As of the effective date of this Code, said term shall be understood to refer to the following documents:
1. Oak Forest Comprehensive Plan
2. This Code.
3. [reserved]
C. Purpose. The Official Comprehensive Plan shall be considered an official statement of the policy of the City of Oak Forest with respect to the existing and developing character of the various areas of the City and its vicinity; the proper objectives, standards and direction for future maintenance, growth, development and redevelopment of the City; the means to be employed to protect existing character or development and to encourage future development that will be in the best interests of the City; and the actions and programs to be undertaken by the City with respect to its future maintenance and development.
D. Effect. After the adoption of the Official Comprehensive Plan, or a part thereof, no ordinance, regulation or Official Map relating to the physical maintenance, development or redevelopment of the City or any land within it shall be enacted, established, amended or varied and no right-of-way, street, utility or public structure or land shall be
168 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
authorized, established, developed, redeveloped or modified in location or extent except in accordance with the policies, goals, objectives, principles and standards of the Official Comprehensive Plan or relevant part thereof unless the City Council shall first make a specific finding that the facts and circumstances affecting the particular matter justify a departure from the Plan.
E. Procedures.
1. Plan Development. The Plan and Zoning Commission, with the assistance of the Community Development Director and the Administrator’s staff, shall exercise the powers and duties delegated to it by Section 11-104 of this Article in the continuing development and revision of the Official Comprehensive Plan. The process of plan development is necessarily an informal one, not readily adaptable to rigid procedures, but the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Community Development Director, in developing a plan, shall make all reasonable efforts to obtain the views, comments and criticisms of interested persons. In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Administrator, in developing a plan, shall make all reasonable efforts to obtain the views, comments and criticisms of interested persons. In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission, prior to making any recommendation for the adoption or amendment of a plan or part thereof to the City Council, shall set, notice and conduct a public hearing thereon in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-203 of this Article.
The City Council may, at any time, refer a plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and recommendation. In the case of such referral, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall return its recommendation to the City Council not later than 90 days following the receipt of the referral. In the event such recommendation is not so delivered, the City Council may proceed to consider the amendment without such recommendation.
When satisfied that a plan, or a part thereof, is adequate for adoption as the Official Comprehensive Plan of the City, or a part thereof or an amendment thereto, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit such plan or part thereof to the City Council together with its recommendations for adoption of such plan as well as any reports or statements deemed necessary to a full consideration of such plan or part thereof. Such reports or statements may include majority and minority positions. Such transmission shall be made not later than fifteen (15) days following the close of the public hearing concerning such plan.
2. Plan Adoption. Upon receiving any recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission with respect to adoption or amendment of any plan, or a part thereof, the City Council may, by ordinance duly enacted, adopt such plan in whole or in part, with or without amendments; or may refer such plan or any part thereof back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration; or may reject such plan. The City Council shall take such action no later than ninety (90) days following the close of the Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing on such plan. The failure of the City Council to act within such period shall be deemed to be a rejection of the plan. Upon the adoptions of any such plan or part
169 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
thereof, it shall be designated as the “Official Comprehensive Plan of the City of Oak Forest,” and if less than a total comprehensive plan, shall carry a subheading designating its specific contents.
3. Plan Amendment. The Official Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, may be amended at any time in accordance with the provisions of this Paragraph 3. Such an amendment may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Community Development Director, or by any owner of property affected by the provisions of such plan sought to be amended.
Amendments initiated by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Community Development Director shall require no formal application and shall be processed as provided in Paragraphs E1 and E2 above.
Amendments initiated by the owner of affected property shall be initiated by an application filed pursuant to Section 11-401 of this Article, except that the time limits specified in Paragraphs E1 and E2 above shall apply.
4. Plan Filing and Notice of Adoption. The ordinance adopting the Official Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, shall provide that the Community Development Director shall cause a certified copy thereof to be placed on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and shall cause a notice evidencing the adoption of such plan, or part thereof, to be filed with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds.
11-106: OFFICIAL MAP
A. Authority. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have authority to prepare and to recommend to the City Council an Official Map of the City and the unincorporated areas surrounding the City and from time to time to prepare and recommend amendments thereto, all of which the City Council may adopts ad the “official Map of the City of Oak Forest,”
B. Definition. The “Official Map” shall be defined as a compilation of maps, standards and specifications of and for existing and proposed rights-of-way, streets, alleys, utility easements, public grounds and public utility systems within the City or within the unincorporated area lying within one and one-half miles of its boundaries as they may from time to time exist, prepared and recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission with the advice and assistance of the Community Development Director and the Community Development Director’s staff and adopted by the City Council by ordinance duly enacted, together with such amendments thereto as may be adopted from time to time.
Said term shall also refer to any internally consistent and complete portion of such a compilation relating to any one or more of the aforesaid subjects or to any specific portion of the aforesaid geographical area.
C. Purpose. The Official Map is adopted to implement the Official Comprehensive Plan, to assure the adequacy of the public facilities to which it relates and to secure for the City the authority and benefits provided by state law in connection with such an Official Map.
170 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
D. Procedures. The procedures for the development, adoption, amendment and filing of the Official Map shall be the same as those provided in Subsection 11-201 E of this Article with respect to the Official Comprehensive Plan.
171 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART II - ZONING APPLICATIONS AND HEARING
11-201: APPLICATIONS
A. Place of Filing.
1. Applications for Zoning and Occupancy Certificates, Code Interpretations and Certain Site Plan Approvals. All applications for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance pursuant to Section 11-301 of this Article, a Certificate of Occupancy pursuant to Section 11-302 of this Article, an interpretation pursuant to Section 11-401 of this Article, and a site plan approval pursuant to Paragraph 11-504 E1 of this Article, shall be filed with the Office of the Community Development Director or with such other City official or body as the Director may, by administrative order designate.
2. All Other Applications. All applications for an appeal pursuant to Section 11-402 of this Article, a variation pursuant to Section 11-403 of this Article, an amendment pursuant to Section 11-501 of this Article, a special use permit pursuant to Section 11-502 of this Article, a planned development pursuant to Section 11-503 of this Article, and a site plan approval pursuant to Subsection 11-504 E2 of this Article shall be filed with the office of the Community Development Director for immediate processing pursuant to Subsection 11-101 F of this Article.
B. Forms, Number, Scale. All applications filed pursuant to this Code shall be on forms supplied by the City and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Community Development Director may by administrative order designate. All plans filed as part of any application shall be at a scale sufficient to permit a clear and precise understanding of the contents of said plan and the proposal being made and shall be folded to a convenient size for handling and filing in standard, legal size legal drawers.
C. Filing Deadlines.
1. Applications Requiring Hearings. Applications requiring public hearing will not be scheduled for such hearing unless and until filed in proper form and number and containing all required information.
2. Applications Not Requiring Hearing. Applications that do not require a public hearing shall be filed, in proper form and number and containing all required information, at least 35 days prior to the time when action on the application is requested. Applications so filed will be processed on a first-filed, first-processed basis.
3. Supplemental Data. Whenever supplemental data in connection with a previously filed application is required by the City or offered by the applicant, it shall be submitted at least seven days prior to the date on which it is to be considered at a hearing or a meeting or acted upon in connection with such application. The filing of such data shall, in the discretion of the Community Development Director and
172 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
of the body hearing the application, because to delay a requested or scheduled hearing date.
D. Fees.
1. Fee Established; Lien. Every application filed pursuant to this Code shall be subject to a non-refundable application and filing fee in the amount established in the annual fee ordinance adopted pursuant to the Oak Forest Municipal Code plus the actual cost, as hereinafter defined, incurred by the City in processing such application.
The owner of the property which is the subject of the application and, if different, the applicant, shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of said fee. By signing the application, owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and to consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to ensure collection of any such fee, plus the costs of collection, which has not been paid within thirty (30) days following the mailing of a written demand for such payment to the owner at the address shown on the application. Any lien filed pursuant to this Subsection may be foreclosed in the manner provided by statute for mortgages or mechanics liens.
2. Recoverable Costs. For purposes of calculating the fee due pursuant to Paragraph D1 above, the actual costs incurred by the City in processing an application shall be deemed to consist of the following items of direct and indirect expense:
(a) Legal Publication (direct cost)
(b) Recording Secretarial Services (direct cost)
(c) Court Reporter (direct cost)
(d) Administrative Preparation and Review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by the Community Development Director at a level sufficient to recover 100 percent (100%) of the direct and indirect cost of such service)
(e) Document Preparation and Review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by the Community Development Director at a level sufficient to recover 100 percent (100%) of the direct and indirect cost of such service)
(f) Professional and Technical Consultant Services (direct cost)
(g) Legal Review, Consultation and Advice (direct cost)
(h) Copy Reproduction (direct cost)
(i) Document Recordation (direct cost)
3. Fee Payment and Escrow.
173 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) Initial Payment and Escrow. Every application filed pursuant to this Code shall be accompanied by the required fee plus an additional amount for recoverable costs as provided in Paragraph D2 above, as fixed from time to time by administrative order of the Community Development Director, to be deposited in an application fee escrow. No interest shall be payable on any such escrow.
(b) Charges Against Escrow. From the date of filing of any application pursuant to this Code, the City shall maintain an accurate record of the actual costs, as hereinabove defined, of processing such application. The Community Development Director shall, from time to time, draw funds from the escrow account established for such application to pay such costs and shall transfer such funds to the appropriate City accounts. The Director shall maintain an accurate record of all such drawings.
(c) Additional Escrow Deposits. Should the Community Development Director at any time determine that the escrow account established in connection with any application is, or is likely to become, insufficient to pay the actual costs of processing such application, the Director shall inform the applicant of that fact and demand an additional deposit in an amount deemed by him to be sufficient to cover foreseeable additional costs. Unless and until such additional amount is deposited by the applicant, the Community Development Director may direct that processing of the application shall be suspended or terminated.
(d) Final Settlement. As soon as reasonably feasible following final action on an application, the Community Development Director shall cause a final accounting to be made of the escrow deposits made in connection with such application and the actual cost of processing such application and shall make a final charge of such costs against such escrow deposits. A copy of the accounting shall be provided to the owner and the applicant.
If the amount in the escrow account is insufficient to pay the total actual costs, a written demand for payment of the balance due shall be mailed to the owner and the applicant. If unused balance remains in the escrow account after paying the total actual costs, it shall be returned to the applicant.
4. Condition of All Applications, Approvals and Permits; Time Periods. No application filed pursuant to the Code shall be considered complete unless and until all fees and deposits due pursuant to this Subsection have been paid. Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this Code shall, whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed to be conditioned upon payment of fees as required by this Subsection.
Where this Code provides that the passage of time without decision or action shall be deemed an approval or a recommendation for approval, time periods shall be tolled during any period of non-payment, but shall otherwise continue to run.
174 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
The failure to fully pay any such fee or deposit, when due, shall be grounds for refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or deposit relates.
5. Specified Public Bodies Exempt. The application fee provided in Paragraph 11-201 D1 shall not apply to, and no fee shall be required of, any public body or agency deriving the majority of its revenue from taxes levied within the City of Oak Forest. However, Paragraph 11-201 D2 shall apply to such public bodies.
E. Minimum Data Requirements.
1. All Applications. Every application submitted pursuant to this Code shall contain at least the following information:
(a) The owner’s name and address and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the application.
(b) The applicant’s name and address, if different than the owner, and his interest in the subject property.
(c) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application.
(d) The name and address and the nature and extent of the interest, as defined in the Oak Forest Ethics Code, of any officer or employee of the City in the owner, the applicant or the subject property.
(e) The address and legal description of the subject property.
(f) A description or graphic representation of the proposal for which approval is being sought and of the existing zoning classification, use and development of the subject property. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the subject matter of the application, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the approval being sought in the application.
(g) In the case of any application being filed less than two years after the denial of an application seeking essentially the same relief, the statement required by Subsection 11-302 B of this Article.
(h) Proof of control or ownership, in the case of site-specific applications.
2. Applications for Zoning and Occupancy Certificates. Every application filed pursuant to Section 11-301 or 11-302 of this Code shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 above, provide the following information:
175 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) A description or graphic representation of any development or construction that will occur or any use that will be established or maintained if the requested relief is granted.
(b) A table showing the following, if applicable:
(i) The total lot area of the subject property, in acres and in square feet;
(ii) The total existing and proposed lot area, expressed in acres, in square feet and as a percent of the total development area, devoted to residential uses, by type of structure, commercial uses, office uses, industrial uses and institutional uses, open space, rights-of-way, streets, and off-street parking and loading areas; and
(c) The existing and proposed:
(i) Number of dwelling units, by number of bedrooms and dwelling unit gross floor area; and
(ii) Gross and net floor area devoted to residential uses, commercial uses, office uses, industrial uses, institutional uses and recreational uses.
(d) A table listing all bulk, space and yard requirements, all parking requirements, and all loading requirements applicable to any proposed development or construction and showing the compliance of such proposed development or construction with each such requirement. Where any lack of compliance is shown, the reason therefore shall be stated and an explanation of the City’s authority, if any, to approve the application despite such lack of compliance shall be set forth.
(e) The certificate of a registered architect or civil engineer licensed by the State of Illinois, or of an owner-designer, that any proposed use, construction or development complies with all the provisions of this Code and other City ordinances or complies with such provisions except in the manner and to the extent specifically set forth in said certificate.
3. Application for Code Interpretations. Every application filed pursuant to Section 11-401 of this Code shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 and, where relevant, Paragraph 2 above, provide the following information:
(a) The specific provision or provisions of this Code for which an interpretation is sought.
(b) The facts of the specific situation giving rise to the request for an interpretation.
(c) The precise interpretation claimed by the applicant to be correct.
176 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(d) Where a use interpretation is sought, the use permitted pursuant to the present zoning classification of the subject property that is claimed by the applicant to include, or to be most similar to, the proposed use.
(e) Where a use interpretation is sought, documents, statements and other evidence demonstrating that the proposed use will comply with all use limitations established for the district in which it is proposed to be located.
4. Applications for Appeals. Every application filed pursuant to Section 11-402 of this Code shall, in addition to the date and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1, and, where relevant, Paragraph 2 above, provide the following information:
(a) The specific order, decision or determination of failure to act from which an appeal is sought.
(b) The facts of the specific situation giving rise to the original order, decision, determination or failure to act and to the appeal therefrom.
(c) The precise relief sought.
(d) A statement of the applicant’s position as to alleged errors in the order, decision, determination or failure to act being appealed and as to why the relief sought is justified and proper.
5. Applications for Variations. Every application filed pursuant to Section 11-403 of this Code shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 and where relevant, Paragraph 2 above, provide the following information:
(a) The specific feature or features of the proposed use, construction or development that require a variation.
(b) The specific provision of this Code from which a variation is sought and the precise variation therefrom being sought.
(c) A statement of the characteristics of the subject property that prevent compliance with the said provisions of this Code.
(d) A statement of the minimum variation of the provisions of this Code that would be necessary to permit the proposed use, construction or development.
(e) A statement of how the variation sought would satisfy the standards set forth in Subsection 11-403 F of this Code.
(f) The names and addresses of all owners of:
(i) Property within 250 lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject property; and
177 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(ii) Property located on the same frontage or frontages as the front lot line or corner side lot line of the subject property and on a frontage directly opposite any such frontage and on a frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley from any such frontage, as shown in the records of the Office of the Assessor of Cook County.
(g) A survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing existing lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all public and private rights-of-way and all streets across and adjacent to the subject property.
(h) A statement concerning the conformity or lack of conformity of the approval being requested to the City Official Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. Where the approval being requested does not conform to the Official Comprehensive Plan or the Official Map, reasons justifying the approval despite such lack of conformity shall be stated.
6. Applications for Official Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Code Text Amendments. Every formal application filed pursuant to Section 11-501 of this Code requesting an amendment to the text of either the Official Comprehensive Plan or this Code shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 and, where relevant, Paragraph 2 above, provide the following information:
(a) The exact wording of the proposed text amendment.
(b) A statement of the need and justification for the proposed text amendment.
(c) The names and addresses of all owners of
(i) Property within 250 lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject property; and
(ii) Property located on the same frontage or frontages as the front lot line or corner side lot line of the subject property and on a frontage directly opposite any such frontage and on a frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley from any such frontage, as shown in the records of the Office of the Assessor of Cook County.
(d) A survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing existing lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all public and private rights-of-way and all streets across and adjacent to the subject property.
(e) A statement concerning the conformity or lack of conformity of the approval being requested to the City Official Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. Where the approval being requested does not conform to the Official Comprehensive Plan or the Official Map, reasons justifying the approval despite such lack of conformity shall be stated.
178 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
7. Formal Applications for Special Use Permits. Every application filed pursuant to Section 11-502 of this Code shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 and, where relevant, Paragraph 2 above, provide the following information:
(a) A written statement of the need for the special permit.
(b) The names and addresses of all owners of
(i) Property within 250 lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject property; and
(ii) Property located on the same frontage or frontages as the front lot line or corner side lot line of the subject property and on a frontage directly opposite any such frontage and on a frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley from any such frontage, as shown in the records of the Office of the Assessor of Cook County.
(c) A survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, showing existing lot lines and dimensions as well as lot area, all easements, all public and private rights-of-way and all streets across and adjacent to the subject property.
(d) A statement concerning the conformity or lack of conformity of the approval being requested to the City Official Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. Where the approval being requested does not conform to the Official Comprehensive Plan or the Official Map, reasons justifying the approval despite such lack of conformity shall be stated.
(e) An application for site plan approval pursuant to Section 11-504 of this Article.
8. Applications for Zoning or Official Comprehensive Plan Map Amendments. Every formal applications filed pursuant to Section 11-501 of this Code requesting an amendment to the Official Comprehensive Plan Map or the Zoning Map shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 and, where relevant, Paragraph 2 above, provide a statement of the need and justification for the proposed Plan or Zoning Map amendment. Said statement shall address at least the following factors:
(a) The existing uses and zoning classifications of properties in the vicinity of the subject property.
(b) The trend of development in the vicinity of the subject property, including changes, if any, in such trend since the subject property was placed in its present plan designation or zoning classification.
(c) The extent to which the value of the subject property is diminished by the existing plan designation or zoning classification applicable to it.
179 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(d) The extent to which such diminution in value is offset by an increase in the public health, safety and welfare.
(e) The extent, if any, to which the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(f) The extent, if any, to which the value of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(g) The extent, if any, to which the future orderly development of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(h) The suitability of the subject property for uses permitted or permissible under its present plan designation and zoning classification.
(i) The availability of adequate ingress to and egress from the subject property and the extent to which traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of the subject property would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(j) The availability of adequate utilities and essential public services to the subject property to accommodate the uses permitted or permissible under its present plan designation and zoning classification.
(k) The length of time, if any, that the subject property has been vacant, considered in the context of the pace of development in the vicinity of the subject property.
(l) The community need for the proposed map amendment and for the uses and development it would allow.
(m) The names and addresses of all owners of:
(i) Property within 250 lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject property; and
(ii) Property located on the same frontage or frontages as the front lot line or corner side lot line of the subject property and on a frontage directly opposite any such frontage and on a frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley from any such frontage, as shown in the records of the Office of the Assessor of Cook County.
9. Applications for Planned Development Concept Plan Approval. Every application filed pursuant to Subsection 11-503 D1 of this Code shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 and, where relevant, Paragraph 2 above, provide the following information:
(a) A development name unique to the Oak Forest area for identification purposes.
180 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(b) Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject property to effectuate the proposed planned development, including a statement of all legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual interests held in or affecting the subject property, and a recent commitment for title insurance or ownership search certificate.
(c) A map depicting municipal and special district boundaries where adjacent to or within the subject property.
(d) A written statement addressing the following matters:
(i) A general description of the proposed planned development, the planning objectives to be achieved by it, including the rationales and assumptions of the applicant supporting the proposed planned development, and the market it is intended to serve.
(ii) How the proposed planned development is to be designed, arranged and operated so as not to adversely affect the development and use of neighboring property in accordance with applicable regulations of this Code.
(e) Schematic, soft-line drawings of the proposed planned development concept, including public or private rights-of-way on or adjacent to the subject property, the proposed dimensions and locations of vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking elements, public and private open space, and residential, commercial, office, industrial and other land uses, and the general locations of and purpose of all easements.
(f) A Tax Impact Study indicating the possible tax consequences the proposed planned development will have upon the City and other affected taxing bodies.
(g) A Traffic and Transit Impact Study including a list of new street construction and traffic control improvements necessary to accommodate the estimated increase in traffic and traffic related problems occasioned by the proposed development and a statement of the applicant’s proposals for providing those needed improvements.
(h) A preliminary engineering study showing the location and adequacy of existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water distribution systems.
(i) A written statement identifying existing natural and environmental resources and features on the subject property, including its topography, vegetation, soils, geology, and scenic view, and the impact of the proposed planned development on such resources and features, including proposals to preserve or protect such resources and features.
(j) Schematic, soft-line architectural elevations indicating the general style of architecture and typical building materials.
181 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(k) A statement of the applicant’s intent with respect to the ownership, sale and leasing of the various completed units, structures, spaces and areas within the proposed planned development.
10. Application for Planned Development Final Plan Approval. Every application filed pursuant to Paragraph 11-503 D2 of this Article shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 and, where applicable, Paragraph 2 above, provide the following information:
(a) The date on which Development Concept Plan approvals were granted.
(b) The materials and data listed in Paragraph 11-201(E)(11), as required for Site Plan Approval.
(c) When the proposed planned development, or stage thereof, includes provision for public or common open space, a statement describing the provision made for the dedication or care and maintenance of such open space. If it is proposed that such open space be owned or maintained by any entity other than a governmental authority, copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and by-laws of such entity shall be submitted. When the property is to be dedicated, a draft of the instrument of dedication shall be submitted.
(d) Copies of any restrictive covenants to be recorded with respect to property included in the Final Plan.
(e) A statement summarizing all changes that have been made, or have occurred, in any document, plan, data or information previously submitted, together with a revised copy of any such documents, plan or data.
(f) All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and recordation of documents.
(g) Proof from appropriate governmental agencies that all taxes on the subject property have been paid and that all special assessments, taxes, and other levies against the subject property or any part thereof have been paid in full.
(h) If the planned development is to be constructed in stages or units during a period extending beyond a single construction season, a development schedule for each and every such stage stating the approximate beginning and completion date, proportion of total public or common open space to be provided for each use and with each development stage.
(i) A detailed description of the financial assurances to be presented to guarantee completion of all public improvements and private open space to be provided in connection with the proposed planned development.
182 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(j) Evidence of the financing plan the applicant proposes to use to complete the proposed planned development. The applicant’s prior success in completing projects of similar scope may be offered in support of this requirement.
(k) A preliminary plat of subdivision if required pursuant to the Oak Forest Subdivision Ordinance.
(l) A final plat of subdivision if required pursuant to the Oak Forest Subdivision Ordinance.
11. Applications for Site Plan Approval. Whenever an application filed pursuant to any provision of this Code involves any use, construction or development requiring the submission of a site plan pursuant to Section 11-504 of this Article, a site plan illustrating the proposed use, construction or development and providing at least the following data and information, on one or more sheets, shall be submitted as part of the application:
(a) A graphic rendering of the existing conditions, which depicts:
(i) All significant natural, topographical and physical features of the subject property including topographical contours at one foot intervals;
(ii) The location and extent of tree cover including single trees in excess of eight inches in diameter at five feet above ground level;
(iii) The location and extent of water bodies and courses, wetlands, marshes and special flood hazard areas and floodways on or within 100 feet of the subject property;
(iv) Existing drainage structures and patterns; and
(v) Soil conditions as they affect development.
(b) The location, use, size and height in stories and feet of structures and other land uses on properties within 250 feet of the subject property.
(c) For areas within any required yard or setback, any proposed regarding of the subject property.
(d) Data concerning proposed structures and existing structures that will remain, including:
(i) Location, size, use and arrangement, including height in stories and feet;
(ii) Where relevant, floor area ratio, gross floor area and net floor area;
(iii) Where relevant, number and size of dwelling units, by dwelling unit type and number of bedrooms;
(iv) Building coverage; and
(v) Description of the calculation method utilized in computing all required statistics shown.
183 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(e) Minimum yard and setback dimensions and, where relevant, relation of yard and setback dimensions to the height, width and depth of any structure.
(f) A vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan showing the location, dimensions, gradient and number of all vehicular and pedestrian circulation elements including rights-of-way and streets; driveway entrances, curbs and curb cuts; parking spaces, loading spaces and circulation aisles; sidewalks, walkways and pathways; and total lot coverage of all circulation elements divided as between vehicular and pedestrian ways.
(g) All existing and proposed surface and sub-surface drainage and retention and detention facilities and existing and proposed water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone and cable communications lines and easements and all other utility facilities.
(h) Location, size and arrangements of all outdoor signs and lighting.
(i) Location and height of fences or screen plantings and the type or kind of building materials or plantings to be used for fencing or screening.
(j) Location, designation and total area of all usable open space.
(k) A detailed landscaping plan, showing location, size and species of all trees, shrubs and other plant material.
(l) A traffic study, if required by the Community Development Director or the Board or Commission hearing the application.
(m) An erosion control plan for the period during which construction will be taking place, if required by the Community Development Director or the Board or Commission hearing the application.
(n) Hard line elevations and floor plans.
(o) The names and addresses of all owners of:
(i) Property within 250 lineal feet, excluding street rights-of-way, in all directions from the subject property; and
(ii) Property located on the same frontage or frontages as the front lot line or corner side lot line of the subject property and on a frontage directly opposite any such frontage and on a frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley from any such frontage, as shown in the records of the Office of the Assessor of Cook County.
(P) An application for a Minor or Major Sign Plan, in accordance with Subsection 9-106(D) of this Code.
184 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
12. Applications for Appeal from Denial of Site Plan Approval. Every application filed pursuant to Subparagraph 11-504 E(1)(d) shall, in addition to the data and information required pursuant to Paragraph 1 above, provide the following information:
(a) A copy of the original application for site plan approval.
(b) A statement of the applicant’s position as the alleged errors in the Director’s denial of site plan approval and as to why approval of the site plan is justified and proper.
F. Special Data Requests. In addition to the data and information required pursuant to Subsection E of this Section, every applicant shall submit such other and additional data, information or documentation as the Community Development Director or any Board or Commission before which its application is pending may deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the particular application.
G. Concurrent Applications. Where a proposed use or development requires more than one approval pursuant to this Code applications for all such approvals may be filed concurrently notwithstanding the fact that approval of one application may be a precondition to approval of other applications. Such applications may, in the discretion of the official, officials, body or bodies charged with review of such applications be processed together; provided, however, that no application shall be approved unless all applications that are a precondition to its approval have first been approved.
H. Withdrawal of Application. An applicant may withdraw an application at any time prior to a final decision having been rendered with respect thereto; provided that the applicant shall have paid all applicable application fees pursuant to Subsection 11-301 D. Such withdrawal shall be without prejudice to the applicant’s right to refile such application, but any such refiling shall be treated as an entirely new filing and shall be subject to the procedures and fees of this Code in the same manner as any other new application.
11-202: SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS
A. Second Applications Without New Grounds Barred. Whenever any application filed pursuant to this Code has been finally denied on its merits, a second application, seeking essentially the same relief, whether or not in the same form or on the same theory, shall not be brought unless, in the opinion of the Officer, Board or Commission before which it is brought, substantial new evidence is available or a mistake of law or fact significantly affected the prior denial.
B. New Grounds to be Stated. Any such second application shall include a detailed statement of the grounds justifying consideration of such application.
C. Exception. Whether or not new grounds are stated, any such second application filed more than two years after the final denial of a prior application shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application had been filed. The applicant shall, however, be required to place in the record all evidence available concerning changes of conditions or new facts that have developed since the denial of the first application. In the absence of
185 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
such evidence it shall be presumed that no new facts exist to support the new petition that did not exist at the time of the denial of the first application.
11-203: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND MEETINGS
A. Setting Hearing or Meeting; Time Limitation. When the provisions of this Code require a public hearing or meeting in connection with any application filed pursuant to this Code, the body charged with conducting the hearing or meeting shall, upon receipt of a properly completed application, fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing or meeting; provided, however, that such hearing or meeting shall be commenced no later than 60 days, and shall be concluded no later than 120 days, following the receipt of the subject application unless the applicant shall agree to an extension or unless the hearing or meeting agenda of the body is completely committed during that time. In all cases where the Planning and Zoning Commission is the body charged with conducting the hearing, an application shall be deemed to have been “received” on the date of the referral of such application by the City Council.
B. Notice.
1. Notice to be Given. Notice of public hearings and meetings set pursuant to Subsection A of this Section shall be given by the Community Development Director or the applicant, as the case may be, in the form and manner and to the person herein specified.
2. Content of Notice. All notices shall include the date, time and place of such hearing or meeting, a description of the matter to be heard or considered, and the address or particular location, as well as a legal description, of the subject property.
3. Persons Entitled to Notice
(a) All Hearings and Meetings. Notice of every hearing or meeting set pursuant to Subsection A of this Section shall be given by the Community Development Director:
(i) By mail or personal delivery to the applicant and, if a specific parcel is the subject of the application, to the owner of the subject property.
(ii) By mail to any newspaper or person that shall have filed a written request, accompanied by an annual fee as established from time to time by the Community Development Director to cover postage and handling, for notice of all hearings or meetings held pursuant to this Code. Such written request shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year in which it is made unless a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual fee, is submitted prior to such date
(iii) By mail, personal delivery or interdepartmental delivery to affected City Councils, Commissions, Departments and Officials.
186 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Notice by mail as herein required, shall be mailed no less than five days in advance of the hearing or meeting date by regular United States mail.
(b) Hearings on Amendments, Special Use Permits and Variations. In addition to the notice as required by Subparagraph B3(a) above, the following notice shall be given for every hearing set pursuant to Subsection A of this Section in connection with an application for an amendment to this Code (other than an amendment to the Zoning Map), a special permit or a variation:
(i) Content of Notice. The notice required pursuant to this Subparagraph shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The street address, legal description or detailed location description of the property, if any, that is the subject of the application;
(2) A brief statement of the nature of the relief being requested;
(3) The name and address of the applicant;
(4) The name and address of the legal and beneficial owner of the property, if any, that is the subject of the application; and
(ii) Notice by Newspaper Publication. The Community Development Director shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper published in, or of general circulation within, the City at least once no less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days, in advance of the hearing date.
(iii) Notice by Mail. If a specific property is the subject of the application, the applicant shall deliver a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery, to all owners of all property located, in whole or in part, within 250 feet of the subject property measured in all directions of the subject property excluding public and railroad rights-of-way. The notice shall be mailed or personally delivered, as the case may be, no less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days, in advance of the hearing date. The mailing of a notice pursuant to this Subparagraph addressed to the name and address on the most recent Cook County real estate tax records shall be deemed a satisfaction of this notice by mail requirement.
(iv) Notice by Sign. If a specific property is the subject of the application, the applicant shall post the subject property with a ground sign of approximately six (6) square feet of gross surface area containing the legibly written notice. The sign shall be located on the subject property so as to be visible from at least one (1) right-of-way abutting the subject property. The applicant shall remove the sign within three (3) days after the hearing is closed.
187 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
The notice by sign requirement shall not be applicable for any application for a variation.
(v) Report to Hearing Body. At the hearing, the applicant shall present to the hearing body an affidavit, certification or other evidence satisfactory to the hearing body, demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the hearing body, that the applicable notice requirements of this Subparagraph have been satisfied.
(c) Hearing on Renewal of Special Use Permits. In addition to notice as required by Subparagraph B3(a) above, notice of a hearing for the renewal of a Special Use Permit pursuant to Subsection 11-502 L of this Code shall be given in accordance with Subparagraphs 11-203 B3(b) (1), (3), (4) and (5); provided, however, that the notice by mail requirement in Subparagraph 11-203 B3(b)(3) shall be satisfied by U.S. Mail, first class pre-paid, instead of certified mail.
(d) Hearing on Official Comprehensive Plan. In addition to notice as required by Subparagraph B3(a) above, notice of every hearing set pursuant to Subsection A hereof in connection with the adoption of the Official Comprehensive Plan shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Cook County at least fifteen (15) days before such hearing.
(e) Hearing on Zoning Map Amendments. In addition to notice as required by Subparagraph B3 (a) above, notice of every hearing set pursuant to Subsection A hereof in connection with an application for an amendment to the Zoning Map shall be pursuant to Subparagraph 11-203 B3 (b); provided, however, that the requirements set forth in Subparagraph 11-203 B3 (b)(4) shall not apply in any of the following instances:
(i) when the City is the applicant and none of the property that is the subject of the application is owned by the City; or
(ii) the property that is the subject of the application consists of five (5) or more zoning lots.
C. Referral to City Commissions and Departments.
1. Hearings and Meetings Regarding Appeals and Variations.
(a) Director to Refer Applications. The Community Development Director shall, not later than the time set pursuant to Subsection B of this Section for giving public notice, refer every application for an appeal pursuant to Section 11-402 of this Article and for a variation pursuant to Section 11-403 of this Article to all appropriate City Commissions and Departments.
(b) Review and Comments. Each City Commission and Department to which an application is referred pursuant to this Subsection shall review such application and submit its comments thereof to the Staff Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
188 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Such comments shall, whenever possible, be submitted at least two business days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall be made available to any person on request prior to the hearing.
2. Hearings and Meetings Regarding Variations, Amendments and Special Use Permits.
(a) Director to Refer Applications. Following receipt from the applicant of an application for a variation pursuant to Section 11-403 of this Article, an amendment pursuant to Section 11-501 of this Article, a special use permit pursuant to Section 11-502 of this Article and a planned development pursuant to Section 11-503 of this Article, the Community Development Director shall, not later than the time set pursuant to Subsection B of this Section for giving public notice, refer such application to all appropriate City Commissions and Departments.
(b) Review and Comments. Each City Commission and Department to which an application is referred pursuant to this Subsection shall review such application and submit its comments thereon to the Staff Secretary of the Plan Commission.
D. Conduct of Hearings.
1. Rights of All Persons. Any person may appear and testify at a public hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney, and may submit documentary evidence; provided, however, that the hearing body may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
2. Rights of Parties and Proximate Owners. The applicant and, subject to restrictions imposed by the Oak Forest Ethics Code, any Board, Commission, Department or Official of the City, and any property owner entitled to written notice pursuant to Subparagraph b3(b)(2) of this Section, may, subject to the discretion of the hearing body, in addition to the rights granted by Paragraph D1 above, be allowed any or all of the following rights:
(a) To present witnesses on their behalf;
(b) To cross-examine all witnesses testifying in opposition to their position;
(c) To examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing;
(d) To have subpoenas issued by the body in charge of the hearing for persons to appear at the hearings and for examination of documents by the person requesting the subpoena either before or during the hearing, where such persons or documents are shown to have a substantial evidentiary connection with:
(i) The property to which the request applies; or
189 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(ii) Facts that would support or negate the legal standards for granting the request; and
(e) To be granted, upon request, a continuance for the purpose of presenting evidence to rebut evidence introduced by any other person.
In granting or withholding such rights, the discretion of the hearing body shall be governed by the goal of securing all information and opinion relevant and material to its deliberations. Such rights shall not, however, be granted where undue and unwarranted delay would result, or where to do so would tend to produce no new evidence to aid the hearing body in reaching its decision.
3. Adjournment of Hearing. The body conducting the hearing may at any time, on its own motion or at the request of any person, adjourn the hearing for a reasonable time, and to a fixed date, time and place, for the purpose of giving further notice, taking further evidence, gathering further information, deliberating further or for such other reason as the body finds to be sufficient. The Staff Secretary of the hearing body shall notify in writing all members of the hearing body, all parties to the hearing, and any other person designated on the vote of adjournment, of the date, time and place of the adjourned hearing.
4. Testimony to be Sworn. All testimony at any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall be given under oath.
5. Right to Submit Written Statements. Any person may at any time prior to the commencement of a hearing hereunder, or during such hearing or within such time as may be allowed by the hearing body following such hearing, submit written statements in support of or in opposition to the application being heard. Such statements shall be subscribed and sworn before an officer authorized to administer oaths and shall be a part of the public record of the hearing.
6. Board or Commission Rules to Govern. All other matters pertaining to the conduct of hearings shall be governed by the provisions of this Code pertaining to, and the rules promulgated by, the body conducting the hearing.
E. Pre-hearing and Pre-meeting Examination and Copying of Application and Other Documents. At any time following the giving of notice as required in Subsection B of this Section, and upon reasonable request, any person may examine the application and, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act, all other documents on file with the Office of the Community Development Director, pertaining to the matter subject to such notice. In addition, any person shall be entitled to copies of such application and documents upon reasonable request and payment of a fee as established from time to time by the Community Development Director to cover the cost of such copies.
190 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART III - ZONING CERTIFICATES
11-301: CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
A. Authority. The Community Development Director shall have authority to issue Certificates of Zoning Compliance, but only in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
B. Purpose. The Certificate of Zoning Compliance is intended to serve two general purposes. First, it provides a procedure for reviewing plans for conformance with this Code and a means for evidencing such conformance. Second, it serves as an adjunct to, and this must be filed prior to or with, all other applications filed pursuant to this Code with respect to a specific use or development proposal. When so filed, it serves as a vehicle for routine plan review by the Community Development Director prior to consideration of special requests by other Officials, Boards and Commissions, thus avoiding needless special reviews of defective plans.
C. Certificate Required. Except where expressly waived by another provision of this Code, unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have first been obtained from the Community Development Director:
1. The construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving of any structure shall not be commenced;
2. No land vacant on the effective date of this Code shall be used or occupied for any purpose, except the raising of crops;
3. The grading, excavation or improvement of land preliminary to any construction on or use of such land shall not be commenced; and
4. Building or other permits pertaining to the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving of any structure or the use of any land or structure shall not be issued by the City.
In any case where a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is not required under this Code, the Community Development Director shall, upon written request, issue a certificate of such fact.
D. [reserved.]
E. Procedure.
1. Application. Applications for Certificates of Zoning Compliance shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-201 of this Article.
2. Action on Application. Within ten (10) days following receipt of a completed application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, the Community Development Director shall cause the application and related submissions to be reviewed for compliance with this Code and shall inform the applicant whether the application has been granted or denied.
191 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
In any case where an application is granted, the Community Development Director shall issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, with shall state on its face, in bold type, that:
“THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT SIGNIFY BUILDING CODE REVIEW OR APPROVAL AND IS NOT AUTHORIZATION TO UNDERTAKE ANY WORK WITHOUT SUCH REVIEW AND APPROVAL WHERE EITHER IS REQUIRED. SEE OAK FOREST BUILDING CODE FOR DETAILS.
BEFORE ANY STRUCTURE TO WHICH THIS CERTIFICATE IS APPLICABLE MAY BE OCCUPIED OR USED FOR ANY PURPOSE, A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY MUST BE OBTAINED.”
In any case where an application is denied, the Community Development Director shall state specific reasons therefore and shall cite the specific provisions of this Code upon which such denial is based. If relief from such demand would be available pursuant to a companion application filed in connection with the application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, the Community Development Director shall so inform the applicant and shall promptly process such companion application. If such application is approved, the Director shall issue the requested Certificate of Zoning Compliance in accordance with the terms and conditions of such approval.
If relief from the Director’s denial of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance would be available by variation, special permit or site plan review, but no application therefore has been filed, the Community Development Director shall so state and shall refer the applicant to the appropriate provisions of this Code.
3. Contents of Certificate. Each Certificate of Zoning Compliance issued pursuant to this Section shall state the specific use of the subject property for which it is issued; shall identify the specific plans; if any, pursuant to which it is issued; and shall set forth any conditions imposed in connection with any approval granted pursuant to this Code.
4. Filing of Certificates. Every Certificate issued pursuant to this Section shall be kept on file in the Office of the Community Development Director and shall be a public record open to inspection in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
F. Effect of Issuance of Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall not authorize the establishment, expansion or extension of any use nor the development, construction, relocation, alteration or moving of building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of applications for any additional permits and approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the City, including, but not limited to, a Building Permit, a Certificate of Occupancy and Subdivision Approval.
G. Limitations on Certificates. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101 L of this Article, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall become null and void six months after the date on which it was
192 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
issued unless within such period construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving of a structure is commenced or a use is commenced.
H. Void Certificates. Any Certificate of Zoning Compliance issued in violation of the provisions of this Code, whether intentionally, negligently or innocently, shall be void ab initio and shall give rise to no rights whatsoever.
11-302: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. Authority. The Community Development Director shall have authority to issue Certificates of Occupancy; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be issued except in accordance with the provisions of this Section and the provisions of the Oak Forest Municipal Code governing development, building and related matters.
B. Purpose. For the purposes of this Code, the Certificate of Occupancy provides a procedure for the inspection of completed premises to ensure their compliance with this Code and approved plans prior to commencement of the use or occupancy of such premises. The Certificate may also evidence compliance with other provisions of the Oak Forest Municipal Code, as set forth in those provisions.
C. Certificate Required. Unless a Certificate of Occupancy shall have first been obtained certifying compliance with the provisions of this Code:
1. No structure, or addition thereto, constructed, reconstructed, remodeled, altered or moved after the effective date of this Code shall be occupied or used for any purpose;
2. No land vacant as of the effective date of this Code shall be used or occupied for any purpose, except the raising of crops;
3. Except for changes involving only substitution of occupants in existing dwelling units, no use or occupancy of any land or structure shall be changed to any other use or occupancy, whether or not construction, remodeling, alteration or moving is involved.
D. Procedure.
1. Application. Where no Certificate of Zoning Compliance is required, applications for Certificates of Occupancy shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-201 of this Article.
Where a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued, the application for that Certificate shall also be treated as the application for a Certificate of Occupancy and shall be processed as such at such time as the applicant notifies the Community Development Director in writing that the subject structure or use is ready for a Certificate of Occupancy in accordance with the Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
In any case where the structure or use involved has been constructed or established pursuant to any approval granted pursuant to this Code, the application shall be accompanied by “as built” plans depicting the structure or use as built and bearing the
193 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
certificate of a surveyor, engineer, architect, land planner or owner-designer, as may be appropriate, certifying that the structure or use as built conforms in all respects to the approval granted.
2. Action on Application. Within ten (10) days following the receipt of a completed application, the Community Development Director shall cause the subject structure or premises to be inspected and shall take on the following actions based on such inspection:
(a) If all work has been completed and the structure and use thereof are in full and complete compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, other relevant codes and ordinances of the City, the applicant’s plans as approved and any conditions attached to any approval issued pursuant to this Code, the Community Development Director shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy;
(b) If, however, all work is not complete or is in any manner not in full compliance with all applicable requirements, the Community Development Director shall deny the application and shall inform the applicant in writing of the specific deficiencies on which such denial is based, citing the particular provisions of the codes and ordinances of the City, the particular items in the applicant’s plans or the applicable special approval conditions with respect to which compliance is lacking.
3. Contents of Certificates. In addition to the matters required to be contained in a Certificate of Occupancy pursuant to other applicable provisions of the Oak Forest Municipal Code, each Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to this Section shall state the specific use of the subject property for which it is issued; shall identify the specific plans, if any, pursuant to which it is issued and shall set forth any conditions imposed in connection with any approval granted pursuant to this Code.
4. Filing of Certificates. Every Certificate issued pursuant to this Section shall be kept on file in the Office of the Community Development Director and shall be a public record open to inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
E. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph D2 above, where construction, reconstruction, remodeling or alteration of a structure does not require the vacating of the structure, or where parts of the structure are finished and ready for occupancy before the completion of such construction, reconstruction, remodeling or alteration and are certified upon inspection to be safe for use or occupancy and to be in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, other relevant codes and ordinances of the City, the applicant’s plans as approved and any conditions attached to any approvals issued pursuant to this Code with respect to such structure or its premises, a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date, which Temporary Certificate shall bear on its face, in bold type, a statement of its temporary nature; provided, however, that no such temporary
194 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
certificate shall be issued pursuant to this Code unless said structure also qualifies for a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to the Oak Forest Building Code.
F. Certificate of Occupancy for Existing Uses. The Community Development Director may issue a Certificate of Occupancy certifying the lawful existence and use of any existing structure or use in the same manner, and subject to the same standards and limitations, as authorized by this Section with respect to new structures and uses. Such Certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it with respect to any structure or use as of the date of its issue and remain effective for that purpose for so long as neither the use or structure nor the applicable provisions of this Code are changed.
G. Certificate of Occupancy for Legal Nonconformities. The Community Development Director may issue a Certificate of Occupancy certifying the lawful existence and use of any nonconforming use, structure, lot or sign in the same manner, and subject to the same standards and limitations, as authorized by this Section with respect to new structures and uses and subject also to the additional standards and limitations set forth in Paragraph 10-101 E3 of this Code.
H. Void Certificates. Any Certificate of Occupancy issued in violation of the provisions of this Code, whether intentionally, negligently, or innocently, shall be void ab initio and shall give rise to no rights whatsoever.-__
195 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART IV - INTERPRETATIONS, APPEAL AND VARIATIONS
11-401: INTERPRETATIONS
A. Authority. The Community Development Director may, subject to the procedures, standards and limitations of this Section, render interpretations, including use interpretations, of the provisions of this Code and of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to it.
B. Purpose. The interpretation authority established by this Section is intended to recognize that the provisions of this Code though detailed and lengthy, cannot possibly address every specific situation to which they may have to be applied. Many such situations can, however, be readily addressed by an interpretation of the specific provisions of this Code in light of the general and specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted. Because the interpretation authority herein established is an administrative rather than a legislative authority, it is not intended to add to or change the essential content of this Code but, rather, it is not intended only to allow authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
C. Parties Entitled to Seek Interpretations. Applications for interpretations may be filed by any person having an interest in the circumstances giving rise to the need for an interpretation; provided, however, that interpretations shall not be sought by any person based solely on hypothetical facts or where the interpretation would have no effect other than as an advisory opinion.
D. Procedure.
1. Application. Applications for interpretations of this Code shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-301 of this Article.
2. Action on Application. Within 35 days following the receipt of a properly completed application for interpretation, the Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in writing of his interpretation, stating the specific precedent, reasons and analysis upon which the determination is based.
The failure of the Community Development Director to act within 35 days, or such further time to which the applicant can agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the application rendered on the day following such 35 day period.
3. Appeal. Appeals from interpretations rendered by the Community Development Director may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in Section 11-402 of this Article.
E. Standards for Use Interpretations. The following standards shall govern the Community Development Director, and the Planning and Zoning Commission on appeals from the Community Development Director, in issuing use interpretations:
196 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. No use interpretation shall be given with respect to the R1 through R6 Residential District.
2. Any use defined in Section 12-206 of this Code shall be interpreted as therein defined.
3. No use interpretation shall permit a use listed as a permitted or special permit use in any district to be established in any district in which such use is not so listed.
4. No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that it will comply with each use limitation established for that particular district.
5. No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses permitted or specially permitted in a more restrictive district.
6. If the proposed use is most similar to a use permitted only as a special permit use in the district in which it is proposed to be located, then any use interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a Special Use Permit for such use pursuant to Section 11-502 of this Article.
7. No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that would be inconsistent with the statement of purpose of the district in question.
8. Subject to the foregoing conditions and limitations, in rendering use interpretations the Community Development Director shall be guided by the North American Industry Classification System, as amended by the City (see Appendix A) and the use classification methodology used therein.
F. Effect of Favorable Use Interpretation. No use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall authorize the establishment of such use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of Applications for any Permits and Approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the City, including, but not limited to, a Special Use Permit, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, a Building Permit, a Certificate of Occupancy, Subdivision Approval and Site Plan Approval.
G. Limitations on Favorable Use Interpretations. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101 L of this Article, no use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be valid for a period longer than six months from the date of issue unless a building permit is issued, and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a Certificate of Occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within that period.
197 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
A use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued, and such permit shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate use interpretation has not been issued. Such permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of six consecutive months or more.
11-402: APPEALS
A. Authority. Except as provided in Subparagraph 11-504 E1(d) of this Article with regard to site plan review appeals, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide appeals from, and review orders, decisions, determinations, or the failure to act, of the Community Development Director acting pursuant to his authority and duties under this Code and to that end the Board of Appeals shall have the same powers and be subject to the same standards and limitations as the Community Development Director with respect to any order, decision or determination being appealed.
B. Purpose. The appeal procedure is provided as a safeguard against arbitrary, ill-considered or erroneous administrative decisions. It is intended to avoid the need for resort to legal action by providing a local procedure for the review and correction of administrative errors. It is not, however, intended as a means to subvert either the clear purposes, intent or meaning of this Code or the rightful authority of the Community Development Director to enforce this Code. To these ends, the reviewing body should give all proper deference to the spirit and language of this Code and to the reasonable interpretations of those charged with its administration.
C. Parties Entitled to Appeal. An application for appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission may be filed by any person aggrieved or adversely affected by an order, decision, determination or failure to act of the Community Development Director acting pursuant to his authority and duties under this Code.
D. Procedure.
1. Application. An application for appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be filed not later than 45 days following the action being appealed and in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-201 if this Article.
2. Action by Community Development Director. Upon receipt of a properly completed application for an appeal, the Community Development Director shall forthwith transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission the application together with all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
3. Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be set, noticed and conducted by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 11-203 of this Article.
4. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. Within thirty (30) days following the close of the public hearing the Planning and Zoning Commission shall render a decision on the appeal in the manner and form specified in Subsection 11-103 B
198 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
of this Article. Such decision may reverse, affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the action appealed from and may include such order or determination as, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, is proper to be made in the premises.
The failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within such thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the appeal.
E. Stay of Proceedings. An application for appeal properly filed pursuant to Subsection D above shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Community Development Director certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission after the application for appeal has been filed with the Director that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the Director’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by the Circuit Court on application, upon reasonable written notice to the Community Development Director and on due cause shown.
F. Right to Grant Variation in Deciding Appeals. In any case where the application for appeal is accompanied by an application for variation in accordance with Section 11-403 of this Article, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to grant, as part of the relief, a variation but only in strict compliance with each provision of said Section 11-403.
G. Conditions and Limitations on Rights Granted by Appeal. In any case where this Code imposes conditions and limitations upon any right, any such right granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission on appeal shall be subject to such conditions and limitations in the same manner and to the same extent as if secured without the necessity of an appeal.
11-403: VARIATIONS
A. Authority. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to grant variations from the provisions of this Code under Paragraph E1 of this Section. The City Council shall have the authority to grant variations under Paragraph E2 of this Section.
B. Purpose. The variation procedure is intended to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen particular applications of this Code that create practical difficulties or particular hardships. When such difficulties or hardships are more appropriate for remedy, if at all, pursuant to other provisions of this Article XI, the variation procedure is necessarily inappropriate.
C. Parties Entitled to Seek Variations. Applications for variations may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the subject property.
D. Procedure.
1. Application. Applications for variations shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 11-201 E5 of this Article.
199 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
2. Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be set, noticed and conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 11-203 of this Article.
3. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. In the cases specified in Paragraph 11-403 E1, within 21 days following the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall render its decision, granting or denying the variation, in the manner and form specified by Subsection 11-103 B of this Article.
The failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within 21 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the variation.
In the cases specified in Paragraph D4 of this Subsection and in Paragraph 11-403 E2, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council its recommendation in a form specified by Subsection 11-103 B of this Article, recommending either granting the application for a variation; granting the application subject to conditions; or denying the application.
4. Action by City Council. Within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or its failure to act as above provided, the City Council shall either deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall grant the variation, with or without modifications or conditions.
5. Special Procedures in Connection With Other Applications. Whenever any other application is filed pursuant to this Code or the Oak Forest Subdivision and Development Code (2014) as a companion to an application for a variation and such companion application requires final approval by the City Council, the authority to hear and decide the application for variation otherwise delegated to the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to this Section may, pursuant to the request of the applicant or the Community Development Director made at the time of the filing of the applicant’s application, be reserved to the City Council. Whenever any application for a variation requires final approval by the City Council, the authority to decide the application for variation shall be reserved to the City Council. For such purposes, the City Council shall have all of the authority granted to, and shall be subject to all of the limitations imposed on, the Planning and Zoning Commission by this Section; provided, however, that the provisions governing public notice and hearing of, and action on, the companion application or the provisions of Paragraphs D2 and D3 of this Section that provide the broadest public notice shall govern.
E. Permitted Variations.
1. Permitted Variations as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission may vary the provisions of this Code in the following cases and in no others, in accordance with Subsection D above.
200 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) To reduce the dimension of any required yard or setback of a lot of record existing at the time that the application for the variation is submitted;
(b) To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than 90 percent of the required area and width, and only on a lot of record existing at the time that the application for the variation is submitted;
(c) To increase the maximum allowable height of any fence;
(d) To reduce by not more than 25 percent, or one space, whichever is greater, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces or loading spaces otherwise required;
(e) To increase by not more than one sign the maximum number of signs of any functional type otherwise allowed;
(f) To allow illumination of residential recreational facilities;
(g) To allow the moving of a pre-code structure to an extent or in a manner not permitted by Subsection 10-104 B of this Code;
(h) To allow the otherwise prohibited restoration of a partially damaged or destroyed pre-code structure or structure devoted to a nonconforming use;
(i) To allow yard variations in excess of those permitted by Section 10-105 of this Code in connection with the development of a legal nonconforming lot of record;
(j) To increase, by not more than five (5) feet or not more than one (1) story or both, the maximum allowable height of a principal residential structure in the R4 Single Family Residential District (provided that in no event shall the maximum allowable height with such a variation exceed 35 feet or three stories, whichever is less) where such structure meets all of the following conditions: (i) it is to be located in whole or in part in the flood plain, (ii) it is a replacement for a residential structure that was destroyed or damaged, by any means not within the control of the owner thereof, to the extent of fifty percent or more of the market value of the structure, (iii) it is a replacement for a residential structure that had a basement prior to such damage or destruction, and (iv) a basement cannot be constructed in the replacement structure because the lowest floor of such structure is required by this Code or other applicable law to be constructed at or above the base flood elevation.
(k) To reduce the bulk, yard, setback and space requirements when a zoning lot, whether vacant or legally used, is reduced in size, by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent domain by an authorized governmental body or by reason of a conveyance made under the specific threat of an
201 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
eminent domain proceeding, so that the remainder of said zoning lot, or any structure or use on said zoning lot, does not conform with one or more of such bulk, yard, setback or space requirements of the district in which said zoning lot is located.
(l) To permit the use of one or more residential lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient width of the lot or lots, where:
(i) The application for a proposed subdivision is submitted concurrently with the application for variation;
(ii) The width of the lot or lots for which the variation is sought is not less than 75 percent of the required width;
(iii) The area of the lots for which a variation is sought is not less than 115 percent of the required lot area; and
(iv) The lot width of the lots created by the proposed subdivision is not less than the lot width of 75 percent of the remaining lots along the same frontage as the proposed new lots.
Any variation granted pursuant to this Subparagraph shall run only to the applicant, as a personal privilege.
(m) To increase the maximum height of an alteration to, or enlargement of, a principal single-family detached residential pre-code structure located in a single-family residential district authorized pursuant to Paragraph 10-104 B2 of this Code, but in no event to a height exceeding the otherwise applicable district height limitations.
(n) To reduce the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required to serve a new non-residential use within a structure located within a Special Parking Area in the Gateway Redevelopment Sub-Area.
(o) To permit fences in front yards of properties within single family residential districts no greater than three (3) feet in height.
(p) To permit fences in front and corner yards of properties within all other districts no greater than three (3) feet in height.
(Q) To allow a setback for a ground sign less than that required by Section 9-106 of this Code.
(R) To allow the area or height of a sign to be increased by up to 25% of the maximum allowable height or facing.
2. Permitted Variations as approved by the City Council. Subject to the prohibitions set forth in Paragraph E4 below, and subject to the other provisions of this Section, the City Council may vary the provisions of this Code in the following cases, in accordance with Subsection D above:
202 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) To permit the use of one or more residential lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient width of the lot or lots, where:
(i) The lot or lots for which the variation is sought are the result of a proposed subdivision that includes one or more existing nonconforming lots of record;
(ii) The application for a proposed subdivision is submitted concurrently with the application for variation;
(iii) The width of the lot or lots for which the variation is sought is not less than 75 percent of the required width;
(iv) The area of the lots for which a variation is sought is not less than 115% of the required lot area;
(v) The creation of new lots does not increase the degree of nonconformity as to width that exists in the existing nonconforming lot or lots at the time of application; and
(vi) The number of lots for which the variation is sought does not exceed either the number of nonconforming lots to be subdivided for the proposed subdivision or thirty percent (30%) of the total number of lots created by the proposed subdivision, whichever is less.
Any variation granted pursuant to this Subparagraph shall run only to the applicant, as a personal privilege.
(B) To permit a reduction of the required lot width for property that is annexed to the City pursuant to an annexation agreement that is duly authorized by the Corporate Authorities in the manner required by the Illinois Municipal Code
(c) To reduce the minimum lot area of a zoning lot for an automobile dealership, as required by Subsection 9-202(B) of this code by twenty (20) percent; or to reduce the minimum frontage of a zoning lot for an automobile dealership, as required by Subsection 9-202(B) of this code by ten (10) percent.
(d) To increase, by not more than one (1) story, the maximum allowable height of a principal structure in any non-residential district, provided that the increase in height by one (1) story shall not require a related increase to the maximum allowable height in feet of the same district.
(e) To permit a variation to any other provision of this Code.
3. Administrative Variations. A request to reduce the minimum front, side or rear yard setback requirement, or to reduce the maximum height requirement of accessory structures, by less than twelve (12) inches may be approved by the Community Development Director or his/her designee.
4. Prohibited Variations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no variation shall be granted that:
203 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) Is intended as a temporary measure only; or
(b) Is greater than the minimum variation necessary to relieve the particular hardship or practical difficulty demonstrated by the applicant.
F. Standards for Variations.
1. General Standard. No variation shall be granted pursuant to this Section unless the applicant shall establish that carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this Code would create a particular hardship or a practical difficultly. Such a showing shall require proof that the variation being sought satisfies each of the standards set forth in this Subsection F.
2. Unique Physical Condition. The subject property is exceptional as compared to other lots subject to the same provision by reason of a unique physical condition, including presence of an existing use, structure or sign, whether conforming or nonconforming; irregular or substandard shape or size; exceptional topographical features; or other extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the subject property that amount to more than a mere inconvenience to the owner and that relate to or arise out of the lot rather than the personal situation of the current owner of the lot.
3. Not Self-Created. The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the result of any action or inaction of the owner or his predecessors in title and existed at the time of the enactment of the provisions from which a variation is sought or was created by natural forces or was the result of governmental action, other than the adoption of this Code, for which no compensation was paid.
4. Denied Substantial Rights. The carrying out of the strict letter of the provision from which a variation is sought would deprive the owner of the subject property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other lots subject to the same provision.
5. Not Merely Special Privilege. The alleged hardship or difficulty is not merely the inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some special privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of other lots subject to the same provision, nor merely an inability to make more money from the sale of the subject property; provided, however, that where the standards herein set out exist, the existence of an economic hardship shall not be a prerequisite to the grant of an authorized variation.
6. Code and Plan Purposes. The variation would not result in a use or development of the subject property that would not be in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Code and the provision from which a variation is sought were enacted or the general purpose and intent of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
7. Essential Character of the Area. The variation would not result in a use or development on the subject property that:
204 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) Would be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the enjoyment, use, development value of property or improvements permitted in the vicinity;
(b) Would materially impair an adequate supply of light and air to the properties and improvements in the vicinity;
(c) Would substantially increase congestion in the public streets due to traffic or parking;
(d) Would unduly increase the danger of flood or fire;
(e) Would unduly tax public utilities and facilities in the area; or
(f) Would endanger the public health and safety.
8. No Other Remedy. There is no means other than the requested variation by which the alleged hardship or difficulty can be avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the subject property.
G. Variation Less Than Requested. A variation less than or different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant’s right to some relief but not to the relief requested.
H. Conditions on Variations. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Code upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the variation. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variation.
I. Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions; Fee. Whenever any variation authorized pursuant to this Section is made subject to conditions and limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall upon meeting such conditions file an affidavit with the Community Development Director so stating. Such affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the Community Development Director, to recover the City’s actual direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.
J. Effect of Grant of Variation. The grant of a variation shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of applications for any permits and approval that may be required by the Codes and Ordinances of the City, including, but not limited to, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, a Building Permit, a Certificate of Occupancy, Subdivision Approval and Site Plan Approval.
205 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
K. Limitations on Variations. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Community Development Director or City Council pursuant to Subsection 11-101 L of this Article, no variation from the provisions of this Code shall be valid for a period longer than 180 days, and no variation from the provisions of this Code that is granted concurrently with a special permit shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit is issued and construction has actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a Certificate of Occupancy is issued and a use is commenced within that period. Variations granted pursuant to Subparagraph 11-403 E2(a) of this Article shall be valid for a period that is coterminous with the period that the tentative subdivision plat is valid under the Oak Forest Subdivision and Development Code (2014), and shall be deemed final variations that run with the land only after recordation of a duly approved final subdivision plat.
A variation shall be deemed to authorize only the particular construction or development for which it was issued and shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such construction or development shall be removed and not replaced within six months following such removal.
206 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART V - AMENDMENTS AND SPECIAL APPROVALS
11-501: AMENDMENTS
A. Authority. This Code and the Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by ordinance duly enacted by the City Council in accordance with the procedures set out in this Section.
B. Purpose. The amendment process established by this Section is intended to provide a means for making changes in the text of this Code and in the Zoning Map that have more or less general significance or application. It is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges or rights. Rather, it is intended as a tool to adjust the provisions of this Code and Zoning Map in light of changing, newly discovered or newly important conditions, situations or knowledge.
C. Parties Entitled to Seek Amendments. An application for an amendment may be filed by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, any property to be affected by a proposed amendment to the Zoning Map, or any person interested in a proposed amendment to the text of this Code.
D. Procedure.
1. Formal Application. A formal application for an amendment to this Code or the Zoning Map shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 11-201 E6 of this article for a code amendment and 11-201E8 of this Article for a map amendment. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, no application for an amendment to this Code or to the Zoning Map shall be filed unless the Community Development Director shall have first reviewed an application for such amendment in accordance with Subsection 11-101(F) of this Code.
2. Referral. The failure of the Community Development Director to act on a properly filed and completed formal application within 30 days of his or her receipt thereof shall be deemed to be a decision to refer the application pursuant to this Subparagraph.
3. Public Hearing. In any case where a formal application for an amendment to this Code or the Zoning Map is referred by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101(F), a public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 11-203 of the Article.
4. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 21 days following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council its recommendation in the form specified by Subsection 11-104 B of this Article.
The failure of the Commission to act within 21 days following the conclusion of such hearing, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
207 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
deemed a recommendation for the denial of the proposed amendment as submitted.
5. Action by City Council; Protest. Within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the recommendation of the Plan Commission, or its failure to act as above provided, the City Council shall either deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, adopt the proposed amendment, with or without modifications; provided, however, that in the event a duly signed and acknowledged protest against a proposed amendment is filed with the City Clerk before the adoption of such amendment by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage to be affected by the proposed amendment, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be affected, such amendment shall not be passed except by a two-thirds vote of the City Council.
The failure of the City Council to act within sixty (60) days or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the application.
E. Standard for Amendments. The wisdom of amending the Zoning Map or the text of this Code is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not dictated by any set standard. However, in determining whether a proposed amendment should be granted or denied, the Board should be guided by the principle that its power to amend this Code is not an arbitrary one but one that may be exercised only when the public good demands or requires the amendment to be made. In considering whether that principle is satisfied in any particular case, the Board should weigh the following factors:
1. The consistency of the proposed amendment with the purposes of this Code.
2. The community need for the proposed amendment and for the uses and development it would allow.
3. If a specific parcel of property is the subject of the proposed amendment, then the following factors:
(a) Existing Uses And Classifications: the existing uses and zoning classifications for properties in the immediate vicinity of the subject property.
(b) Trend Of Development: the trend of development in the immediate vicinity of the subject property, including changes, if any, in such trend since the subject property was placed in its present zoning classification.
(c) Diminution Of Values: the extent to which the value of the subject property is diminished by the existing zoning classification applicable to it.
208 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(d) Increase In Health, Safety, And Welfare: the extent, to which any such diminution in value is offset by an increase in the public health, safety, and welfare.
(e) Effects On Adjacent Properties: the extent to which the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(f) Value Of Adjacent Properties: the extent to which the value of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(g) Future Development: the extent to which the future orderly development of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(h) Suitability Of Text Amendment: the suitability of the proposed text amendment for the zoning district in which the amendment is being proposed.
(i) Ingress And Egress: the availability, where relevant, of adequate ingress to and egress from the subject property and the extent to which traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of the subject property would be affected by the proposed amendment.
(j) Utilities And Services: the availability, where relevant, of adequate utilities and essential public services to the subject property to accommodate the uses permitted or permissible under its present zoning classification.
(k) Length Of Vacancy: the length of time that the subject property has been vacant, considered in the context of the pace of development in the vicinity of the subject property.
(l) Positive Effect: the proposed amendment creating a positive effect for the zoning district, its purposes, and adjacent properties shall be placed before the benefits of the petitioner.
11-502: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A. Authority. The City Council may, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Section and by ordinance duly adopted, grant special use permits authorizing the development of uses listed as special uses in the regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property is located.
B. Purpose. Special uses are those uses having some special impact or uniqueness that require a careful review of their location, design, configuration and special impact to determine, against fixed standards, the desirability of permitting their establishment on any given site. They are uses that may or may not be appropriate in a particular location depending on a weighing, in each case, of the public need and benefit against the local impact and effect.
209 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
C. Parties Entitled to Seek Special Use Permits. An application for a special use permit may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the subject property.
D. Procedure.
1. Application. An application for a special use permit shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 11-201 E7 of this Article. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, no application for a special use permit shall proceed to a public hearing until unless the Community Development Director has first reviewed the said application in accordance with Subsection 11-101(F) and determined that it is in proper form.
2. Board Referral. The failure of the Community Development Director to act on a properly filed and completed application within 30 days of his or her receipt thereof shall be deemed to be a decision to refer the application pursuant to this Subparagraph.
3. Public Hearing. In any case where a formal application for a special use permit is referred by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101(F), a public hearing shall be set, noticed and conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 11-203 of this Article.
4. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 21 days following conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council its recommendation in a form specified by Subsection 11-104 B of this Article, recommending either granting the application for a special use permit; granting the application subject to conditions, as specified in Subsection F below; or denying the application.
The failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within 21 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the proposed special use permit.
5. Action by City Council; Protest. Within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or its failure to act as above provided, the City Council shall either deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall grant the special use permit, with or without modifications or conditions; provided, however, that in the event a duly signed and acknowledged protest against the proposed special use permit is fled with the City Clerk by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage to be affected by the proposed special use permit, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be affected, such ordinance shall not be adopted except by a two-thirds vote of the City Council.
E. Standards for Special Use Permits.
210 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. General Standards. No special use permit shall be recommended or granted pursuant to this Section unless the applicant shall establish that:
(a) Code and Plan Purposes. The proposed use and development will be in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Code was enacted and for which the regulations of the district in question were established and with the general purpose and intent of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
(b) No Undue Adverse Impact. The proposed use, drainage and development will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the area or the public health, safety and general welfare.
(c) No Interference With Surrounding Development. The proposed use and development will be constructed, arranged and operated so as not to dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the use and development of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations.
(d) Adequate Public Facilities. The proposed use and development will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as streets, public utilities, drainage structures, police and fire protection, refuse disposal, parks, libraries, and schools, or the applicant will provide adequately for such services.
(e) No Traffic Congestion. The proposed use and development will not cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of traffic through residential streets.
(f) No Destruction of Significant Features. The proposed use and development will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic or historic feature of significant importance.
(g) Compliance With Standards. The proposed use and development complies with all additional standards imposed on it by the particular provision of this Code authorizing such use.
2. Special Standards for Specified Special Uses. Where the district regulations authorizing any special use in a particular district impose special standards to be met by such use in such district, a permit for such use in such district shall not be recommended or granted unless the applicant shall establish compliance with such special standards.
3. Considerations. In determining whether the applicant’s evidence establishes that the foregoing standards have been met, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider:
(a) Public Benefit. Whether, and to what extent, the proposed use and development at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable
211 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
to provide a service or a facility that is in the interest of the public convenience or that will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community; and
(b) Mitigation of Adverse Impacts. Whether, and to what extent, all steps possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed use and development on the immediate vicinity through building design, site design, landscaping and screening.
F. Conditions; Periodic Review; Term.
1. Conditions on Special Use Permits. In order to prevent or minimize substantial or undue adverse effects upon neighboring and adjacent properties and improvements, substantial or undue or upon public facilities and services, the Plan Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose, and expressly include in the ordinance granting a special use permit, conditions and limitations upon the premises benefited by a special use permit. Such conditions, restrictions, and limitations may include, without limitation, the following:
(a) limitations and restrictions of the use of the subject property;
(b) restrictions on construction activity that will occur on and around the subject property;
(c) conditions concerning the character and design of the proposed use and development;
(d) the location of the use within the subject property;
(e) the provision of landscaping and screening, with specificity as to design, quantity, quality, size and location;
(f) restrictions on the hours of operation of the use;
(g) a requirement that the subject property be developed and used in strict accordance with a site plan that is attached to the ordinance granting the special permit; and
(h) any other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Code.
2. Violation of Conditions. Violation of any of the conditions imposed pursuant to Paragraph 11-502 F1 of this Code shall be a violation of this Code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special use permit.
3. Periodic Review. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose, a requirement that the special use permit be publicly reviewed periodically pursuant to and in accordance with such procedures as are set forth in the ordinance granting the special use permit. In every instance, such procedures shall provide the applicant with advance notice of, and an opportunity to be heard at, such periodic review.
212 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
4. Term of Special Use Permit. Because of the unique operational nature, and potential unknown adverse impacts, of certain special uses, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose, a term limitation on the duration of certain special uses. Such term limitation shall (a) be set forth in the ordinance granting the special use permit and (b) shall be subject to renewal in accordance with Subsection 11-502 L of this Code.
G. Affidavit of Compliance With Conditions. Whenever any special use permit granted pursuant to this Section is made subject to conditions or limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the Community Development Director so stating. Such affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the Community Development Director, to recover the City’s actual direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.
H. Effect of Issuance of a Special Use Permit. The granting of a special use permit shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by the Codes and Ordinances of the City, including but not limited to, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, a Building Permit, a Certificate of Occupancy and subdivision approval.
I. Limitations on Special Use Permits. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101 L of this Article, no special use permit shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is there-after diligently pursued to completion or unless a Certificate of Occupancy is issued and a use commenced within that period. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more. Except when otherwise provided in the Ordinance granting a special use permit, a special use permit shall be deemed to relate to, and be for the benefit of, the current owner or operator of the use or lot in question rather than to the lot itself. Should a new owner or operator purchase the real property and seek to operate the special use in a manner that is in substantial conformance with that of the prior operation, then the new owner or operator shall be allowed to submit a written request to the Community Development Director for a Transfer of Special Use Permit in accordance with Subsection J below.
J. Transfer of Special Use Permit. A request for Transfer of Special Use Permit shall be filed on an application as provided by the Community Development Director. Within 21 days of receiving a complete application, the Community Development Director shall have the sole discretion to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application subject to the requirements of this Subsection J.
1. Affidavit of Acknowledgement and Compliance Agreement. The new owner or operator shall, as part of the application for Transfer of Special Use Permit,
213 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
submit a signed and notarized affidavit in a form provided by the Community Development Director affirming the following:
(a) That the new owner or operator is aware of and in agreement with all of the conditions imposed on the original special use permit as approved.
(b) That the new owner or operator shall not affect or increase the intensity of the original operation.
(c) That the Transfer of Special Use Permit shall be null and void in accordance with Paragraph F2 of this Section.
(d) That the new owner or operator agrees to comply with Sections 9-104 (Off-Street Parking) and 9-107 (Buffers and Landscaping) of this Code is directed to do so by the Community Development Director prior to Certificate of Occupancy issuance.
2. Request for Minor Change as Part of Transfer of Special Use Permit. Should the new owner or operator decline to sign an affidavit as described above, or if the Community Development Director denies an application, the new owner or operator may file a request for a Minor or Major Amendment in accordance with Subsection K below.
K. Amendments to Special Use Permits. A special use permit may be amended, varied or altered only as follows:
1. Major Amendments to Special Use Permits. Major amendments are modifications which alter the concept, intent, or intensity of the special use. Any one of the following shall be considered a major amendment to a special use. Requests for major amendments shall be reviewed in accordance with Subsection D of this Section. These amendments shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Significant changes to the parking location, access plan, building or parking setback areas, or landscaping plans which alter the intent or concept of the special use approved for the site as determined by the Community Development Director. Such significant changes shall include, but not be limited to: relocating the parking location from the rear of the building to either side of the building or to the front; relocating the building from the center of the site to the front, rear, or side of the site; enlarging or reducing any front, side, or rear yards or setbacks by more than twenty percent (20%); eliminating any previously required landscaping serving as screening of the special use from adjacent properties; and adding or eliminating any point of ingress or egress to and from the site which changes the circulation of the site internally and the impact of the use on the transportation system.
(b) Any increase in the intensity of the special use which alters the intent or concept of the special use. Such an increase in the intensity shall include, but not be limited to: an increase in the number of vehicles to be served on
214 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
a site at one time; an increase in the maximum number of customers to be served; and an increase in the net floor area by greater than twenty percent (20%).
2. Minor Amendments to Special Use Permits. Minor amendments are modifications not defined as major amendments and do not alter the concept, intent, or intensity of the special use. Requests for minor amendments shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 11-203 of this Code, with the Planning and Zoning Commission making a final determination within 21 days of the close of the public hearing, either granting the application for a minor amendment; granting the application subject to conditions, as specified in Subsection F above; or denying the application. These amendments shall include:
(a) Minor changes to the parking location, access plan, building or parking setback areas, or landscaping plans approved for the site as determined by the Community Development Director. Such minor changes shall include, but not be limited to: shifting the parking location internally within the site while maintaining the general siting and circulation; changes to the hours of operation if previously limited in the original special use permit; reducing the height or density of any previously approved landscaping or screening; and any changes that may be required that accommodate stormwater management facilities without altering the concept, intent, or intensity of the special use.
(b) Any alteration of approved conditions applicable to the special use that would constitute a reduction to the mitigation of the potential negative impact the use would otherwise have on adjacent properties.
L. Renewal of Special Use Permits. The City Council may, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Subsection, consider requests for renewal of special use permits. An application for the renewal of a special use permit must be filed by the party to whom a special use permit was granted, or a permitted successor thereto or assignee thereof, and must be filed prior to the date on which the term of the special use permit is scheduled to expire. The City Council may consider such request at a public hearing following notice pursuant to Subparagraph 11-203 B3(c) of this Code. The City Council may, but shall have no obligation to, seek the recommendation of another board or commission of the City prior to such consideration. In the event that the party requesting such renewal demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that the standards and circumstances under which the special use permit was originally approved have not materially changed, then the City Council shall, by ordinance duly adopted, renew the special use permit for the same period of time for which the special use permit was first valid. In the event that the City Council determines that the standards and circumstances under which the special use permit was originally approved have materially changed, the City Council shall have no obligation to renew the special use permit.
215 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
11-503: PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
A. Authority. The City Council may, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Section, and by ordinance duly adopted, grant special permits authorizing the development of planned developments, but only in the districts where such developments are listed as an authorized special permit use.
B. Purpose. Planned developments are included in this Code as a distinct category of special use. As such, they are authorized for the same general purposes as all other special uses.
In particular, however, the planned development technique is intended to allow the relaxation of otherwise applicable substantive requirements based upon procedural protections providing for detailed review of individual proposals for significant developments. This special regulatory technique is included in this Code in recognition of the fact that traditional regulations, which may be useful in protecting the character of substantially developed and stable areas, may impose inappropriate pre-regulations and rigidities upon the development or redevelopment of parcels or areas that lend themselves to an individual, planned approach.
Through the flexibility of the planned development technique, the City seeks to achieve the following specific objectives:
1. Creation of a more desirable environment than would be possible through strict application of other City land use regulations.
2. Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities resulting in better design and development, including aesthetic amenities.
3. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features, and the prevention of soil erosion.
4. Combination and coordination of architectural styles, building forms, and building relationships.
5. Provision for the preservation and beneficial use of open space.
6. An increase in the amount of open space over that which would result from the application of conventional subdivision and zoning regulations.
7. Encouragement of land uses that promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Parties Entitled to Seek Planned Development Approval. An application for special permit to permit a planned development may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the subject property.
D. Procedure.
1. Development Concept Plan.
216 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(a) Purpose. The Development Concept Plan is intended to provide the applicant an opportunity to submit a plan showing the basic scope, character and nature of the entire proposed planned development without incurring undue cost. The Development Concept Plan is the basis on which the required public hearing is held, thus permitting public consideration of the proposal at the earliest possible stage. In order to permit the City and the applicant to proceed with some assurance, approval of the Development Concept Plan binds the applicant and the City with respect to the following basic elements of development:
(i) Categories of uses to be permitted;
(ii) General location of residential and nonresidential land uses;
(iii) Overall maximum density of residential uses and intensity of nonresidential uses;
(iv) General architectural style of the proposed development;
(v) General location and extent of public and private open space, including recreational amenities;
(vi) General location of vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems;
(vii) Staging of development; and
(viii) Nature, scope and extent of public dedications, improvements or contributions to be provided by the applicant.
(b) Application. A formal application for approval of a Development Concept Plan shall be filed with the Community Development Director in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 11-201 E9 of this Article. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, no application for approval of a Development Concept Plan shall proceed to a public hearing until the Community Development Director has first reviewed the application and determined that it is in proper form.
(c) Referral. After the Community Development Director has determined that an application for approval of a Development Concept Plan is in proper form, it shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a public hearing. The failure of the Community Development Director to act on a properly filed and completed application within thirty (30) days of his or her receipt thereof, shall be deemed to be a decision to refer the application pursuant to this Subparagraph.
(d) Public Hearing. In any case where an application for approval of a Development Concept Plan is referred by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101(F), a public hearing shall be set, noticed and conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 11-203 of this Article.
(e) Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 21 days following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council its recommendation, in the form specified by Subsection 11-104 B of this Article that the
217 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Development Concept Plan either be approved, be approved subject to modifications, or not be approved.
The failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within 21 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the Development Concept Plan as submitted.
(f) Action by City Council. Within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or its failure to act as above provided, the City Council shall either deny the application for approval of the Development Concept Plan; shall remand it back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration of specified matter; or shall, by resolution duly adopted, approve the Development Concept Plan, with or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of such approval, and refer the matter to the Community Development Director for processing of the Final Plan in accordance with Paragraph D2 of this Section.
The failure of the City Council to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying approval of the Development Concept Plan.
(g) Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance. When a subdivision of land subject to the Oak Forest Subdivision Ordinance is proposed in connection with a planned development, review of the tentative plant of the proposed subdivision shall be carried out simultaneously with review of the Development Concept Plan.
(h) Limitation on Development Concept Plan Approval. An application for Final Plan approval shall be filed in accordance with Paragraph D2 below within one year after the approval of the Development Concept Plan. Failure to file a Final Plan application within such period shall, unless an extension of time shall have been granted by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101 L of this Article, automatically render void the Development Concept Plan approval and all approvals of the planned development, and the Community Development Director shall, without further direction, initiate an appropriate application to revoke the Special Use Permit.
2. Final Plan.
(a) Purpose. The Final Plan is intended to particularize, refine and implement the Development Concept Plan and to serve as a complete, thorough and permanent public record of the planned development and the manner in which it is to be developed.
(B) Application. Upon approval of the Development Concept Plan, the applicant shall file an application for Final Plan approval with the
218 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Community Development Director in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 11-201 E10 of this Article. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, no application for approval of a Development Concept Plan shall proceed to a public hearing until the Community Development Director has first reviewed the application and determined that it is in proper form. The application shall refine, implement and be in substantial conformity with the approved Development Concept Plan.
(c) Simultaneous Submission of Final Plan. The applicant may, at his option, submit a Final Plan for the proposed planned development pursuant to the requirements of Paragraph D2 simultaneously with the submission of the Development Concept Plan pursuant to the requirements of Paragraph D1 above. In such case, the applicant shall comply with all provisions of this Code applicable to submission of the Development Concept Plan and to submission of the Final Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider such plans simultaneously and shall grant or deny Final Plan Approval in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph D2.
(d) Public Meeting. A public meeting shall be set, noticed and conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 11-203 of this Article.
(e) Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance. When a subdivision of land subject to the Oak Forest Subdivision Ordinance is proposed in connection with a planned development, review of the final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be carried out simultaneously with review of the Final Plan.
(f) Phasing of Final Plan Approval. An application for Final Plan approval may include the entire area included in the approved Development Concept Plan or one or more phases, stages or units thereof; provided, however, that the following matters must be addressed and provide in the first phase, stage or unit submitted for Final Plan approval:
(i) All public improvements required or proposed for the entire area included in the approved Development Concept Plan.
(ii) All open space required or proposed for the entire area included in the approved Development Concept Plan.
(iii) All land dedications required or proposed for the entire area included in the approved Development Concept Plan.
(iv) The payment of all fees required by this Code.
(g) Action by Planning and Zoning Commission.
(i) Evaluation. Within sixty (60) days following the filing of an application for approval of a Final Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall with such aid and advice of such City staff and
219 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
consultants as may be appropriate, review and act on the plan. Such review shall consider:
(1) Whether the Final Plan is in substantial conformity with the approved Development Concept Plan;
(2) The merit or lack of merit of any departure of the Final Plan from substantial conformity with the approved Development Concept Plan;
(3) Whether the Final Plan complies with any and all conditions imposed by the approval of the Development Concept Plan; and
(4) Whether the Final Plan complies with the provisions of this Code and all other applicable federal, state and City codes, ordinances and regulations.
(ii) Approval Based on Substantial Conformity. If the Planning and Zoning Commission finds substantial conformity between the Final Plan and the approved Development Concept Plan and further finds the Final Plan to be in all other respects complete and in compliance with any and all conditions imposed by approval of the Development Concept Plan and with the provisions of this Code and all other applicable federal, state and City codes, ordinances and regulations, it shall transmit the plan to the City Council with its recommendation, in the form specified in Subsection 11-104 B of this Article, that the Board approve the Final Plan, with or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of approval.
(iii) Recommendation of Denial. In any case where the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the Final Plan is not in substantial conformity with the approved Development Concept Plan and does not merit approval, or in any case where it requires modifications of a plan that are not accepted by the applicant, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit the plan to the City Council together with its recommendation and specific reasons in support of its recommendation, in the form specified in Subsection 11-104 B of this Article, that the Final Plan not be approved.
(iv) Failure to Act. The failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within the 60 day period specified in Subparagraph D3(f)(i) of this section, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a recommendation to the City Council to deny the Final Plan as submitted.
(h) Action by City Council. Within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or its failure to act as above provided, the City Council shall take action in accordance with the following Paragraphs:
220 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(i) Approval Based on Substantial Conformity. If the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended approval of a Final Plan pursuant to Subparagraph D3(g)(ii) of this Section, the City Council shall, unless it specifically rejects one or more of the findings of the Planning and Zoning Commission on the basis of expressly stated reasons, approve the Final Plan by a duly adopted ordinance.
(ii) Approval Notwithstanding Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation of Denial. If the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended denial of a Final Plan pursuant to Subparagraph D3(g)(iii) of this Section, the City Council may, if it finds that the Final Plan merits approval and otherwise conforms to the requirements of this Code, approve the Final Plan by a duly adopted ordinance.
(iii) Referral Back to Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Council may refer the Final Plan back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration of specified matters.
(iv) Conditions on Final Plan Approval. The approval of any Final Plan may, in addition, be granted, with or without modifications and conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of approval.
(v) Failure to Act. The failure of the City Council to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying Final Plan approval.
(i) Recording of Final Plan. When a Final Plan is approved, the Community Development Director shall cause the Final Plan, or the portions thereof as are appropriate, to be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County.
(j) Limitation on Final Plan Approval. Construction shall commence in accordance with the approved Final Plan within one year after the approval of such Plan, or within such shorter time as may be established by the approved development schedule. Failure to commence construction within such period shall, unless an extension of time shall have been granted by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101 L of this Article, automatically render void the Final Plan approval and all approvals of the planned development and all permits based on such approvals, and the Community Development Director shall, without further direction, initiate an appropriate application to revoke the special use permit for all portions of the Planned Development that have not yet been completed.
221 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(k) Building and Other Permits. Appropriate officials of the City may, upon, but not before, receiving notice from the Community Development Director that the documents required for Final Plan approval have been approved, and upon proper application by the applicant, issue building and other permits to the applicant for the development, construction and other work in the area encompassed by the approved Final Plan; provided however, that no permit shall be issued unless the appropriate official is first satisfied that the requirements of any codes or ordinances of the City, in addition to this Code, that are applicable to the permit sought have been satisfied.
Building permits may, however, be withheld at the discretion of the Community Development Director or the City Council at any time it is determined that the development of the planned development is not proceeding in strict compliance with the approved Final Plan.
E. Standards for Planned Developments.
1. Special Use Permit Standards. No special use permit for a planned development shall be recommended or granted pursuant to this Section unless the applicant shall establish that the proposed development will meet each of the standards made applicable to special uses pursuant to Section 11-502 of this Article.
2. Additional Standards for All Planned Developments. No special use permit for a planned development shall be recommended or granted unless the applicant shall establish that the proposed development will meet each of the following additional standards:
(a) Unified Ownership Required. The entire property proposed for planned development treatment shall be in single ownership or under such unified control as to ensure that the entire property will be developed as a unified whole. All owners of the property shall be included as joint applicants on all applications and all approvals shall bind all owners. The violation of any owner as to any tract shall be deemed a violation as to all owners and all tracts.
(b) Minimum Area. The district regulations of this Code establishing standards for particular types of planned development specify the minimum area required for same planned development. In addition to meeting that specific standard, or where no specific standard is set, the applicant shall have the burden of establishing that the subject property is of sufficient size and shape to be planned and developed as a unified whole capable of meeting the objectives for which planned developments may be established pursuant to this Section.
(c) Covenants and Restrictions to be Enforceable by City. All covenants, deed restrictions, easements and similar restrictions to be recorded in connection with the planned development shall provide that they may not be modified, removed or released without the express consent of the City
222 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
Council and that they may be enforced by the City as well as by future landowners within the proposed development.
(d) Public Open Space and Contributions. Whenever the Official Comprehensive Plan or Official Map indicates that development of a planned development will create a need for land for public purposes of the City within the proposed planned development, the City Council may require that such area be designated and to the extent such need is specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed development, dedicated to the City for such use. In addition, the City Council may require evidence that all requirements of City ordinances pertaining to the dedication of land or the contribution of cash in connection with subdivisions or developments of land have been met as respects the proposed planned development.
(e) Common Open Space.
(i) Amount, Location and Use. The failure of a planned development to provide common open space shall be considered to be an indication that it has not satisfied the objectives for which such developments may be approved pursuant to this Code. When common open space is provided in a planned development, the amount and location of such open space shall be consistent with its intended function as set forth in the application and planned development plans. No such open space shall be used for the construction of any structure or improvement except such structures and improvements as may be approved in the Final Plan as appropriate to the intended leisure and recreational uses for which such open space is intended.
(ii) Preservation. Adequate safeguards, including recorded covenants or dedication of development rights, shall be provided to prevent the subsequent use of common open space for any use, structure, improvement or development other than that shown on the approved Final Plan. The restrictions must be permanent and not for a given period of years and must run with the land.
(iii) Ownership and Maintenance. The Final Plan shall include such provisions for the ownership and maintenance of such open space and improvements as are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity, care, conservation, maintenance and operation in accordance with predetermined standards and to ensure that remedial measures will be available to the City if such open space or improvements are permitted to deteriorate or are not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned development or the City.
(iv) Property Owners’ Association. When the requirements of the preceding Subparagraph are to be satisfied by the ownership or maintenance of such open space or improvements by a property
223 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
owners’ association, such association shall meet each of the following standards:
(1) The by-laws and rules of the association and all declarations, covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved as part of the Detailed Plan prior to becoming effective. Each such document shall provide that it shall not be amended in any manner that would result in it being in violation of the requirements of this Subparagraph.
(2) The association must be established and all covenants and restrictions recorded prior to the sale of any property within the area of the planned development designated to have the exclusive use of the proposed open space or improvements.
(3) The association must be responsible for casualty and liability insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of the open space and improvements to be deeded to it.
(4) Membership in the association must be mandatory for each property owner, and any successive owner, having a right to the use or enjoyment of such open space or improvements.
(5) Every property having a right to the use of enjoyment of such open space or improvements must pay its pro rata share of the cost of the association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association that meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with statutes of the State of Illinois.
(6) The association must have the right to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. The membership vote required to authorize such adjustment shall not be fixed at more than 51 percent of the members voting on the issue.
(7) The City must be given the right to enforce the covenants.
(8) The City must be given the right, after ten days’ written notice to the association, to perform any maintenance or repair work that the association has neglected to perform, to assess the membership for such work and to have a lien against the property of any member failing to pay such assessment. For this purpose alone, the City shall have all the rights and powers of the association and its governing body under the agreements and declarations creating the association.
(f) Landscaping and Perimeter Treatment. Any area of a planned development not used for structures or circulation elements shall be landscaped or otherwise improved. The perimeter of the planned development shall be treated so as to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses by means such as provision of compatible uses and structures; setbacks; screening; or natural or manmade buffers. Every planned development shall provide a perimeter landscaped open space
224 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
along each of its boundaries; each such open space shall have a minimum depth equal to the minimum applicable yard required in the district in which it is located.
(g) Private Streets. Private streets shall be permitted in a planned development provided that:
(i) Said streets shall be treated as public streets and rights of way for purposes of all setbacks, yards and calculations under this Code.
(ii) Said streets shall be owned and maintained by a property owners’ association meeting the requirements set forth in Subparagraph E2(e)(4) above; and
(iii) A covenant shall be recorded against the subject property acknowledging that the City shall at no time be under any obligation to provide maintenance for or accept dedication of said streets.
(h) Utilities. All utility lines shall be installed underground.
3. Additional Standards for Specific Planned Developments. Where the district regulations authorizing any planned development use in a particular district impose standards to be met by such planned development in such district, a special permit for such development shall not be recommended or granted unless the applicant shall establish compliance with such special standards.
F. Conditions on Planned Development Approvals. The approval of either a Development Concept Plan or a Final Plan may be conditioned on such matters as the approving body may find necessary to prevent or minimize any possible adverse effects of the proposed planned development; or to ensure its compatibility with surrounding uses and development and its consistency with the general purposes, goals and objectives of this Code, the Subdivision Ordinance and the Official Comprehensive Plan. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance or resolution granting the approval in question. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of all approvals granted for the planned development.
G. Affidavit of Compliance With Conditions; Fee. Whenever any planned development approval granted pursuant to this Section is made subject to conditions or limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the Community Development Director so stating. Such affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the Community Development Director, to recover the City’s actual direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.
H. Regulation During and Following Completion of Development. Following Final Plan approval, in the event of an express conflict between the provisions of the Final Plan and this Code, the Final Plan shall control. This Code shall control in all other instances.
I. Inspections During Development.
225 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. Inspections by Community Development Director. Following approval of the Final Plan of a planned development, or any stage thereof, the Community Development Director shall, at least annually until the completion of development, review all permits issued and construction undertaken and compare actual development with the approved plans for development and with the approved development schedule.
2. Action by Community Development Director. If the Community Development Director finds that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved schedule, or that it fails in any other respect to comply with the Final Plan, the Community Development Director shall immediately notify the City Council of such fact and may, if necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare or to prevent further violation of this Code and the Final Plan, issue an order stopping any and all work on the planned development until such time as any noncompliance is cured.
3. Action by City Council. Within sixty (60) days following notification by the Community Development Director, the City Council shall either:
(a) Take such steps as it deems necessary to compel compliance with the Final Plan; or
(b) Require the owner or applicant to seek an adjustment to the Final Plan as provided in Subsection J of this Section.
J. Adjustments to Final Plan During Development
1. Minor Adjustments. During the development of a planned development, the Community Development Director may authorize minor adjustments to the Final Plan when such adjustments appear necessary in light of the technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual development. Such minor adjustments shall be limited to the following:
(a) Altering the location of any one structure or group of structures by not more than 5 feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the approved Final Plan between such structure or structures and any other structure or any vehicular circulation element or any boundary of the planned development, whichever is less;
(b) Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than five (5) feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the approved Final Plan between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is less;
(c) Altering the location of any open space by not more than twenty (20) feet;
(d) Altering any final grade by not more than ten percent (10%) of the originally planned grade; and
(e) Altering the location or type of landscaping elements.
226 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(f) Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Code and the Final Plan as approved, shall be the minimum necessary to overcome the particular difficulty and shall not be approved if they would result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this Code.
2. Major Adjustments. Any adjustment to the Final Plan not authorized by Paragraph J1 above shall be considered to a major adjustment and shall be granted only upon application to and approval by, the City Council. The City Council may, by ordinance duly adopted, grant approval for a major adjustment without a hearing upon finding that any changes in the Final Plan as approved will be in substantial conformity with said Final Plan. If the City Council determines that a major adjustment is not in substantial conformity with the Final Plan as approved, then the Board may refer the request to the Plan Commission for further hearing, review and recommendation.
K. Amendments to Final Plan Following Approval or Completion of Development. After approval or completion of a planned development, an approved Final Plan may be amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures and subject to the standards and limitations provided in this Section 11-503 for approval of the planned development.
1. Major Amendments. Major amendments are modifications which alter the concept or intent of the approved Final Plan. Any one of the following shall be considered a Major Amendment to a Final Plan. Requests for Major Amendments shall be reviewed in accordance with Paragraph D2 of this Section. These amendments shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Significant changes which include increases in density, increases in height and/or bulk of buildings, a major reduction in the size of the proposed buildings, increases or major decreases in the number of buildings and/or lots, reductions in the amount of proposed open space, any roadway changes, changes in the final governing agreements, provisions or covenants, or other changes which change the concept or intent of the development.
(b) Significant changes to the parking location, access plan, building or parking setback areas, landscape plans, or approved conditions.
(c) Any changes to the designated land use or uses which either are not consistent with the written statement filed and approved as part of the Development Concept Plan, as required by Subparagraph 11-201 E9(d) of this Code, or would require a Special Use Permit approval in the property’s underlying zoning classification.
(d) Any changes which would result in a variation in the underlying zoning classification not otherwise approved in the Final Plan, as authorized by Paragraph 11-403 E2 of this Code.
2. Minor Amendments. Minor amendments are modifications not defined as major amendments and do not alter the concept or intent of the Final Plan. Requests for
227 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
minor amendments shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 11-203 of this code, with the Planning and Zoning Commission making a final determination within 21 days of the close of the public hearing, either granting the application for a minor amendment; granting the application subject to conditions, as specified in Subsection F above; or denying the application. These amendments shall include:
(a) Minor changes to the parking location, access plan, building or parking setback areas, or landscaping plans approved for the site as determined by the Community Development Director. Such minor changes shall include, but not be limited to: shifting the parking location internally within the site while maintaining the general siting and circulation; reducing the amount of parking spaces provided by not more than twenty (20) percent than what was approved in the Final Plan; reducing the height or density of any previously approved landscaping or screening; and any changes that may be required that accommodate stormwater management facilities without altering the concept or intent of the Final Plan.
(b) Any alteration of approved conditions applicable to the planned development that would constitute as a reduction to the mitigation of the potential negative impact the planned development would otherwise have on adjacent properties.
(c) Any change that results in a variation to this Code as permitted in Paragraph 11-403 E1 of this Code or increase the extent of a previously granted variation from this Code
(d) Any other minor change that would otherwise not be considered a Major Amendment, as defined Paragraph K1.
11-504: SITE PLAN REVIEW
A. Authority. Except in the cases of uses and developments requiring a special use permit pursuant to the provisions in this Code, the Community Development Director may, as a matter of original jurisdiction and in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Section, grant site plan approval to uses and developments requiring such approval pursuant to Subsection C of this Section. In case of uses and developments requiring a special use permit pursuant to Section 11-502 or Section 11-503 of this Code, and in cases of appeal from a denial of approval by the Community Development Director, the City Council may, by ordinance duly adopted, grant site plan approval in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Section.
B. Purpose. The site plan review process recognizes that even those uses and developments that have been determined to be generally suitable for location in a particular district are capable of adversely affecting the purposes for which this Code was enacted unless careful consideration is given to critical design elements. It is the purpose of this Section to provide a vehicle for the review of the developer’s attention to such elements.
C. Site Plan Review Required.
228 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. Community Development Director Review. Site plan review by the Community Development Director in accordance with this Section shall be required in connection with the following developments:
(a) Any development or redevelopment, other than for one single family detached dwelling unit, involving a parcel under single ownership or control having an area in excess of 40,000 square feet.
(b) Any development or redevelopment involving the construction of any new structure or structures having a gross floor area in excess of 20,000 square feet, a floor area ratio in excess of 0.25 or a height of more than three stories.
(c) Any development or redevelopment involving an existing structure having a floor area in excess of 20,000 square feet, a floor area ration in excess of 0.25, or a height in excess of three stories that would alter any such measure by more than 25 percent of such amount.
(d) Any development or redevelopment involving the creation or expansion of a parking lot or garage or a loading space.
(e) Any nonresidential development on a lot abutting or across a right of way from any residential district.
(f) Any development or redevelopment in a Redevelopment Overlay District.
(g) Any development or redevelopment involving a personal wireless services antenna, with or without an antenna support structure that is not a special permit use.
2. City Council Review. Site plan review by the City Council in accordance with this Section shall be required in connection with development or redevelopment for which this Code requires a special use permit, including planned development approval; and may be sought in any case of a denial of site plan approval by the Community Development Director.
D. Parties Entitled to Seek Site Plan Approval. Application for site plan review may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the subject property,
E. Procedure.
1. Community Development Director Approvals.
(a) Application. Applications for site plan approval by the Community Development Director shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-301 of this Article.
(b) Action by Community Development Director. Within 30 days following receipt by the Community Development Director of a properly completed application, the Community Development Director shall cause
229 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
such application and the attached site plan to be reviewed, in terms of the standards established by Subsection F of this Section, by appropriate members of his staff.
He shall then either: (1) approve the site plan as submitted; (2) on the basis of written findings in accordance with Subsection F below, approve it subject to specific modification; or (3) on the basis of such written findings, deny approval of the site plan.
Immediately upon concluding his review, the Community Development Director shall return one copy of the site plan to the applicant marked to show either approval, approval subject to modification, which modification shall be clearly and permanently marked on such plans, or denial or approval. The Community Development Director shall maintain a similarly marked set of such plans in his files for any further processing that may be required.
The failure of the Community Development Director to act within said thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision approving the site plan as submitted.
(c) Effect of Community Development Director’s Action. The action of the Community Development Director in approving a site plan or in approving a site plan subject to modifications that are acceptable to the applicant shall constitute a final administrative action and shall not be subject to further review by, or appeal to, any City Council or Commission.
The action of the Community Development Director in denying an application for site plan approval or in approving a site plan subject to modifications that are not acceptable to the applicant (which action the applicant may treat as a denial) shall not be considered final action by the City but shall only be authorization for the applicant to seek approval of the site plan from the City Council by way of the appeal procedure set forth below.
(d) Appeals. Within 45 days following a denial of site plan approval by the Community Development Director, the applicant may seek approval of the site plan by filing an application for appeal to the City Council in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-201 of this Article. Any such appeal shall be proceeded in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph E2 below.
2. City Council Approvals: Original and Appellate.
(a) Application. Applications for site plan approval by the City Council, whether as a matter of its original or its appellate jurisdiction shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-201 of this Article. In cases where review is sought by way of an appeal of a denial of site plan
230 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
approval by the Community Development Director, the application for appeal shall be filed within 45 days following such denial.
(b) Action by Community Development Director in Appeal Cases. Upon receipt of a properly completed application for an appeal of a denial of site plan approval by the Community Development Director, the Director shall forthwith transmit to the City Council the application for appeal, the original application for site plan approval, all papers constituting the record upon which the Director’s denial was based and a copy of the Director’s decision denying the application for site plan approval.
(c) Public Meeting. A public meeting shall be set, noticed and conducted by the City Council in accordance with Section 11-203 of this Article.
(d) Action by City Council. Within 35 days following the conclusion of the public meeting, the City Council shall, by ordinance duly adopted, either approve the site plan as submitted, make modifications acceptable to the applicant and approve such modified site plan or approve or disapprove it in the manner hereinafter specified.
The failure of the Board to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying site plan approval.
F. Standards for Site Plan Disapproval.
1. Standards. The Community Development Director and the City Council shall not disapprove a site plan submitted pursuant to this Section except on the basis of specific written findings directed to one or more of the following standards:
(a) The application is incomplete in specified particulars or contains or reveals violations of this Code or other applicable regulations that the applicant has, after written request, failed or refused to supply or correct.
(b) The application is submitted in connection with another application, the approval of which is a condition precedent to the necessity for site plan review, and the applicant has failed to secure approval of that application.
(c) The site plan fails to adequately meet specified standards required by this Code with respect to the proposed use or development, including special use standards where applicable.
(d) The proposed site plan interferes with easements or rights-of-way.
(e) The proposed site plan is unreasonably injurious or detrimental to the use and enjoyment of surrounding property.
(f) The proposed site plan creates undue traffic congestion or hazards in the public streets, or the circulation elements of the proposed site plan
231 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
unreasonably create hazards to safety on or off site or disjointed or inefficient pedestrian or vehicular circulation path on or off site.
(g) The screening of the site does not provide adequate shielding from or for nearby uses.
(h) The proposed site plan creates unreasonable drainage or erosion problems or fails to fully and satisfactory integrate the site into the overall existing and planned drainage system serving the City.
(i) The proposed site plan places unwarranted or unreasonable burdens on specified utility systems serving the site or area or fails to fully and satisfactory integrate site utilities into the overall existing and planned utility systems serving the City.
(j) The proposed site plan does not provide for required public uses designated on the Official Map.
(k) The proposed site plan otherwise adversely affects the public health, safety or general welfare.
2. Alternative Approaches. In citing any of the foregoing standards, other than those of Subparagraphs 1(a) and (b), as the basis for disapproving a site plan, the Community Development Director or the City Council may suggest alternative site plan approaches that could be developed to avoid the specified deficiency or may state the reasons why such deficiency cannot be avoided consistent with the applicant’s objectives.
G. Effect of Site Plan Approval. Approval of a site plan shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the City, including, but not limited to, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, a Building Permit, a Certificate of Occupancy and Subdivision Approval.
A copy of every approved site plan shall be filed with the Community Development Director and the development of the site shall be in substantial conformity with such approved & filed plan.
H. Limitations on Site Plan Approval. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Community Development Director pursuant to Subsection 11-101 L of this Article, no site plan approval shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless a building permit is issue and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a Certificate of Occupancy is issued and a use commenced within that period.
I. Adjustments to Site Plan during Development.
232 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. Site Plans Approved by the Community Development Director. During the development of the site, the Community Development Director shall have authority to authorize any adjustment to a site plan approved by him that he could have authorized in the course of his original review.
2. Site Plans Approved by the City Council.
(a) Minor Adjustments. During the development of the site, the Community Development Director may authorize minor adjustments to a site plan originally approved by the City Council when such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations first discovered during actual development. Such minor adjustments shall be limited to the following:
(i) Altering the location of any one structure or group of structures by not more than 5 feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the approved site plan between such structure or structures and any other structure or any vehicular circulation element or any boundary of the site plan, whichever is less.
(ii) Altering the location of any circulation element by not more than five (5) feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the approved site plan between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is less.
(iii) Altering the location of any open space by not more than twenty (20) feet.
(iv) Altering any final grade by not more than ten percent (10%) of the originally planned grade.
(v) Altering the location or type of landscaping elements.
Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Code and the site plan as approved shall be the minimum necessary to overcome the particular difficulty and shall not be approved if they would result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this Code.
(b) Major Adjustments. Any adjustment to a site plan originally approved by the City Council that is not authorized by Subparagraph 2(a) above shall be considered to be a major adjustment and shall be granted only upon application to an approval by, the City Council. The City Council may, by ordinance duly adopted, grant approval for major adjustment without referral to the Planning and Zoning Commission upon finding that any changes in the site plan as approved will be in substantial conformity with said plan.
J. Amendments to Site Plan Following Completion of Development. After a site is developed in accordance with an approved site plan, the approved site plan may be amended, varied, or altered in the same manner and subject to the same limitations as provided for the original approval of site plans.
233 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
11-505: DESIGN REVIEW
A. Authority. The City Council, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this Section and by ordinance duly adopted, may grant Design Review Permit approval; provided, however, that no such permit shall be granted unless such use or development complies with the regulations of the district in which it is located and all necessary certificates, permits and approvals for such use or development shall have been secured.
B. Purpose. The Design Review Permit process is intended to provide a procedure for the review of plans to ensure that the use and development requiring design review approval will comply with standards established to preserve the integrity of areas and structures which have been determined to merit special protection.
C. Parties Entitled to Seek Design Review Permits. An application for a Design Review Permit may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual interest in, the subject property.
D. Procedure.
1. Application. Applications for a Design Review Permits shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 11-301 of this Code. Applications will be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for special use permit, variation and construction approvals.
2. Other approvals required prior to approval. In any case where the proposed work requires the issuance of a special use permit, variation, or other approval, no Design Review Permit shall be granted unless and until such special use permit, variation, or other approval has been issued. The issuance of any such other approval shall not be deemed to establish any right to the issuance of a Design Review Permit.
3. Public meeting. A public meeting shall be conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
4. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. Within 35 days following the conclusion of the public meeting provided in Subsection E3 of this Section, the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall, in writing, recommend to the City Council to grant the Design Review Permit without modification, grant the Design Review Permit with modifications or subject to conditions, or deny the Design Review Permit. In reaching its recommendation, the Planning and Zoning Commission, whichever is applicable, shall be guided by the particular standards and considerations set forth in Subsection E of this Section. The failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission, to act within 35 days, or such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant, shall be deemed a recommendation to deny the Design Review Permit.
5. Action by City Council. Within 35 days after receiving the recommendation of the Plan Planning and Zoning Commission, or if the Planning and Zoning Commission fails to act within 35 days following the conclusion of the public
234 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
meeting provided in Subsection E3 of this Section, within seventy (70) days following the conclusion of such public meeting, the City Council shall, by ordinance duly adopted, grant the Design Review Permit without modification, grant the Design Review Permit with modifications or subject to conditions, or deny the Design Review Permit. The failure of the City Council to act within the time limits set in this Subsection, or such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant, shall be deemed a denial of the Design Review Permit. In reaching its decision, the City Council shall be guided by the particular standards and considerations set forth in Subsection E of this Section.
6. Issuance of certificate. If a Design Review Permit is granted pursuant to this Section, the Community Development Director, within seven days following the passage of the ordinance by the City Council pursuant to Subsection E5 of this Section, shall issue the Design Review Permit, noting thereon any modifications or conditions imposed by the City Council. Each Design Review Permit shall state on its face, in bold type, that:
THIS PERMIT DOES NOT SIGNIFY ZONING, BUILDING CODE, OR SUBDIVISION REVIEW OR APPROVAL AND HOLDER IS NOT AUTHORIZED TO UNDERTAKE ANY WORK WITHOUT SUCH REVIEW AND APPROVAL WHERE REQUIRED.
E. Standards and Considerations for Design Review Permit. In passing upon applications for Design Review Permits, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, as the case may be, shall consider and evaluate the property of issuing the Design Review Permit all in as expeditious as manner as possible. In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, as the case may be, shall be guided by the following standards and considerations:
1. General Building Design and Relation to Street and Pedestrians: All building designs shall be evaluated under the following guidelines, as well as the way in which the design relates to the street on which the subject building is, or is proposed to be, located:
(a) Height, Bulk, Scale and Massing: Overall height and massing of proposed buildings and structures shall be modulated to reduce the appearance of height and bulk.
(b) Roof-lines: Roof-lines shall be designed to generate visual interest.
(c) Façade: Architectural details in building facades shall provide visual interest and be generally compatible with surrounding buildings and properties.
(d) Proportion of openings: The size and number of openings (windows, doors, etc.) shall be proportionate to the overall façade.
235 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(e) Rhythm of entrance porch and other projections: The scale of entrances and other projections shall be designed to relate proportionately to sidewalks and pedestrians.
(f) Open spaces. The quality and location of the open spaces between buildings and in setback spaces between the street and façade shall be suitably located in relation to the street, other open spaces and pedestrian ways.
2. Visual compatibility. Visual compatibility shall be considered and reviewed in terms of the following guidelines.
(a) Height. The height of proposed buildings and structures as it relates to adjacent buildings.
(b) Materials. The quality of materials and their relationship to those in existing adjacent structures.
(c) Proportion of front façade. The relationship of the width to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
(d) Proportion of openings. The relationship of the width to the height of windows shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which the building is visually related.
(e) Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front façade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
(f) Rhythm of spacing and buildings on streets. The relationship of a building or structure to the open space between it and adjoining buildings or structures shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related.
(g) Relationship of materials and texture. The relationship of the materials and texture of the façade shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in the buildings and structures to which it is visually related.
(h) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.
(i) Walls of continuity. Building facades and appurtenances such as walls, fences, and landscape masses shall, when it is a characteristic of the area, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to ensure visual compatibility with the buildings, public ways, and places to which such elements are visually related.
236 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
(j) Scale of building. The size and mass of building and structures in relation to open spaces, windows, door openings, porches, and balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which they are visually related.
3. Overall Site Design and Landscaping. The overall site design shall be reviewed in terms of the quality of the following elements:
(a) Landscaping and screening: Parking lots, unsightly equipment and service areas shall be screened from public view by means of landscaping, fencing, and/or other means of screening.
(b) Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be architecturally integrated with building style, material and color, and shall not be directed off site.
(c) Parking: Automobile access, servicing of the property, and impact on vehicular traffic patterns and conditions on-site and in the vicinity of the site, and the retention of trees and shrubs to the maximum extent possible shall also be reviewed.
4. Special considerations for existing buildings. For existing buildings, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the availability of materials, technology, and craftsmanship to duplicate existing styles, patterns, textures, and overall detailing.
5. Manuals and guidelines. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, from time to time, provide for specific manuals or guidelines for architectural styles or common-occurring buildings or site features and elements to assist applicants for Design Review Permits. Such manuals or guidelines shall be advisory only and shall bind neither the applicant nor the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council with respect to any specific case.
F. Modifications and Conditions. In approving an application for a Design Review Permit, the City Council may, by resolution duly adopted, authorize the issuance of the Design Review Permit for plans as submitted, or on condition that specified modifications in such plans be made, or on any other condition deemed necessary to achieving the purposes and objectives of this Section. Such conditions and modifications shall be set forth in the resolution granting approval and in the Design Review Permit. The violation of any such condition or modification shall be a violation of this Code.
G. Limitation on Permits. A Design Review Permit shall become null and void 12 months after the date on which it was issued unless, within such period, the work authorized by such permit is commenced. A Design Review Permit shall relate solely to the work shown on plans approved by the issuance of such permit and it shall be unlawful for any person to deviate from such plans without obtaining an amended permit in the same manner as herein provided for obtaining original permits.
237 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART VI - SETTLEMENT OF LITIGATION
11-601: AUTHORITY
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the City Council may grant zoning approvals in connection with the settlement of litigation or pending against the City subject only to the provisions of this Part; provided, however, that this Part shall not apply to actions seeking administrative review of any final decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
11-602: PURPOSE
The authority conferred on the City Council pursuant to this Part is conferred in recognition of the fact that, when the City is involved in litigation concerning the exercise of its powers under this Code, unique factors are sometimes brought into play. It is the ultimate responsibility of the elected governing body of the City to assess the impact of those factors on the land use decision involved and to make a decision based upon the overall public good, other than actions seeking administrative review of any final decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
11-603: POWERS
For the purpose of settling pending litigation on terms deemed by it to be most advantageous to the City, the City Council shall have the power to grant any approval authorized by this Code or to modify or vary the provisions of this Code as they apply to the property which is the subject of such litigation.
11-604: PROCEDURE
Before exercising its powers under Section 11-703, the City Council shall set, notice and conduct a hearing in accordance with Section 11-20311-203 of this Article. No other procedure shall be required.
All action taken pursuant to this Part shall be evidenced by an ordinance duly adopted. The concurrence of four members of the Board shall be sufficient to approve any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority and power granted by this Part.
238 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART VII - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
11-701: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND DUTY
Upon finding the existence of any violation of this Code, the Community Development Director shall have the authority and duty to take or direct all actions necessary or appropriate to punish and abate such violation.
11-702: CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
A. STOP AND CEASE-AND-DESIST ORDERS. UPON FINDING THE EXISTENCE of any violation of this Code, the Community Development Director shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it; specifically, the Director shall order the discontinuance of any illegal use of land or structures; the removal of illegal structures, additions or alterations; and the discontinuance of illegal work being done.
B. Legal Actions. In the enforcement of this Code, the Community Development Director shall exercise all the powers authorized by the statutes of the State of Illinois and the codes and ordinances of this City to ensure compliance with, or to prevent or abate any violation of, the provisions of this Code, and in particular, shall, where necessary or appropriate, institute or cause to be instituted by the City Attorney in the name of the City of Oak Forest any and all actions, legal or equitable, including appeals, that may be required for the enforcement of this Code.
C. Abatement; Liens. Where authorized by state statute, the Community Development Director may order any work necessary to abate any violation of this Code and shall assess the cost of such work to the property owner. Upon the failure of the owner to pay such cost, the Director shall file a lien for such costs, and for all costs of collection, against the property in question.
D. Revocation of Permits. The violation of any provision of this Code, or of any permit or approval granted pursuant to it, or of any condition imposed pursuant to it shall be grounds for the revocation of any rezoning, permit, variation or approval granted pursuant to this Code and affecting the property involved in the violation. The Community Development Director may recommend and the City Council may order such revocation; provided, however, where the original rezoning permit, variation or approval was granted following a public hearing required pursuant to this Code, the revocation shall be preceded by a similar hearing.
E. Fines. In the enforcement of this Code, the Community Development Director shall, where necessary and appropriate, order the issuance and enforcement of citations to recover fines and penalties for the violation of this Code as authorized by state law and this Code.
11-703: PENALTIES
Any person who shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with, or who shall resist enforcement of, any provision of this Code shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor
239 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
more than $750 for each offense; provided, however, that, if service of summons is made by certified mail pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1, the maximum fine shall not exceed $750 for each offense. Each day violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
11-704: PRIVATE REMEDIES PRESERVED
Nothing in this Part shall be interpreted to prevent any person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the provisions of this Code from bringing an appropriate action to secure such relief.
240 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ARTICLE XII. APPLICABILITY & INTERPRETATION
PART 1 - APPLICABILITY
12-101: GENERAL SCOPE
A. Territorial Application. This Code shall apply to land, structures, and uses within the corporate limits of the City.
B. General Application. All structures erected hereafter, all uses of land or structures established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing structures occurring hereafter, and all enlargements and extensions of, additions to, changes in and relocation of existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Code applicable to the zoning districts in which such land, structures or uses are located. Existing structures and uses that do not comply with the regulations of this Code shall be subject to the provisions of Article X of this Code relating to nonconformities.
C. General Prohibition. No structure; no use of any structure or land; and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall hereafter be established, enlarged, extended, altered, moved, divided or maintained, in any manner, except as authorized by the provisions of this Code and except in compliance with the regulations of this Code. Without limiting the foregoing, any such activity that would cause any existing structure not to comply with this Code or that would create any parcel of land that could not be developed in compliance with this Code shall be prohibited.
D. Special Prohibition -- Multiple Principal Structures on Same Zoning Lot. No zoning lot in the City of Oak Forest shall be used for more than one principal structure except when authorized as part of a planned development approved pursuant to Section 11-603 of this Code or as a special permit in, non-residential zoning districts pursuant to Section 11-602 of this Code; or when one or more of the principal structures is a personal wireless services antenna, with or without antenna support structures, and related electronic equipment and equipment structures which is authorized as a permitted or special permit use pursuant to the applicable District regulations of this Code. No structural group containing two or more upward projections shall be considered a single structure unless all such upward projections are joined by an element that:
1. Is at least half as high as the tallest upward projection; and
2. Is something other than a fence, canopy, freestanding wall or other non-functional connection.
E. Plat of Consolidation Required. Whenever any application is submitted pursuant to this Code for the erection or construction of any building or structure, other than a fence, or for the installation of any paving or surfacing of the ground, over, upon or across one or more lot lines dividing or separating two or more lots of record, such application shall include an application for approval of a plat of consolidation of those lots of record into a single lot of record pursuant to the Oak Forest Subdivision and Development Code (2010), as the same has been and may, from time to time, be amended. This Subsection
241 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
shall not apply where an application for approval of a plat of subdivision or resubdivision accompanies such an application under this Code.
F. Exempt Uses.
1. Utility Lines. The following utility uses are exempt from the provisions of this Code: poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains and valves, but not including substations located on or above the surface of the ground, for the distribution to consumers of telephone, cable television or other communications, electricity, gas or water, or for the collection of sewage or surface water, and also not including personal wireless services antenna, with or without antenna support structures, and related electronic equipment and equipment structures. All such uses shall, however, comply with the subdivision and other applicable ordinances of the City.
2. Railroad Right-of-Way Uses. All railroad rights-of-way, trackage and passenger stations existing on the effective date of this Code shall be exempt from its provisions. Any other railroad facilities or uses, or any change of such existing facility, shall, however, be subject to all of the provisions of this Code.
G. Private Agreements. This Code is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any platted building line, easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the regulations of this Code are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such platted building line, easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship, the regulations of this Code shall govern.
12-102: APPLICATION TO VARIATIONS AND SPECIAL PERMIT USES
A. Existing Variations and Special Permits. Any variation or special permit (sometimes, in prior codes, referred to as "special uses") lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Code, or any amendment thereof, shall be deemed to be and continue to be valid after such effective date, subject to any conditions placed thereon at the time of issuance. Any structure or use lawfully authorized by any such variation or special permit that could not be so issued after the effective date of this Code shall be subject to the provisions of Article X of this Code dealing with nonconformities.
B. Existing Uses and Structures Newly Requiring Special Permit. Any use or structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code or any amendment thereof that did not, prior to such effective date, require a special permit but which, after such effective date, does require a special permit, may secure such a permit only pursuant to the standards and procedures made applicable to special permit uses by Section 11-602 of this Code. Unless and until such a permit is so secured, such use shall be subject to the provisions of Article X of this Code dealing with nonconformities.
12-103: BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE
A. New Code Shall Apply. Except as provided in Subsections B and C of this Section, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued following the effective date of this Code or any
242 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
amendment thereof unless the work, structure or use for which the Certificate of Occupancy is sought is made to fully comply with the applicable provisions of this Code or such amendment.
B. Right to Complete Construction Pursuant to Approved Plans. Nothing in this Code, or any amendment to it, shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure in the event that:
1. A building permit for such structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Code or any such amendment thereof or such a permit is issued after such effective date based upon a complete and proper application for such permit filed prior to such effective date; and
2. Such permit had not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date; and
3. Such permit was lawfully and properly issued in accordance with the law prior to such effective date; and
4. Construction pursuant to such permit is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit and within 180 days of such effective date and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Right to Occupy as Nonconformity. Upon completion pursuant to Subsection B hereof, such structure may be occupied by, and a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for, the use designated on such permit, subject thereafter, to the extent applicable, to the provisions of Article X of this Code relating to nonconformities.
12-104: PENDING APPLICATIONS
A. New Code Shall Apply. This Code and any amendment thereof shall apply to any application pending on the effective date of this Code or such amendment in the same manner as though such application was filed after such effective date.
B. Duty of City Officials. Within twenty (20) days following the effective date of this Code or any amendment thereof, any City official, department, board or commission then having pending before it any application to which this Code or any amendment of it applies pursuant to Subsection A of this Section shall transmit a copy of such application to the City Administrator.
C. Duty of City Administrator. Within thirty (30) days following the effective date of this Code or any amendment thereof, the City Administrator shall inform each applicant named on each application referred to him pursuant to Subsection B of this Section that said application is subject to the provisions of this Code, as amended, and will be processed in accordance therewith; that the applicant may within thirty (30) days following the mailing of such notice refile, without additional fee, its application on the basis of this Code, as amended; and that if the applicant does not so re-file, its application may be denied for noncompliance with the provisions of this Code, as amended.
243 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
D. Duty of Applicant. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections B and C of this Section, it shall be the responsibility of each applicant having an application pending on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment thereof, to modify such application in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Code, as amended, and the failure to do so may, whether or not the procedures of said Subsections have been followed, result in denial of such application for failure to comply with this Code, as amended. Any modification or re-filing of an application pending on such effective date in order to comply with the provisions of this Code, as amended, shall be permitted at any time prior to the final disposition of such application & shall be permitted without payment of any additional fee.
E. Processing of Pending Applications. Upon the re-filing of any pending application as herein provided, or upon notification from the applicant that it will not re-file or modify its application, or upon the expiration of sixty (60) days following effective date of this Code or any amendment thereof, whichever occurs first, such pending application shall be processed in accordance with the terms of this Code, as amended; provided, however, that the application requirements, hearing requirements and procedural requirements set forth in Article XI, Part 3, and Subsections 11-601D, 11-602D, 11-603D and 11-604E of this Code shall not apply to any such pending application and each such application shall be processed in accordance with the application, hearing and procedural requirements that were in effect on the date such application was filed. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the City Manager shall have the authority to request additional data, information or documentation for pending applications when, in his or her judgment, such additional data, information or documentation is necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of such pending application.
12-105: REPEAL OF PRIOR PROVISIONS
The Oak Forest Zoning Ordinance as adopted by Ordinance No. 64-36 on December 19, 1964, and as amended from time to time thereafter prior to the adoption of this Ordinance No. 88-62 providing for the comprehensive revision of said Ordinance by the adoption of this Code, be, and it is hereby, repealed in its entirety. Ordinance No. 79-1, passed and approved on January 9, 1979, as amended by Ordinance No. 84-16, on June 12, 1984, be, and are hereby, repealed in their entirety. Except as expressly provided in this Code, such repeals shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal takes effect, but the same may enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted, as fully and the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected.
12-106: SEVERABILITY
A. Intent as to Severability. The several provisions of this Code shall be severable in accordance with the following rules:
1. Provisions Declared Invalid. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Code to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Code.
244 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
2. Applications Declared Invalid. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Code to a particular parcel of land, a particular structure or a particular use, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any other land, structure or use.
3. Applicable Regulations Following Declaration of Invalidity. Whenever the provisions of this Code are declared invalid in their application to any particular parcel of land, the Zoning Map provided for in Section 2-103 of this Code shall continue to show such parcel in the zoning district applicable to it pursuant to this Code unless and until such district is changed by an amendment adopted by the City Council pursuant to Section 11-601 of this Code; provided, however, that the parcel in question shall also be marked with a star or other distinctive marking to direct attention to the court decree affecting said parcel. The City Administrator shall maintain a file of any such decrees. The provisions of any such decree shall be deemed to modify the otherwise applicable provisions of this Code as they apply to said parcel to the extent provided in said decree but said parcel shall otherwise remain subject to the provisions of this Code.
12-107: EFFECTIVE DATE AND PUBLICATION
This Code shall take effect immediately upon, and its Effective Date shall be the date of, its passage by a vote of two-thirds of the corporate authorities then holding office and its approval by the Mayor, the corporate authorities hereby finding that the immediate implementation of this Code is a matter of urgency; provided, however, that the following provisions of this Code shall not take effect until one year following said Effective Date: 9-107 insofar as it requires buffering and screening of structures and uses existing on said Effective Date.
The City Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to publish this Code in pamphlet form and to publish an appropriate notice of its adoption and availability in a newspaper published in the City.
245 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PART II - INTERPRETATION
12-201: PROVISIONS ARE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare, as set forth in the provisions hereof establishing the intent and purpose of this Code in general and its various Sections in particular.
When the provisions of this Code impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Code shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this Code, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
12-202: PROVISIONS ARE CUMULATIVE
The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other codes, laws and ordinances in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this Code. The several provisions of this Code shall also be interpreted to be cumulative of each other. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this Code shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other codes, laws and ordinances, and each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.
12-203: PROVISIONS ARE NOT A CONSENT, LICENSE OR PERMIT
The provisions of this Code shall not be interpreted to be, or to grant, a consent, license or permit to use any property or to establish, locate, construct or maintain any structure or use, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or activity.
12-204: UNLAWFUL USES AND STRUCTURES NOT VALIDATED
This Code shall not be interpreted to validate or make lawful any unlawful use or structure existing upon the effective date of this Code. Any such unlawful use or structure shall remain unlawful to the extent that said use or structure is in conflict with the provisions of this Code.
12-205: WORD USAGE
A. TENSE AND FORM.
Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
B. NUMBER.
Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
C. GENDER.
246 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall include the masculine and feminine.
D. SHALL AND MAY.
The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
E. TIME.
The time within which any act required by this Code is to be performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Illinois General Assembly, in which event it shall also be excluded.
F. PERSON.
The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations and any other similar entities.
G. USED FOR.
The phrase "used for" shall include intended for, designed for, occupied for, maintained for, and arranged to be used or occupied for whenever that interpretation would result in the regulation being more restrictive in its application to any use or structure.
H. CITY.
The word "City" means the City of Oak Forest, Illinois.
I. COUNTY.
The word "County" means the County of Cook, Illinois, unless referring to a property or matter over which Lake County, Illinois has jurisdiction, in which event, it means the County of Lake, Illinois.
J. UNDEFINED TERMS.
Any word not defined in Section 12-206 of this Code shall have the meaning given in any applicable City code ordinance or, if none, in Webster's New International Dictionary, Second Edition 1975, except for words employed to refer to the permitted uses and special permit uses of this Code, which shall be interpreted, insofar as applicable, in accordance with the meaning established in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987, as amended through the effective date of this Code and as further amended by the City (see Appendix A).
K. CAPTIONS, ILLUSTRATIONS AND TABLES.
In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any caption, illustration or table, the text shall control.
L. ARTICLE, SECTION AND PARAGRAPH HEADINGS.
247 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
This Code is divided into articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, and subparagraphs that shall be numbered according to the following format:
1-101 A1(a)(1)(i)
and that shall be referred to in accordance with the following example:
II Article
A. Section
2-401B Subsection
2-401B3 Paragraph
2-401B3(a) Subparagraph
B3(a)(2) Subparagraph
B3(a)(2)(iii) Subparagraph
12-206: DEFINITIONS
A. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ABUT. To touch, to lie immediately next to, to share a common wall or lot line or to be separated by only a street, alley or drainage course.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE. See Section 9-101 of this Code.
ADJACENT. To lie near, close to, or in the vicinity.
ADVERTISING SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
AIRPORT. Any premises used for the landing and take-off of aircraft of any kind including appurtenant land and structures.
ALLEY. A public right-of-way that affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property.
ALTERATION. Any change in the size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a structure.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL. See Subsection 12-206 S of this Section.
AMENDMENT. See Section 11-601 of this Code.
ANIMAL TRAINING. Shall have the same meaning as the defined term "Trainer" in Section 5-1 of the City's Municipal Code.
ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
ANTENNA. Any structure designed for transmitting signals to a receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, or other signals from satellites or other sources.
248 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure used for the principal purpose of supporting an antenna.
ANTENNA SURFACE AREA. See Subsection 12-206 S of this Section.
APPEAL. See Section 11-502 of this Code.
APPROPRIATE USE. Only those uses that are allowed within the regulatory floodway, as specified in Section 8-207 of this Code.
AREA, GROSS. The total land and water area included in a parcel that is the subject of an application filed pursuant to this Code, excluding only property located in public rights-of-way or private easements of access or egress at the time of application.
AREA, NET. The gross area of a parcel less land and water areas required or proposed to be publicly dedicated or land to be devoted to private easements of access or egress. Both land and water areas not so publicly dedicated or devoted shall be included in the calculation of net area.
ATTACHED DWELLING. See Subsection 12-206 D of this Section.
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
AUTOMATED WAREHOUSE. A warehouse, or a portion thereof, where the process of picking, distributing and sorting inventory is supported primarily by mechanization and where no more than one employee for each 2500 square feet of warehouse space perform such process at any one time.
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE. An automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, such as collision service, body repair and frame straightening; painting and upholstering; vehicle steam cleaning; and undercoating.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Minor repairs, incidental replacement of parts and motor service to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons capacity, but not including any operation included in "Automobile Repair, Major" as defined in this Subsection.
AUTOMOTIVE DETAILING. Services including washing, detailing, waxing, or cleaning of passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons capacity, provided at non-automated establishments and performed by the business operator without the use of an automatic production line method, conveyor machines or any other large mechanical equipment typically found at car washing facilities.
AWNING. A roof-like covering, temporary in nature, that projects from the wall of a building.
AWNING SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
249 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
B. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
BALCONY. A platform that projects from the exterior wall of a building and (i) is located a minimum of one story above grade, and (ii) is unenclosed and exposed to the open air, and (iii) has direct access to the interior of the building, and (iv) is not supported by posts or columns extending to the ground.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the one hundred year (100-year) frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is defined in Section 8 of this code.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood. The base flood elevation is also known as the one hundred (100) year frequency flood elevation.
BASEMENT. A portion of a structure located partly underground but having less than half its clear floor to ceiling height over more than half of its floor area below grade.
BAY WINDOW. A window or windows cantilevered from the wall of a building above grade or resting on a building foundation and which forms an alcove within the building
BERM. A hill that acts as a visual barrier between a lot and adjacent properties, alleys or streets.
BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by public streets or by a combination of public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or boundary lines of the City.
BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City. See Section 11-102 of this Code and Chapter 2, Article XIV of the Oak Forest Municipal Code
CITY COUNCIL. The President and the City Councilof the City of Oak Forest.
BOARDING KENNEL. Shall have the same meaning as the defined term "Boarding Kennel" in Section 5-1 of the City 's Municipal Code.
BUFFERING. Any means of protecting a parcel from the visual or auditory effects of an adjacent use. Buffering may include, but is not limited to, berming, fencing, landscaping, setbacks open spaces.
BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property. References to "Building" shall in all cases be deemed to refer to both buildings and structures.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See Section 9-101 of this Code.
BUILDING CODE. The Building Code of the City of Oak Forest.
BUILDING COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot area covered by any building or structure. See also Subsection 12-206 L, "Lot Coverage," of this Section.
250 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
BUILDING DEPTH. The longest straight line that can be drawn through a structure substantially parallel to the side or corner side lot lines of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded entirely by open space.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE FRONT. Except as provided in Subsection 12-206 H, "Height" of this Section, that exterior wall of a building or structure facing the front line of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING HEIGHT. See Subsection 12-206 H of this Section.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING WIDTH. The longest straight line that can be drawn through a structure parallel to the front lot line.
BULK AND SPACE REGULATIONS. The regulations of this Code pertaining to the permissible or required height, volume, area, floor area, floor area ratio, and dimensions, building coverage, lot coverage and usable open space applicable to uses and structures. The term does not include yard requirements.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
BUSINESS SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
C. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a building.
CANOPY SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
CARRY-OUT EATING PLACE. See Subsection 12-206 E of this Section.
CELLAR. A portion of a structure located partly or wholly underground and having half or more than half its clear floor to ceiling height over half or more than half of its floor area below grade.
CEMETERY. A burial ground including structures such as mausoleums, columbariums, incidental management offices and maintenance facilities.
CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMITY. See Subsection 11-402 G of this Code.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. See Section 11-402 of this Code.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. See Section 11-401 of this Code.
CHANGES TO THE REGULATORY FLOODWAY. Changes in the original regulatory floodway due to:
251 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
1. Error in physical data or mathematical model;
2. Changed conditions;
3. Public flood control projects; or
4. Relocation of floodway storage and conveyance approved by a unit of local government.
Conditional approval of such a change must be obtained from IDNR/OWR and FEMA prior to construction of the floodway change. Final approval and revision of the regulatory floodway map will occur only after acceptance by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of as-built plans, and buildings and structures may thereafter be constructed.
CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening).
CIRCULATION AISLE. The means of access to a parking or loading space for a motor vehicle.
CITY ENGINEER. The head of the Engineering Department of the City.
CITY MANAGER. The chief administrative official of the City. When used in this Code, the term City Manager shall refer either to such official or to his duly authorized delegate.
CIVIC USE OR PURPOSE. An undertaking in which citizens of a community, by their cooperative action and as their central goal, seek to promote the general welfare and common good of the community; in other words, a community movement to accomplish community goals.
CLASSIFICATION OR ZONING CLASSIFICATION. The district into which a parcel of land is placed and the body of regulations to which it is subjected by this Code and the Zoning Map.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A building the principal use of which is a commercial use.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. Any district whose designation begins with the letter "C", as set forth in Section 2-101 of this Code.
COMMERCIAL USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in a Commercial District.
252 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. For purposes of this Code, all commercial vehicles shall be classified as either a Class I or Class II commercial vehicle. Any trailer including, but not limited to, tar hoppers, generators, cement mixers, or any portable construction or maintenance equipment that is not a camper trailer, a travel trailer, or a recreational vehicle trailer, shall be deemed a commercial vehicle. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this Code to commercial vehicles shall be deemed to be made to both Class I and Class II commercial vehicles.
CLASS I. Any vehicle, other than a recreational vehicle, regardless of the use to which the vehicle is put or intended or designed to serve and regardless of any other classification system made applicable to vehicles by any other governmental body, that weighs in excess of 8,000 pounds in gross weight (including vehicle and maximum load).
CLASS II. Any vehicle that is not a recreational vehicle or a Class I commercial vehicle that is operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, including, without limitation, the following:
1. Any van with no side windows other than those adjacent to the driver and passenger seats, sometimes known as panel vans; or
2. Any other vehicle with any commercial markings or any removable equipment or merchandise stored on the exterior of the vehicle.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A group home or specialized residential care home, the residents of which do not constitute a family, that serves persons with disabilities, that is licensed, certified or accredited by appropriate governmental entities, and that does not serve as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or persons whose primary reason for placement is treatment of a communicable disease. For purposes of this definition, "disabilities" means any disability:
1. Attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments or a combination thereof;
2. Likely to continue for a significant amount of time or indefinitely;
3. That results in functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of major life activities: self-care, receptive or expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living, and economic self-sufficiency; and
4. That reflects a person's need for a combination and sequence of interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services which are of a life-long or extended duration.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of flood storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain.
253 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING. A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open area, or from other buildings or structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows or doors normally provided for the accommodation of persons, goods or vehicles. However, a parking structure that has less than 50 percent of its outer wall space open but that does not allow any parked vehicle within said structure to be seen from the exterior thereof shall be considered a completely enclosed building.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. See Subsection 11-201 P of this Code.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction approval by IDNR-OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
CONDITIONAL USE. See Subsection 11-206 U of this Section.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN. See Subsection 9-1 of this Code.
CORNER LOT. See Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one end open and one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CURB LEVEL. The street curb height at the midpoint of a lot line. Where curb exists, the elevation of the crown of the street at the midpoint of the lot line shall be deemed to be the curb level.
D. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DAY CARE. Daytime care or instruction, except elementary, secondary and schools of higher education, of children or adults away from their own homes by a person other than a relative, whether or not for compensation or reward.
DAY CARE NURSERY. A place providing day care for not more than eight children, including family members, being operated as a home occupation, and retaining all necessary state and local licenses.
DAY CARE SERVICE, CHILD. A place providing day care for children and not operated as a home occupation.
254 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
DECK. A platform or structure serving a principal structure at thirty inches or more above grade and not covered by any permanent structure.
DEDICATION. The designation of land for a public use by the owner thereof.
DENSITY. The number of persons, families or dwelling units or the amount of gross floor area in a building, on a lot or in a development.
DENSITY, GROSS. The density of a development divided by the gross area of the development.
DENSITY, NET. The density of a development divided by the net area of the development.
DEPTH OF LOT. See Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
DETENTION. Temporary storage of storm water to be released from the property at the same rate as it would be released from the property in its natural state, by means of a facility engineered for that purpose.
DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change, other than maintenance of existing structures, paved areas or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate, including, without limitation, the construction or installation of new, or enlargement of existing structures, streets or utilities; dredging, filling, drilling, mining, grading, paving or excavating operations; and open storage of materials.
DISPLAY SURFACE OR FACE. The area made available by a sign structure for the purpose of displaying the sign's message.
DISTANCE OF SIGN PROJECTION. The distance from the exterior wall surface of a building to the sign element farthest distant from such surface.
DISTRICT OR DISTRICT, ZONING. See Subsection 12-206 Z of this Section.
DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE. A line on the Zoning Map separating one district from another. See also Subsection 2-103 C of this Code.
DISTRICT BOUNDARY LOT. Any lot or parcel of land any lot line of which coincides with a district boundary line or which is contiguous to a public or private right-of-way containing a district boundary line.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. An establishment or facility that provides products or services to occupants seated inside a motor vehicle, other than within a building, but not including dispensing of fuels at an automobile service station. Pick-up, drop-off, ordering and service are handled through a drive-through window.
DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW. A window, other fenestration or other device provided within the structure of a building designed for the delivery of goods or products to a vehicle and through which compensation for such may be exchanged, including the making of change and the order of such goods.
255 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
DRIVEWAY. A private access way that provides direct access from a street to not more than one lot or one principal building or use, except as may otherwise be provided by the City Council pursuant to Section 22-60 of the Oak Forest Municipal Code (1988).
DWELLING. Any structure or portion thereof designed or used for habitation by one or more families.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A dwelling, other than a single family attached dwelling, containing more than two dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED. See Subsection 12-206 D, "Dwelling, Townhouse."
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling containing only one dwelling unit, situated on a separate subdivision lot or being a separate condominium unit capable of individual sale and completely surrounded by open space.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. A dwelling composed of a row of two or more, but not more than eight adjoining dwelling units, each situated on a separate subdivision lot or being a separate condominium unit capable of individual sale and each of which is separated from the others by one or more unpierced walls extending from ground to roof.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A dwelling, other than a single family attached dwelling, containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall.
DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation by one family.
E. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
EARTHBORNE VIBRATIONS. A cyclic movement of the earth due to the propagation of mechanical energy.
EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated area of his property. The term also refers to such a designated area.
EATING PLACE. An establishment where food is available to the general public primarily for consumption within a structure on the premises, where at least 50 percent of the gross floor area of the establishment is devoted to patron seating.
EATING PLACE, CARRY-OUT. An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared, ready-to-eat foods intended to be consumed off the premises.
EATING PLACE, DRIVE-IN. A drive-in establishment where food is prepared and served to persons in, or for consumption in motor vehicles.
256 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
EFFECTIVE DATE. See Section 12-107 of this Article.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
ENLARGEMENT. An addition to the floor area of an existing building or an increase in the size of any other existing structure.
EROSION. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
ETHICS CODE. The City of Oak Forest Code of Ethics.
EXCEPTION. See Section 11—505 of this Code.
EXTENSION. An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an existing use within an existing structure or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
EXTERIOR WALL. Any wall of a building or structure one side of which is exposed to the outdoors.
F. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or guardianship, or not more than three persons not so related, together with gratuitous guests and domestic servants, living together as the functional equivalent of a traditional family and a single housekeeping unit.
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR Parts 59-79, as amended.
FENCE. A barrier structure used as a boundary or as a means of protection, confinement or screening.
FINAL PLAT OF SUBDIVISION. A map or plan of record of a subdivision, and any accompanying materials, prepared in accordance with Article VIII of the Oak Forest Subdivision Ordinance.
FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated regulatory floodway.
FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM). An official map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that depicts the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA’s) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
257 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PLAIN. That land typically adjacent to a body of water or watercourse with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA’s), ponding areas, or areas not adjacent to a body of water or watercourse. The floodplains are those lands within the City of Oak Forest that are subject to inundation by the base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood. The flood plains within the City of Oak Forest are generally identified on the maps, plans and studies referenced in Section 8-204 of this Code.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or one hundred (100) year frequency flood event plus one (1) foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY. See Subsection 12-206 R “Regulatory Floodway” of this Code.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. (For determining maximum gross floor area for single family detached dwellings in SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.) The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or of such area devoted to a specific use, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings or uses. Gross floor area shall include, without limitation, areas such as:
1. basement floors;
2. area devoted to off-street parking or loading, whether in attached or detached structures;
3. elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
4. floor spaces and shafts used for mechanical, electrical and plumbing equipment, except equipment located in a cellar or on the roof; and
5. penthouses;
6. interior balconies and mezzanines;
7. enclosed porches;
8. floor space used for accessory uses; and
258 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
9. where any space has a floor to ceiling height of 14 feet or more, each 14 feet of height, or fraction thereof, shall constitute a separate floor; provided, however, for spaces with a sloping or slanting ceiling, only that portion of such space with a floor to ceiling height of 14 feet or more shall be treated as a separate floor.
Gross floor area shall exclude the following specific areas:
1. cellar floors;
2. attic floors, regardless of the clear ceiling height;
3. decks and patios;
4. open, unenclosed porches, not exceeding eight feet in depth;
5. chimneys projecting not more than two feet from an exterior wall;
6. bay windows projecting not more than three feet from an exterior wall for a distance not more than 1/3 of the length of such wall provided that such projections shall come entirely within planes drawn from the main corners of the building at an interior angle of 45 degrees with the wall in question; and
7. the first 200 square feet of accessory storage structures other than garages, when authorized pursuant to Paragraph 9-101 D1 of this Code.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. (for all purposes except determining maximum gross floor area for single family detached dwellings in single-family residential districts and off-street parking and loading requirements in all districts.) The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or of such area devoted to a specific use, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings or uses. Gross floor area shall include areas such as basement floors, but not cellar floors; elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor spaces and shafts used for mechanical, electrical and plumbing equipment, except equipment located in a cellar or on the roof; penthouses; attic floors, except where the clear ceiling height is less than seven feet; interior balconies and mezzanines; enclosed porches and floor space used for accessory uses. It shall not include floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading. Where any space has a floor to ceiling height of more than 16 feet, only the first 16 feet of space shall constitute a floor for the purpose of calculating gross floor area.
FLOOR AREA, NET. (For determining off-street parking and loading requirements.) The gross floor area of a building minus floor space devoted to washrooms intended for general public use; elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor space and shafts used for mechanical, electrical, and plumbing equipment; basement and attic floor space used only for bulk storage.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The gross floor area of a building divided by the total lot area of the zoning lot on which it is located. For planned developments, the FAR shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area of all principal buildings by the net area of the site. (Illust. #14)
FOOT CANDLE. The illumination at all points one foot distant from a uniform point source of one candle power.
259 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of development within the watershed.
FRONT LOT LINE. See Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
FRONT YARD. See Subsection 12-206 Y of this Section.
FRONT YARD LINE. See Subsection 12-206 Y of this Section.
FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on one side of a street, measured along such street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another intersecting or intercepting street, a right-of-way in excess of 30 feet, an end of a dead-end street, a watercourse or a City boundary.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT. All of the property of a zoning lot fronting on a street, measured along the front and corner side lot lines.
G. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
GARAGE. A structure, or part thereof, designed or used for the parking and storage of vehicles at one or more levels.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
GRADE. In all zoning districts other than single family residential districts and the Residential and Limited Commercial District, for structures more than 5 feet from any street line, the average level of the finished surface adjacent to the structure, and for structures any portion of which is located within 5 feet of a street line or lines, the curb level, or the average of the curb levels at such street line or lines.
In all single family residential districts and the Residential and Limited Commercial District, the normal contour of the land at the location of the proposed structure or development prior to the construction of such structure or development, as established by the City Engineer; provided, however, that if no normal contour can be established, then grade shall mean (1) the curb level, or the average of the curb levels, adjacent to the street line or lines, or (2) where no curbs exist, the level of the center line of the street, or the average level of the center line of the street, adjacent to the street line or lines.
GRADING. Reshaping natural land contours using natural land materials.
GROUND SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
H. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
HEIGHT. In all zoning districts other than single family residential districts and the Residential and Limited Commercial District, the vertical distance measured from grade at the front of a structure to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs and to
260 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs or to the highest point of a structure without a roof. Where a parapet wall, penthouse, mechanical equipment or any similar structure is located on the roof of a building, building height shall be measured to the highest point of said structure if any part of it extends above the height as measured pursuant to the first sentence of this definition. Where a structure faces more than one street, the structure face with the greater height when measured as herein required shall be deemed to be the front of the structure for purposes of measuring structure height.
In all single family residential districts and the Residential and Limited Commercial District, the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of a structure. For the purposes of this definition in single family residential districts and the Residential and Limited Commercial District, "highest point of a structure" shall mean the point of said structure that is located at the highest vertical distance above grade. Chimneys of principal residential buildings shall not be included in determining the said highest point. Where a zoning lot has more than one grade at the location of the building or structure, the structure face with the greater height when measured as herein required shall be used for purposes of measuring structure height.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
HOME OCCUPATION. See Subsection 9-102 B of this Code.
HOTEL. An establishment offering transient lodging accommodations, that is commonly known as a hotel in the community in which it is located, and that provides customary hotel services such as maid service, furnishing and laundry of linen, telephone service, desk service, bellboy service and the use and upkeep of furniture.
HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY. An establishment offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public that are, accessed through a central area or main lobby, and that have limited kitchen facilities and are rented on a weekly basis a majority of the time; provided, however, that no more than four guests shall occupy any unit of such accommodations at any one time.
HYDROLOGIC and HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events.
I. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
IDENTIFICATION SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
IDNR/OWR. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources - Office of Water Resources or the successor to its responsibilities.
IMPROVEMENT OR FACILITY, PUBLIC. A sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage appurtenance, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, planting strip or other facility for which the City or any other governmental agency may assume maintenance or operational responsibility.
INDUSTRIAL BUILDING. Any building the principal use of which is an industrial use.
261 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. Any district whose designation begins with the letter "I" as set forth in Section 2-101 of this Code.
INDUSTRIAL USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in a Industrial District.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING. Any building the principal use of which is an Institutional use.
INSTITUTIONAL USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in the Institutional Buildings District.
INTEGRATED CENTER. A grouping of compatible uses on a single zoning lot, such uses being in either single ownership or under unified control.
INTERPRETATION. See Section 11-501 and Article XII, Part 2, of this Code.
INTERIOR LOT. See Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
J. When used in this Code, the following term shall have the meaning herein ascribed to it:
JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 of this Code.
K. [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
L. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
LANDBANKING. Setting aside land area for future use. See also Subsection 9-104 E of this Code.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. See Subsection 12-206 N of this Section.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. See Subsection 12-206 P, "Pre-Code Structure."
LEGAL USE. See Subsection 12-206 U, "Use, Legal."
LESS RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT. See Section 2-102 of this Code.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An official determination by FEMA following a review of scientific or technical data that a specific property or portion of a property is not in a 100-year floodplain. The LOMA amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM.
LIMITED FINANCIAL SERVICE FACILITY. A facility established by an existing banking or financial institution that offers limited financial services only to businesses conducted within the contiguous area of the district in which the Limited Financial Service Facility is located.
262 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. A public performance intended to be diverting or engaging with or without the use of instrumental, electronic or mechanical accompaniment.
LOADING SPACE. An area used for the standing, loading or unloading of truck or trailer.
LOT. See "Lot of Record" and "Lot, Zoning," infra. Unless the context indicates otherwise, all references in this Code to a "lot" shall be deemed to mean a "zoning lot."
LOT AREA, TOTAL. The total land and water area included within lot lines, excluding, however, areas subject to easements for public or private access or egress.
LOT AREA PER UNIT. That portion of the total lot area allocated for each dwelling unit located on a lot.
LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF A. That portion of a lot bounded by the required yards.
LOT, BUILDABLE WIDTH OF A. The width of a lot remaining as buildable after side yards and corner side yards are provided.
LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more intersecting streets or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street where it is possible to draw two intersecting tangents, one each commencing at each of the two points of intersection of the lot lines and street line, which intersect with each other to form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot's area covered by any building or structure or any impermeable surface other than streets, whether public or private, public sidewalks, private sidewalks under common ownership, or water bodies. See also Subsection 12-206 B, "Building Coverage" of this Section.
LOT DEPTH. The minimum straight line distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE. Any street line of a corner lot other than its front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot abutting upon only one street, the line separating such lot from the right-of-way of such street; in the case of a through lot, each line separating such lot from the right-of-way of a street shall be considered a front lot line; in the case of a corner lot, the shorter lot line separating such lot from the right-of-way of a street shall be considered to be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR. The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines generally opposite or most nearly parallel to the front lot line. In the case of triangular shaped lots or a lot having a rear lot line less than ten feet in length, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be an imaginary line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front line. City of
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front, corner-side or rear lot line.
263 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
LOT LINES. The property lines bounding a lot; provided, however, that where a lot includes land subject to a public right-of-way easement for street purposes, the line separating such right-of-way from the rest of the lot shall be deemed to be the lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM TOTAL AREA OF. The smallest lot on which a particular use or structure may be located in a particular district.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel of land separately described in a recorded instrument.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontages on two non-intersecting streets.
LOT, WIDTH OF. The shortest distance between side lot lines measured by a line passing through the center point of the required front yard line.
LOT, ZONING. A tract of land consisting of one or more lots of record, or parts thereof, under single fee simple title ownership or control, located entirely within a block and occupied by, or designated by its owner or developer at the time of filing for any zoning approval or building permit as a tract to be developed for, a principal building and its accessory buildings, or a principal use, together with such open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged, or required under this Code, to be used with such building or use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sale of individual lots of record underlying individual dwelling units in an attached or two family dwelling, following issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for such dwelling, shall not prevent treatment of the tract of land underlying such dwelling as a zoning lot and all applicable bulk, space and yard requirements shall be applied with respect to such dwelling and such zoning lot rather than with respect to individually-owned dwelling units and lots of record.
M. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
MAJOR AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. See Subsection 12-206 A of this Section.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a building.
MARQUEE SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
MEMORIAL SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
MINIMUM LOT AREA. See Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
MINOR AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. See Subsection 12-206 A of this Section.
MIXED RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. The Multiple Family Residential and Commercial District and the Residential and Limited Commercial District as set forth in Section 2-101 of this Code.
MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT. See Section 2-202 of this Code.
264 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
MOTEL. An establishment offering transient lodging accommodations that provides services similar to a hotel and that has individual entrances from the outside of the building for at least 25 percent of the lodging accommodations located therein.
MOVING SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING. See Subsection 12-206 D of this Section.
MUNICIPAL CODE. The Oak Forest Municipal Code.
N. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
NAME PLATE SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). That program established by Congress at 42 U.S.C. Sec. 4001 et seq. to provide a means of insuring property losses caused by flood risks.
NAVD. North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
NET FLOOR AREA. See Subsection 12-206 F of this Section.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. A lot of record that does not comply with the lot requirements for any permitted use in the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD, LEGAL. A nonconforming lot of record that:
1. Was created by a plat or deed recorded and came into ownership separate from adjoining tracts of land, at a time when the creation of a lot of such size, shape, depth and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any ordinance or other regulation; and
2. Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such a lot has been prohibited by any applicable ordinance or other regulation.
NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment to it rendering such sign nonconforming, does not comply with all of the standards and regulations of this Code or any such amendment hereto.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. See Subsection 12-206 P, "Pre-Code Structure."
NONCONFORMING USE. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building or structure, other than a sign, on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment to it rendering such use nonconforming, that does not comply with all of the regulations of this Code, or any such amendment hereto, governing use for the zoning district in which such land, building or structure is located.
265 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
OAK FOREST STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. Standards and Specifications for Public and Private Improvements.
NURSING AND PERSONAL CARE FACILITY. An establishment that provides full-time nursing and health related personal care, but not hospital services, with in-patient beds for three or more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such an establishment; a hospital shall not be construed to be included in this definition.
O. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
OBSOLETE DEVELOPMENT. Property used in a manner that is no longer compatible with uses on surrounding properties due to the trend of development, regardless of conformancy with the regulations of this Code.
OFFICE BUILDING. Any building the principal use of which is an office use.
OFFICE DISTRICT. Any district, except the Open Space District, whose designation begins with the letter "O" as set forth in Section 2-101 of this Code.
OFFICE USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in an Office District.
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. See Subsection 11-201 B of this Code.
OFFICIAL MAP. See Section 11-202 of this Code.
ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD ELEVATION. See Base Flood Elevation in Subsection 12-206 B of this Code.
ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD EVENT. See Base Flood in Subsection 12-206 B of this Code.
ONE-ON-ONE PERSONAL FITNESS TRAINING FACILITY. An establishment offering only one-on-one personal fitness training, by appointment only, and no group fitness training activities. Each client must work directly with a certified personal trainer when using such an establishment, and each trainer shall work with no more than two clients at one time.
ONE-ON-ONE SCHOOLS AND EDUCATIONAL SERVICES. An establishment offering only one-on-one educational training, by appointment only, and no group tutorial activities. Each student must work directly with a personal instructor when using such an establishment, and each instructor shall work with no more than two students at one time.
OPEN SALES LOT. Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or renting merchandise out-of-doors.
266 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
OPEN SPACE AND USABLE OPEN SPACE. An area or areas of a lot, including required yards, that is:
1. Open and unobstructed from ground to sky except by facilities specifically designed, arranged and intended for use in conjunction with passive or active outdoor recreation or relaxation;
2. Located at least five feet from any structure arranged and intended for use in conjunction with passive or active outdoor recreation or relaxation;
3. Landscaped, maintained or otherwise treated to create a setting appropriate to recreation or relaxation; and
4. Accessible and usable by the residents of all dwellings, or the users of all nonresidential buildings, it is intended or required to serve.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Open space held in private ownership, regularly available for use by the occupants of more than one dwelling or the users of more than one nonresidential building.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE. Open space held private ownership, the use of which is normally limited to the occupants of one dwelling or the users of one nonresidential building.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC. Open space dedicated to or owned by any government or governmental agency or authority.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics.
OWNER. Includes the holder of legal title as well as holders of any equitable interest, such as trust beneficiaries, contract purchasers, option holders, lessees under leases having an unexpired term of at least ten years, and the like. Whenever a statement of ownership is required by this Code, full disclosure of all legal and equitable interests in the property is required.
P. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
PARKING AREA. Any land area, not located in a garage, designed and used for the parking of not more than four vehicles.
PARKING LOT. Any land area designed or used for the parking, and associated circulation, of more than four vehicles.
PARKING SPACE. An area for the parking of a vehicle.
PARTICULATE MATTER. Material other than water that is suspended or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
267 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PERIMETER LANDSCAPED OPEN SPACE. A landscaped open space intended to enhance the appearance of, or screen from view, parking lots and other outdoor aesthetically unpleasant uses or areas or to create a transition between incompatible uses by means of appropriate buffering, landscaping or screening primarily along lot lines.
PERMITTED USE. See Subsection 12-206 U of this Section.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile telecommunications services, unlicensed wireless telecommunications services, and common carrier wireless telecommunications exchange access services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES ANTENNA. An antenna used in connection with the provision of personal wireless services.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. See Section 11-603 of this Code.
PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the City of Oak Forest.
POLITICAL SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
PORTABLE SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
PRE-CODE STRUCTURE. Any building or structure, other than a sign, lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment to it rendering such building or structure nonconforming, that:
1. Does not comply with all of the regulations this Code, or any such amendment thereto, governing parking, loading or bulk and space requirements for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or
2. Is located on a lot that does not, or is so located on a lot as not to, comply with the yard or setback requirements for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or
3. Both 1. and 2.; except
4. Any building containing more than one dwelling unit in addition to the number permitted by the district regulations in the district where it is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use rather than a pre-code structure.
PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, together with the buildings and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR BUILDING. A structure or building on a zoning lot intended to be utilized for a principal use and to which any other structure on such lot must be accessory.
PRINCIPAL USE. The use of a zoning lot, whether a permitted or specially permitted use, designated by the owner of such lot as the primary or main use of such lot and to which any other use on such lot must be accessory.
PLAT, FINAL. See Subsection 12-206 F, "Final Plat."
268 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY. See Subsection 12-206 R of this Section.
PRIVATE SALE SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
PRIVATE WARNING SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
PROJECTING SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
PROPERTY LINE. See "Lot Line" at Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
PUBLIC BODY OF WATER. Any open public stream or lake capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, and any lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and make navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
PUBLIC HEARING. A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act at which members of the general public must be permitted to give testimony, evidence or opinions relevant to the subject matter.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT OR FACILITY. See Subsection 12-206 I of this Section.
PUBLIC MEETING. A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act where members of the general public, as opposed to members of the Board or Commission and as opposed to the applicant for relief, have no right (but may be given the opportunity) to offer testimony, evidence or opinions.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm or corporation under public regulation furnishing franchised services such as cable television, electricity, gas, telephone, water or sewage service.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR PUBLIC WAY. See Subsection 12-206 R of this Section.
PYLON SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
Q. [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
R. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car yards.
269 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
REAL ESTATE SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
REAR LOT LINE. See Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
REAR YARD. See Subsection 12-206 Y of this Section.
REAR YARD LINE. See Subsection 12-206 Y of this Section.
RECREATIONAL DEVICE. A structure or outdoor facility intended primarily for recreational use by children such as, but not limited to, a play house, a swing set, a trampoline or a sand box.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, RESIDENTIAL. An area, court, pool or facility, other than a recreational device, intended for active recreational or athletic use such as game courts, swimming pools or ball fields established as an accessory use to a residential dwelling.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle or boat originally designed for living quarters, recreation or human habitation and not used as a commercial vehicle, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Boat. Any vessel used for water travel. A boat mounted on a trailer shall be considered one vehicle.
2. Camper Trailer. A folding or collapsible vehicle without its own motive power, designed as temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreational, seasonal, or vacation use.
3. Motorized Home. A temporary dwelling designed and constructed for travel, camping, recreational, seasonal, or vacation uses as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
4. Off-the-Road Vehicle. A vehicle intended primarily for recreational use off of roads where state vehicle licenses are required, such as a dune buggy, go-cart or snowmobile.
5. Racing Car or Cycle. A vehicle intended to be used in racing competition, such as a race car, stock car or racing cycle.
6. Travel Trailer. A vehicle without its own motive power, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreational or vacation uses.
7. Truck Camper. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or single truck chassis and designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreational or vacation uses. When mounted on a truck, such a structure and the truck shall together be considered one vehicle.
8. Van. A general term applied to a noncommercial motor vehicle licensed by the State of Illinois as a Recreational Vehicle.
9. Vehicle Trailer. A vehicle without its own motive power that is designed to transport another vehicle, such as a boat, motorcycle or snowmobile for
270 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
recreational or vacation use and that is a eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use. A vehicle trailer with another vehicle mounted on it shall be considered one vehicle.
REDEVELOPMENT. The significant reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or other change in a structure or use, or the division of a parcel of land into additional parcels.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois, under The Illinois Land Surveyors Act 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the State of Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the flood plain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store or convey the existing and anticipated future one hundred (100) year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth (0.1) foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are designated for the West and Middle Forks of the North Branch of the Chicago River and their tributaries, on the maps, plans and studies referenced in Section 8-204 of this Code. Also sometimes referred to as a “Designated Floodway.”
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A structure containing one or more dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any district the designation of which begins with the letter "R" as set forth in Section 2-201 of this Code.
RESIDENTIAL USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in a Residential District.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land designated for use for vehicular or pedestrian access or passage or for installation of railroad tracks, utility lines or similar facilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE. A right-of-way that has not been dedicated to or accepted by any government agency.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. A right-of-way that has been dedicated to and accepted by a government agency.
RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, brook, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified channel. Riverine SFHA does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
ROOF SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
271 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
ROOMING UNIT. Any habitable room or group of not more than 2 habitable rooms forming a single habitable unit used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
S. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
SCREENING. A structure erected or vegetation planted to conceal an area from view.
SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING. A dwelling unit in a dwelling:
1. Constructed, maintained and operated for the exclusive occupancy by:
(a) Persons who are at least 62 years of age;
(b) Persons who are under a disability or are handicapped as determined by the regulations of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; or
(c) 2 or more persons, one of whom meets the occupancy criteria stated in (a) or (b); provided, however, that not more than one dwelling unit in such dwelling may be occupied by a resident manager who does not meet the aforesaid occupancy criteria; and
2. Which complies with such special construction standards that may from time to time be imposed on dwellings constructed and maintained pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937 by federal statute or regulation and such additional special construction standards for Senior Citizen Housing as the City Councilmay, from time to time, approve by ordinance or resolution; and
3. Which may provide communal eating facilities for the exclusive use of the aforesaid occupants and their occasional guests.
SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between a property line, or other line, and a building.
SHED. A relatively small accessory structure or building primarily for storage purposes. It is not designed to be served by heat, electricity, or plumbing.
SHOPPING CENTER. A building or group of buildings that are planned and managed as a single commercial property.
SIDE LOT LINE. See Subsection 12-206 L of this Section.
272 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
SIDE YARD. See Subsection 12-206 Y of this Section.
SIDE YARD LINE. See Subsection 12-206 Y of this Section.
SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangular area, described by the edge of pavement lines of two intersecting streets and a line connecting said edge of pavement lines, in which the height of structures and landscaping regulation is limited to a maximum of two and one-half feet above grade in order to promote visibility at street intersections. Any leg of such triangle lying along any street in a residential district or any street forming part of an intersection that is not controlled by a traffic signal or a stop sign shall be a minimum of 45 feet in length.
SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. For definitions of particular functional and structural types of signs, see Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING. Any sign that fails to conform to the regulations of Section 9-106 of this Code.
SIGN WITH BACKING. Any sign that is displayed upon, against or through any material or color surface or backing that forms an integral part of such display and differentiates the total display from the background against which it is placed.
SIGN WITHOUT BACKING. Any sign other than a sign with backing.
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING. See Subsection 12-206 D of this Section.
SITE PLAN REVIEW. See Section 11-604 of this Code.
SMOKE. Small gas-borne particles other than water that form a visible plume in the air.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river or tributary thereof, creek, intermittent stream, brook, ditch, or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, or E. See also Subsection 12-206 F “Floodplain” of this Code.
SPECIAL PERMIT USE. See Section 11-602 of this Code.
STABLE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory structure for the keeping of horses for the private, noncommercial use of the occupants of the premises on which such structure is located.
STANDARD FLOOD INSURANCE POLICY. The flood insurance policy issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, or an insurer pursuant to federal statutes and regulations.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL (SIC). The 1987 edition of the publication prepared by the Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the President of the United States, available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., as amended through the effective date of this Code.
273 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
STORY. That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface on any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. The floor of a story may split levels provided that there is not more than four feet difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A basement shall be counted as a story; a cellar shall not be counted as a story. Any area in which the distance from one floor to the floor or ceiling above it is more than 16 feet shall be deemed to consist of one story for each 16 feet of height or major fraction thereof.
STREET. The paved portion of a right-of-way, other than a driveway, that affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property.
STREET LINE. A lot line separating a street right-of-way from other land.
STREET, PRIVATE. Any street other than a public street.
STREET, PUBLIC. A street that has been dedicated to and accepted by, or otherwise acquired by, a government agency.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, that would prolong the life of the supporting members of a structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations or that would alter the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls of a structure or that would increase either the gross or net floor area of a structure.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or anything attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, but not including paving or surfacing of the ground. Structure shall in all cases be deemed to refer to both structures and buildings. See Subsection 12-206 B of this Code.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. See Section 9-101 of this Code.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING. See Subsection 12-206 N of this Section.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. See Subsection 12-206 P of this Section.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE. The Oak Forest Subdivision Ordinance.
SUBSTATION, ELECTRICAL. A subsidiary station for the transmission of electrical current, consisting of transformers and other related safety and switching equipment that convert higher voltage electrical current received from incoming lines into lower voltage electrical current transmitted through other smaller lines.
SURFACE AREA, ANTENNA. An area determined by adding together the actual surface area of each solid element or part of an antenna or its support structure, where "solid" is defined to include all air spaces that are fully bounded by solid elements.
T. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
TEMPORARY SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
274 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
TEMPORARY USES. See Section 9-103 of this Code.
TERRACE. A level plane, surfaced patio, platform or structure serving a principal building at less than thirty inches above grade and not covered by any permanent structure.
TOWNHOUSE. See Subsection 12-206 D, "Dwelling, Townhouse."
TRANSITIONAL PARKING LOT OR GARAGE. A parking lot or garage accessory to a nonresidential use but located in a residential district pursuant to a special permit.
TRANSITIONAL SERVICE FACILITY. An authorized and licensed dwelling operated by a public or private agency duly authorized and licensed by any state agency having authority to license and approve said facility that houses individuals being cared for by the agency and deemed by the agency to be capable of living and functioning in the community and that provides continuous professional guidance.
TRANSITIONAL SERVICE FACILITY RESIDENT. A person receiving care or treatment at a transitional service facility.
TWO FAMILY DWELLING. See Subsection 12-206 D, "Dwelling, Two Family."
U. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
UNDERDEVELOPMENT. Property not used to the fullest extent permitted by this Code.
USABLE OPEN SPACE. See Subsection 12-206 O of this Section.
USE. The purpose or activity for which a structure or land is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY. See Section 9-101 of this Code.
USE, CONDITIONAL. A use that appears as a conditional use in the “Use List” of a particular zoning district and is subject to additional standards set forth in this Code. Unless specifically provided otherwise in this Code, a Conditional Use shall be treated as a Permitted Use for purposes of this Code.
USE INTERPRETATION. An interpretation of the use lists established by this Code for the purpose of allowing a use not expressly mentioned in those lists to be established in a zoning district found to be appropriate for such use by application of the standards established in Subsection 11-501 E of this Code.
USE, LEGAL. Any use being made of any land, building or structure, other than a sign, on or after the effective date of this Code or any amendment thereof, that complies with all of the applicable regulations of this Code and any amendment thereof and was legally and validly instituted.
USE, NONCONFORMING. See Subsection 12-206 N of this Section.
275 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
USE, PERMITTED. A use that appears as a permitted use on the “Use List” list of a particular zoning district.
USE, PRINCIPAL. See Subsection 12-206 P of this Section.
USE, SPECIAL PERMIT. A use that appears as a special permit use on the “Use List” of a particular zoning district. See Subsection 11-602 of this Code.
USE, TEMPORARY. See Section 9-103 of this Code.
V. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
VARIATION. See Section 11-503 of this Code.
VEHICLE. Any device for carrying passengers, goods or equipment including, but not limited to, passenger automobiles, vans, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, commercial vehicles and vehicles used for governmental purposes.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. See Subsection 12-206 C of this Section.
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL. See Subsection 12-206 R of this Section.
W. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
WALL SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
WAREHOUSE, AUTOMATED. See Subsection 12-206 A, "Automated Warehouse."
WARNING SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
WATERCOURSE. See Section 8-204 of this Code.
WHOLESALE TRADE. A business engaged in the sale of commodities in quantity, usually for resale or business use chiefly to retailers, other businesses, industries and institutions rather than to the ultimate consumer.
WIDTH OF LOT. See Subsection 12-206 of this Section.
WINDOW SIGN. See Subsection 9-106 E of this Code.
X. [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
Y. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
YARD. A required open space on a lot between a lot line and a yard line that is unoccupied and unobstructed from grade to the sky.
276 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
YARD, CORNER SIDE. A yard extending from the front yard line to the rear lot line between the corner side lot line of the lot and the corner side yard line.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the entire front of a lot between the front lot line of the lot and the front yard line.
YARD LINE, CORNER SIDE. A line drawn parallel to a side lot line abutting a street right-of-way at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required corner side yard.
YARD LINE, FRONT. A line drawn parallel to a front lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard.
YARD LINE, REAR. A line drawn parallel to a rear lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required rear yard.
YARD LINE, SIDE. A line drawn parallel to a side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required side yard.
YARD, PERIMETER. A yard within, and abutting the boundary of, a planned development.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines, except that in the case of a corner lot the rear yard shall extend from the inner side lot line to the corner side yard line.
YARD REQUIRED. The minimum yard depth designated in the regulations of this Code establishing minimum front, corner side, side and rear yard requirements for various uses, structures and districts.
YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the side yard line.
Z. When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ZONING BOARD. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City.
ZONING CLASSIFICATION. See Subsection 12-206 C of this Section.
ZONING CODE. The Oak Forest Zoning Code; that is, this Code. Unless the context specifically requires otherwise, all references to this Code shall be deemed to refer to any certificate, permit, approval, resolution or ordinance granted or adopted pursuant to this Code.
ZONING DISTRICT. A part of the corporate area of the City wherein regulations of this Zoning Code are uniform. See also Section 2-101 of this Code.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP OR ZONING MAP. See Section 2-103 of this Code.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The Community Development Director.
277 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
278 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1 Accommodations
721110
Hotels, except casino hotels
S
S
S
S
-
Hotel, Extended Stay
S
S
S
S
721110
Motel
S
S
S
S
-
Motel, Extended Stay
S
S
S
S
Arts, Entertainment and Recreation
711410
Agents and Managers for Artists, Athletes, Entertainers, and other Public Figures
P
P
P
P
P
115210
Boarding Horses
71395
Bowling Centers
S
S
S
713940
Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers, excluding outdoor Swimming Pools and Wave Pools
P
P
P
P
713910
Golf Courses and Country Clubs
P
713990
Golf Courses, Miniature
S
S
S
P
713990
Horseback Riding Recreational
S
713990
All Other Indoor Amusement & Recreation Industries (Indoor)
S
711310
Horseshow Organizers with Facilities
711320
Promoters of Performing Arts, Sports, and similar events without facilities
P
P
P
P
115210
Training Horses
713120
Video Game Arcades (excluding gambling)
P
P
P
P
Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
561599
All Other Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services
P
P
P
P
P
561450
Credit Bureaus
P
P
P
P
P
561439
Document Duplicating Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
561410
Document Preparation Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
5613
Employment Services
P
P
P
P
P
279 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
561622
Locksmiths
P
P
P
P
P
P
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1
5611
Office Administrative Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
56162
Security Systems Services
P
P
P
5617
Services to Buildings and Dwellings
P
P
561422
Telemarketing Bureaus
P
P
P
P
P
56151
Travel Agencies
P
P
P
P
P
Construction
2383
Building Finishing Contractors, excluding outdoor storage
P
P
P
P
P
2383
Building Finishing Contractors, including outdoor storage
P
23821
Electrical Contractors, excluding outdoor storage
P
P
P
P
P
23821
Electrical Contractors, including outdoor storage
P
2381
Foundation, Structure, and Building Exterior Contractors, excluding outdoor storage
P
P
P
P
P
2381
Foundation, Structure, and Building Exterior Contractors, including outdoor storage
P
23829
Other Building Equipment Contractors, excluding outdoor storage
P
P
P
P
P
23829
Other Building Equipment Contractors, including outdoor storage
P
2389
Other Specialty Trade Contractors, excluding outdoor storage
P
P
P
P
P
2389
Other Specialty Trade Contractors, including outdoor storage
P
23822
Plumbing, Heating, and Air Conditioning Contractors, excluding outdoor storage
P
P
P
P
P
23822
Plumbing, Heating, and Air Conditioning Contractors, including outdoor storage
P
Educational Services
611699
All Other Schools and Miscellaneous Instruction, excluding Life Guard Training and Survival Training Instruction
P
P
P
S
S
P
P
611410
Business Secretarial Schools
P
P
P
S
S
P
P
280 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1
6113
Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
611420
Computer Training
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
611511
Cosmetology and Barber Schools
P
P
P
P
P
P
611710
Educational Testing Services
P
P
P
P
P
6111
Elementary and Secondary Schools
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
611691
Exam Preparation and Tutoring
P
P
P
P
P
P
611610
Fine Arts Schools, except academic
P
P
S
P
P
6112
Junior Colleges
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
611630
Language Schools
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
611430
Professional and Management Development Training
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
611620
Sports and Recreation Instruction, excluding Skiing, Scuba , Skin and Sky Diving, and Riding Instruction
P
P
P
P
P Finance and Insurance
522390
Check Cashing Services
S
S
S
P
P
5221
Commercial Banking, Savings Institutions, and Credit Unions
P
P
P
P
P
525
Funds, Trusts, and other Financial Vehicles
P
P
P
P
P
524
Insurance Activities and Related Activities
P
P
P
P
P
522310
Mortgage and Nonmortgage Loan Brokers
P
P
P
P
P
5222
Nondepository Credit Intermediation excluding Consumer Lending (522291), Pawnshops, and Short- term inventory credit lending (522298)
P
P
P
P
P
523
Securities, Commodity Contracts, and Other Financial Investments and Related Activities, excluding Miscellaneous Intermediation (523910) and Miscellaneous Financial Investment Activities (523999)
P
P
P
P
P
Food Services and Drinking Places
722320
Banquet Halls with Catering Staff
S
S
S
722320
Caterers
P
P
P
P
281 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
7221
Full Service Restaurants
P
P
P
P
531120
Hall and Banquet Room, non-residential rental or leasing
S
S
S
S
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1
7222
Limited Service Eating Places
P
P
P
P
Healthcare and Social Assistance
6244
Child Day Care Services, excluding babysitting services in providers own home
S
S
S
S
S
S
6233
Community Care Facilities for the Elderly
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
6223
General Medicine and Surgical Hospitals
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
6216
Home Health Care Services
P
P
P
P
P
6215
Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories
S
S
S
P
6231
Nursing Homes
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
6212
Offices of Dentists
P
P
P
P
P
6213
Offices of Other Health Practitioners
P
P
P
P
P
6211
Offices of Physicians
P
P
P
P
P
Information
516
Internet Publishing and Broadcasting
P
P
P
P
P
519120
Libraries
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
512131
Movie Theaters
S
S
S
S
512132
Movie Theaters Drive-In
S
S
S
511
Newspapers, Periodical, Book, and Directory Publishers, excluding printing
P
P
P
P
P
S
511
Newspapers, Periodical, Book, and Directory Publishers, including printing
P
P
S
515112
Radio and Television Broadcasting
P
P
P
P
P
S
5171
Wired Telecommunications Carriers
Subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 156 and Article IX.
5172
Wireless Telecommunication Carriers
Subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 156 and Article IX. Manufacturing
315
Apparel
P
32412
Asphalt Paving, Roofing, and Saturated Materials
P
3121
Beverage
P
282 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
3273
Cement and Concrete Product
P
327122
Ceramic Wall and Floor Tile
P
32712
Clay Building Material and Refractories
P
334
Computer and Electric Product
P
327991
Cut Stone and Stone Product
P
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1
3322
Cutlery and Handtool
P
335
Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component
P
311
Food
P
337
Furniture and Related Product
P
3272
Glass and Glass Product
P
316
Leather and Allied Product
P
333
Machinery
P
339
Miscellaneous
P
336991
Motorcycle, Bicycle, and Parts
P
3362
Motor Vehicle Body and Trailer
P
3363
Motor Vehicle Parts
P
3361
Motor Vehicle
P
3219
Other Wood Product
P
3255
Paint, Coating, and Adhesive
P
322
Paper
P
326
Plastics and Rubber Product
P
32711
Pottery, Ceramics, and Plumbing Fixture
P
32591
Printing Ink
P
323
Printing and Related Support Activities
P
3211
Sawmills and Wood Preservation
P
3256
Soap, Cleaning Compound, and Toilet Preparation
P
313
Textile Mills
P
314
Textile Product Mills
P
3212
Vaneer, Plywood, and Engineered Wood Product
P
Other Services
283 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
812910
Animal Grooming Services
P
P
P
P
P
811412
Appliance Repair and Maintenance
P
P
P
P
P
811121
Automotive Body, Paint, and Interior Repair and Maintenance
S
S
S
P
811122
Automotive Glass Replacement Shops
S
S
S
P
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1
811111
Automotive Mechanical and Electrical Repair and Maintenance
S
S
S
P
811191
Automotive Oil Change and Lubrication Shops
S
S
S
P
813910
Business Associations
P
P
P
P
P
P
811192
Car Washes
S
S
S
S
812220
Cemeteries and Crematories
S
S
S
S
811490
Clothing Repair Shops, alterations only
P
P
P
P
812310
Coin Operated Laundries and Drycleaners
P
P
P
P
P
811211
Consumer Electronics Repair and Maintenance
P
P
P
P
P
811310
Consumer and Industrial Machinery and Equipment Maintenance and Repair
P
812191
Diet and Weight Reducing Centers, non-medical
P
P
P
P
P
812320
Dry-cleaning and Laundry Services
P
P
P
P
P
81143
Footwear and Leather Repair
P
P
P
P
P
812210
Funeral Homes
S
S
S
S
81211
Hair, Nails, and Skin Care Services
P
P
P
P
812332
Industrial Launderers
P
811490
Jewelry Repair Shops without retailing new jewelry
P
P
P
P
812930
Parking Garages, automobile (privately owned)
S
S
S
P
S
812930
Parking Garages, automobile (publicly owned)
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
S
81291
Pet Boarding Services
P
P
P
P
S
812990
Psychic Readings
S
813
Religious, Non-for-Profit, Professional, Fraternal and Civic Organizations
S
S
S
S
S
81142
Reupholstery and Furniture Repair
P
P
P
P
P
284 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
812199
Tanning Salons
P
P
P
P
812199
Tattoo Parlor***
S
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1 Other S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
-
Accessory Uses
Subject to provisions set forth in Article IX.
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
Drive-in or Drive-up facilities associated with retail establishment
S
S
S
S
S
-
Outdoor storage accessory to a retail trade located in the C1 thru C3 districts of this zoning ordinance
S
S
S
S
P
-
Planned Unit Development
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
-
Public Parks and Playgrounds
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
-
Home Occupation
Subject to provisions set forth in Section 9-102.
S
P
P
-
Outdoor Eating Patios when accessory to commercial establishment
S
S
S
S
-
Outdoor Beer Garden, when accessory to commercial establishment
S
S
S
S
-
Temporary Uses
Subject to provisions set forth in Section 9-103.
P
P
P
P
P
P Public Administration
922160
Fire Departments
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
921190
Other General Government Support
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
921110
Mayor’s Offices
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
922120
Police Departments
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
-
Public Works Facilities
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P Professional, Scientific, and Technical Service
5412
Accounting, Tax Preparation, Bookkeeping, and
Payroll Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
541611
Administrative and Management and General Management Consulting Services
P
P
P
P
P
541810
Advertising Agencies
P
P
P
P
P
541940
Animal Hospitals
P
P
P
P
5413
Architectural, Engineering, and Related Services, excluding Testing Laboratories (541380)
P
P
P
P
P
P
285 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
541922
Commercial Photography Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
551114
Corporate, Subsidiary, and Regional Managing Offices
P
P
P
P
P
P
541620
Environmental Consulting Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
541612
Human Resources and Executive Search Consulting Services
P
P
P
P
P
5411
Legal Services
P
P
P
P
P
541613
Marketing Consulting Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
541820
Public Relations Agencies
P
P
P
P
P
5414
Specialized Design Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
Real Estate Rental, and Leasing
53221
Consumer Electronics and Appliances Rental
P
P
P
P
P
53222
Formal Wear and Costume Rental
P
P
P
P
53242
Office Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing
P
531210
Offices of Real Estate Agents and Brokers
P
P
P
P
P
5321
Passenger Car Rental and Leasing
S
S
53212
Truck, Utility Trailer, and RV (Recreational Vehicle) Rental and Leasing
S
S
53223
Video Tape and Disc Rental
P
P
P
P
Retail Trade
453998
All Other Miscellaneous Store Retailers, except Firework Shops (453998)
P
P
P
P
45392
Art Dealers
P
P
P
P
441
Automobile Dealers
S
S
4413
Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tires Stores
S
P
S
P
4453
Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores
P
P
P
S
441222
Boat Dealers
S
S
S
448
Clothing and Clothing Accessories Stores
P
P
P
P
44612
Cosmetics, Beauty Supplies, and Perfume Stores
P
P
P
P
443
Electronics and Appliance Stores
P
P
P
P
454
Electronic Shopping and Mail Order Houses
P
P
P
P
P
4531
Florists
P
P
P
P
445
Food and Beverage Stores excluding Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores (445310)
P
P
P
P
446191
Food (Health) Supplement Stores
P
P
P
P
442
Furniture and Home Furnishing Stores
P
P
P
P
286 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
444220
Garden Centers
P
P
P
P
447110
Gasoline Stations with Convenience Stores
S
S
S
447190
Gasoline Stations without Convenience Stores
S
S
S
452
General Merchandise Stores, excluding Home and Auto Supply Stores (452990)
P
P
P
P
444130
Hardware Stores
P
P
P
P
44411
Home Improvement Centers
P
P
P
441660
Medical Cannabis Dispensary
S
4532
Office Supplies, Stationary, and Gift Stores
P
P
P
P
44613
Optical Goods Stores
P
P
P
P
444190
Other Building Material Dealers
S
P
P
P
P
44412
Paint and Wallpaper Stores
P
P
P
P
P
45391
Pet and Pet Supplies Stores
P
P
P
P
4461
Pharmacies and Drug Stores
P
P
P
P
441210
Recreational Vehicle Dealers
S
S
S
3256
Sexually Oriented Businesses
Subject to the provisions set forth in Article 9 Part III
451
Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book, and Music Stores excluding Gun Shops and Gunsmith Shops retailing guns (451110), and the retail sale of firearms and ammunition
P
P
P
P
451110
Gun Shops & Gunsmith Shops**
S
453
Used Merchandise Stores
P
P
P
S
Residential
-
Mobile Home Parks
Subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 158.
P
P
P
P
-
Multi-Family Dwellings (subject to the regulations of a planned unit development)
S
S
S
S
P
P
S
S
S
P
-
Single-Family Dwellings
P
P
P
P
NAICS Code Uses Residential Districts Commercial Districts Ind Dist Off Dist GRD OS IB R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 C1 C2 C3 159th St. C.O.D. I1* O1 Transportation and Warehousing S
S
P
49311
General Warehousing and Storage
S
P
531130
Lessors of Miniwarehouses & Self Storage Units
S
287 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
48841
Motor Vehicle Towing, when accessory to an automotive repair and maintenance facility
S
S
S
P
488991
Packing and Crating
P
491
Postal Services
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
49312
Refrigerated Warehousing and Storage excluding farm product warehousing and storage
P
Health Care and Social Assistance
P
P
P
P
624190
Support Group Service Centers
S
Wholesale Trade P
P
P
423
Wholesale Trade - Durable Goods, but not including ammunition, firearms, guns (423910, 423990), or
fireworks (423920)
P
424
Wholesale Trade - Nondurable Goods, but not including farm product raw materials (44420), or petroleum and petroleum products (425120, 424720)
P
* Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Appendix A, any property that is (1) located in I1 Industrial District and (2) has frontage along either Harlem Avenue or 167th Street may be used in accordance with the use and bulk regulations set forth Article V.
**All Gun shops must be ancillary to “NAICS 713990 All Other Indoor Amusement & Recreation Industries” or “NAICS 451 – Sporting Goods Retail”
***Any new tattoo parlor must be located at minimum 2,000 feet from any other existing tattoo parlor.
288 Adopted March 11, 2014
Ordinance #2014-03-0487O
289 APPENDIX B: TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Ordinance Number Date Section(s) Description
2014-08-0507O
August 12, 2014
Appendix A – Table of Uses
To add all other indoor amusement and recreation industries and gun shops as special uses in the C2 General Service District.
2014-08-0510O
August 26, 2014
Appendix A – Table of Uses
To add lessors of mini-warehouses and self-storage units as a special use in the I Industrial District.
2014-09-0518O
September 9, 2014
Appendix A – Table of Uses
To add psychic readings as a special use in the C3 Central Business District.
2014-09-0524O
November 11, 2014
Appendix A – Table of Uses; Articles 9 and 12
To add specific regulations for medical cannabis dispensaries.
2015-12-0576O
December 8, 2015
Appendix A – Table of Uses
To add tattoo parlors as a special use to the C2 General Service District.
2016-01-0578O
January 12, 2016
Appendix A – Table of Uses
To add automobile dealers as a special use in the I Industrial District.
2016-09-0618O
September 13, 2016
Section 9-106.K
To amend the height, width, and area requirements of wall signs.
2017-04-0337O
April 11, 2017
Section 9-106.K
To amend the number, proportions and area requirements of wall signs.
2017-08-0657O
August 22, 2017
Appendix A – Table of Uses; Section 9-107(K)
To change of beer, wine, and liquor stores from a special use to a permitted use in the C1, C2, and C3 zoning districts and to modify fence allowances, respectively
2017-10-0664O
October 24, 2017
Section 9-106.K
To amend the different sizes of wall signs allowed on different types of frontages.
2017-12-0675O
December 12, 2017
Article 9, Part II; Appendix A; Section 11-403(E)
To add use standards and other supporting amendments for new and used automobile dealerships.
2018-03-0683O
March 13, 2018
Subparagraph 11-403(E)(1)
To allow for variations to the maximum permitted height of principal structures in non-residential districts
2018-06-0693O
June 26, 2018
Article XI; Subsection 9-107(K)
To change the zoning relief procedures and such other and further zoning relief as required
290 
 
 
 
 




 



 


