
Orland Park, IL Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK
VILLAGE CODE




Ordinance 2989 as Amended
Updated with local legislation passed through November 30, 2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE 1 ADMINISTRATION



CHAPTER  1   OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE



CHAPTER  2   SAVING CLAUSE



CHAPTER  3   DEFINITIONS



CHAPTER  4   GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER  5   VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES



CHAPTER  6   MANAGERIAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT



CHAPTER  7   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS OF VILLAGE



CHAPTER  8   VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES;  GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER  9   EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



CHAPTER 10   VILLAGE FINANCES



CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC RECORDS



CHAPTER 12   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS



CHAPTER 13   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM



CHAPTER 14   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF NON-VEHICULAR CODE VIOLATIONS 



CHAPTER 15   INDEMNIFICATION



CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE



SECTION:



1-1-1:   Title



1-1-2:   Acceptance



1-1-3:   Amendments



1-1-4:   Code Alteration



1-1-1: TITLE:



   Upon adoption by the President and Board of Trustees, this Municipal
Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official
Municipal Code of the Village of Orland Park, Illinois, including
amendments.  This Municipal Code shall be known and cited as the ORLAND PARK
MUNICIPAL CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of
Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided for by this Chapter under
the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for said Village Board of
Trustees.  Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this
Municipal Code by title in any legal document.



1-1-2:  ACCEPTANCE:



   This Municipal Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall
hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of
general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances expressly
enumerated in this Municipal Code.



1-1-3:  AMENDMENTS:



   Any ordinance amending this Municipal Code shall set forth the title,
chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this
shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this
Municipal Code.  All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Municipal
Code. 



1-1-4:  CODE ALTERATIONS:



   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this Municipal Code in such a
manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. 
Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when
so authorized by the Village Board.  The Clerk shall see that the
replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in
the office of the Clerk.  Any person having in his custody an official copy
of this Municipal Code shall make every effort to maintain this Code in an up
to date and efficient manner.  Said Code books, while in actual possession
of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property
of the Village and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed
so to do by order of the Village Board.



CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE



SECTION:



1-2-1:   General Ordinances Superseded



1-2-2:   Public Utility Ordinances



1-2-3:   Court Proceedings



1-2-4:   Severability Clause



1-2-5:   Section Headings; Ordinance References



1-2-1:  GENERAL ORDINANCES SUPERSEDED:



   The general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of
this Municipal Code are superseded to the extent they are inconsistent with
the terms hereof; provided, the following ordinances shall not be included in
this Code and are not superseded:  zoning ordinances and subdivision
regulations, tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances
relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other
ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Village; and all special
ordinances.



1-2-2:  PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:



   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets
and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates
of public utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the adoption of this
Municipal Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this
Municipal Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this
Municipal Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances
in respect to such provisions only.



1-2-3:  COURT PROCEEDINGS:



   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture
or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the
new ordinance takes effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable.  If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.



   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.



   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in
this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment
of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing,
abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as
affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any
right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the
time of the adoption of this Municipal Code.



1-2-4:  SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:



   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Municipal Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to
be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof.  The Village Board
of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.



1-2-5:  SECTION HEADINGS; ORDINANCE REFERENCES:



   Throughout this Code, Title, Section and Subsection headings are used
for informational purposes only and shall not be deemed to govern, limit
modify or otherwise affect the scope of any Title, Section or Subsection. 
Where Ordinance numbers and dates which precede the date of adoption of this
Code are shown following the provisions of any part of this Code, said
Ordinance numbers and dates are provided for historical reference only and do
not add or detract from the validity of the provisions adopted as this Code.



CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS



SECTION:



1-3-1:   Construction of Words



1-3-2:   Definitions



1-3-3:   Section Headings



1-3-1:  CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:



   Whenever any word in any section of this Municipal Code importing the
plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used.  When any subject
matter, party or person is referred to in this Municipal Code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
applied to any section of this Municipal Code which contains any express
provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content
may be repugnant thereto.



   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has
been changed in the content of this Municipal Code to "Title", "Chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only.  Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.



1-3-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall
have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:



   AGENT:  A person acting on behalf of another.



   BOARD:  Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of Trustees of the
Village.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES:  The Board of Trustees shall consist of the
President and Trustees. (65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5). The President may nominate and
the Corporate Authorities shall by election designate one of the members of
the Village Board of Trustees to serve as President pro tem, if necessary.
Such nomination and election shall occur annually, in December. 65 ILCS
5/3.1-35-35(a).  (65 ILCS 5/3-12-5)



   CODE:  The Municipal Code of the Village of Orland Park, and
amendments thereto.



   COUNTY:  The Counties of Cook and Will, State of Illinois.



   EMPLOYEES:  Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village
employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words, "of the Village of Orland Park".



   FEE:  A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a
business, profession or occupation.



   FISCAL YEAR:  The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on October 1
of each year.  Effective January 1, 2010, the fiscal year of the Village
will be January 1 to December 31.The fifteen-month period from October 1,
2008 to December 31, 2009 will be a modified fiscal year.  (Ord. 2560,
4-18-94; Amd. Ord. 4336, 2-4-08)



   LICENSE:  The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.



   MAYOR:  See Village President.



   MISDEMEANOR:  Any offense for which a sentence to a term of
imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than six months may be
imposed.



   NUISANCE:  Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare
of the inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or
creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of
another person or to the community.



   OCCUPANT:  As applied to a building or land, this term shall include
any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.



   OFFENSE:  Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the
omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.



   OFFICERS:  Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village
officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words "of the Village of Orland Park".



   OPERATOR:  The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.



   OWNER:  As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, lessee or holder of
a beneficial interest of the whole or of a part of such building or land.



   PERSON:  Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as
well as a natural person.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY:  Every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which
any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.



   RETAILER:  Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
small quantities direct to the consumer.



   STATE:  The State of Illinois.



   STREET:  This term shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public squares, public thoroughfares and sidewalks.



   TENANT:  As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   VILLAGE:  The Village of Orland Park, Counties of Cook and Will, State
of Illinois.



   VILLAGE PRESIDENT:  The President of the Village may be referred to as
"Mayor" or "President."



   WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER:  Unless otherwise specifically
defined, such terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.



   WRITTEN, IN WRITING:  These terms may include printing and any other
mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any
person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required
by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he
is unable to write, by his proper mark, or by the use of a facsimile
signature in accordance with the Uniform Facsimile Signature Act, 30 ILCS
320/1, as amended.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



1-3-3:  SECTION HEADINGS:



   Headings and captions used in this Municipal Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be
so deemed when any of such sections are amended or re- enacted.



CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY



SECTION:



1-4-1:   General Penalty



1-4-2:   Application of Provisions



1-4-3:   Liability of Officers



1-4-1:  GENERAL PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, and there shall be no fine or penalty declared
for such violation, shall upon conviction be fined according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every
day during which a violation continues or exists.



   In addition to the penalty provided in the preceding paragraph, the
Village may file suit and proceed to demolish, repair, enclose, recover costs
or sue for an injunction to cause compliance with Title 5 of the Orland Park
Municipal Code, as provided for in Chapter 65, Article 5, Sections 11-31-1 et
seq., of the Illinois Municipal Code.  (65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 et seq.).



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



1-4-2:  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:



   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day a violation
continues.



   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Municipal Code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to
bar any other penalty being enforced.



1-4-3:  LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:



   No provision of this Municipal Code designating the duties of any
officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty
on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the
section creating the duty.



CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES



SECTION:



1-5-1:   Meetings of the Board of Trustees



1-5-2:   Presiding Officer, President Pro Tem



1-5-3:   Quorum



1-5-4:   Record of Proceedings



1-5-5:   Agenda Prepared for Board Meetings



1-5-6:   Order of Business



1-5-7:   Rules and Regulations of Board Proceedings



1-5-7-1:   Priority of Business



1-5-7-2:   Order in Board of Trustees' Meeting Room



1-5-7-3:   Communications



1-5-7-4:   Limitation on Debate



1-5-7-5:   Conduct of Members During Debates



1-5-7-6:   Voting Mandatory Unless Excused



1-5-7-7:   Orders, Motions and Questions



1-5-7-7-1:   Special Order



1-5-7-7-2:   Motions



1-5-7-7-3:   Ordinances - Voting - Rules for Attendance At Meeting by
Video or Audio Conference



1-5-7-7-4:   Questions



1-5-7-8:   Action on Motions



1-5-7-8-1:   Tabling



1-5-7-8-2:   Previous Question



1-5-7-8-3:   Indefinite Postponement



1-5-7-8-4:   Motion to Refer



1-5-7-8-5:   Amendment of Motion



1-5-7-8-6:   Substitute Motions



1-5-7-9:   Reconsideration



1-5-7-10:   Adjournment



1-5-7-11:   Amendment, Repeal or Suspension of Rules



1-5-7-12:   Robert's Rules of Order Adopted



1-5-7-13:   Posting Rules



1-5-7-14:   Committee of the Whole



1-5-7-14-1:   Previously Deliberated Items



1-5-7-14-2:   Special Committees



1-5-8:   Public and News Media Participation



1-5-9:   Sergeant At Arms



1-5-10:   Village President; Line of Succession



1-5-1:  MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:



   Regular Meetings:  The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall
be held on the first and third Mondays of each month, at the hour of 7:00
P.M., central standard time, at the Board Room of the Frederick T. Owens
Village Hall, 14700 South Ravinia Avenue, Orland Park, Illinois, unless
otherwise ordered by resolution or motion at any regular meeting of the Board
of Trustees.  During that portion of the year when daylight savings time may
be in effect in the Village, the said meetings shall be at the hour of 7:00
P.M., central daylight savings time. (Ord. 2396, 5-18-93; Amd. Ord. 5243,
11-20-17)



   Any regular meeting falling upon a legal holiday may be held on said
date, may be omitted, or may be held at such time as the Board of Trustees
shall designate in the schedule of meetings required to be posted for each
calendar or fiscal year (as defined in this Code) in that certain Act
entitled, "An Act in Relation to Meetings", approved July 11, 1957, as
amended (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.).  The date of any regular meeting may be
changed by the Board of Trustees as provided in said Act.



   Special Meetings:  Special meetings may be set at a regular meeting or
may be held at any time on call for the same by the President or any three
(3) or more Trustees; such call shall be communicated to the Village Clerk
who shall proceed immediately to prepare notices and agendas of the same and
shall cause them to be served on the President and other members of the Board
of Trustees in person or by leaving a copy at their place of residence at
least forty eight (48) hours before the time of meeting except in the case of
a bona fide emergency.  Such notices shall describe in brief the nature or
objects of the call. The President, any three (3) Trustees or the Village
Manager may direct the Village Clerk to place an item on the special meeting
agenda for consideration.  The Village Clerk may place items on the agenda
of all special meetings of the Board of Trustees that are necessary to
perform the Clerk's duties as prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois
and the Ordinances of the Village of Orland Park.  Notice of an emergency
meeting shall be given as soon as practicable prior to the holding of the
meeting.  Notice of any special meeting shall also be given by the Village
Clerk to any news medium entitled to receive such notice as provided in the
Illinois Open Meetings Act.  At every special meeting, the call for the same
shall be read and afterwards filed by the Village Clerk, and no business
other than that proposed by the call shall be in order at such meeting.



   Place of Meetings: All meetings shall be held at the Board Room of the
Village Hall and shall be open to the public except for those meetings or
those portions of meetings that are not required to be open to the public as
provided in the aforesaid State law. (Amd. Ord. 5243, 11-20-17)



1-5-2:  PRESIDING OFFICER, PRESIDENT PRO TEM:



   The Village President shall preside at all meetings of the Board of
Trustees or the Committee of the Whole, and he shall vote on all questions.



   If the President is absent from the Village or disabled for a period
long enough incapacitating him from the performance of his duties, the
President pro tem shall have all of the powers of the President and shall
perform all of the duties of the President until the President is able to
perform his duties or a vacancy in the office exists.



   The President may nominate and the Corporate Authorities shall by
election designate one of the members of the Village Board of Trustees to
serve as President pro tem, if necessary.  Such nomination and election
shall occur annually, in May. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35(a).



   If the President is absent from a meeting, the Corporate Authorities
may elect one of its members to act as temporary chairman.  The temporary
chairman shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and shall have
only the right to vote as a Trustee on any ordinance, resolution or motion. 
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35(b).



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5405, 5-6-19; Amd. Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



1-5-3:  QUORUM:



   A majority of the Corporate Authorities shall constitute a quorum to do
business. A smaller number, however, may adjourn from time to time and if the
members present desire to compel the attendance of absent members, they
themselves, or by their agents, shall attempt to communicate personally to
the absentees the call to the session.



1-5-4:  RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:



   The Village Clerk, or someone appointed to so do, shall make a full
record of the proceedings of the Board of Trustees in a journal as required
by Statute, which journal shall be the only official record of said
proceedings, certified copies of which shall be evidence as provided by
Statute.  (65 ILCS 5/1-2-5)



1-5-5:  AGENDA PREPARED FOR BOARD MEETINGS:



   The Village Clerk shall prepare an agenda for each meeting.  The
Village President or the Village Manager may direct the Village Clerk to
place an item on the agenda for all regular meetings of the Board of Trustees
for consideration if the request is timely made and shall communicate with
the office of the Village Clerk not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on
the Friday preceding said regular meeting indicating what business is to be
placed on the agenda.  The Village Clerk may place items on the agenda of
all regular meetings of the Board of Trustees that are necessary to perform
the Clerk's duties as prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois and the
Ordinances of the Village of Orland Park.  The Village Clerk shall post a
copy of said agenda on the bulletin board in the Village Hall not later than
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the Friday preceding the regular meeting.  For a
special meeting, the agenda shall be posted at the time notice of said
meeting is posted on the bulletin board which shall not be later than forty
eight (48) hours prior to the time of convening of said special meeting. 
Such of the order of business enumerated in this Chapter as shall be
applicable shall be the order of business for a special meeting.



(Amd. Ord. 5242, 11-20-17; Amd. Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



1-5-6:  ORDER OF BUSINESS:



   The following order of business shall be followed in all regular
meetings of the Board of Trustees unless suspended by a majority of the
Trustees present.



   At the hour selected for the meeting, the Village Clerk, or someone
appointed to fill his place, shall proceed to call the roll of the Board of
Trustees, mark the absentees and announce whether a quorum is present.  If a
quorum is present, the meeting shall be called to order, the Village
President taking the chair if present, and the Trustees appointing a
temporary chairman, if he should be absent.  If a quorum does not appear,
the Board of Trustees shall not thereby stand adjourned unless by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the Trustees present.  When a quorum is
present, the Board of Trustees shall then proceed to the business before it,
which shall be conducted in the following order:



   1   Call to Order - Roll Call.



   2   Pledge of Allegiance.



   3.   Reading of minutes of proceedings of the last preceding meeting
or meetings unless reading be dispensed with on motion properly made and
carried; approval of the same as published or read or as amended, if
amendment be made.



   4   Proclamations/Appointments.



   5   Pre-Scheduled citizens and visitors.



   6.   Omnibus vote (consent agenda) on the several questions of the
passage of any two or more of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions
or motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group.



   7.   Public Hearings (Ord. 2819, 1-2-96).



   8.   Agenda and Matters added to the Agenda



   9.   Reports and business matters of other Village officers and
employees.



   10.   Reports and business matters of special committees.



   11.   Non-scheduled citizens and visitors.



   12.   Board comments.



   13.   Executive Session if any.



   14.   Adjournment.



1-5-7:  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF BOARD PROCEEDINGS:



1-5-7-1:  PRIORITY OF BUSINESS:



   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by
the Village President or temporary chairman (hereinafter both referred to as
presiding officer) without debate, subject to appeal to the members of the
Board of Trustees present.



1-5-7-2:  ORDER IN BOARD OF TRUSTEES' MEETING ROOM:



   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may speak to
points of order in preference to other members, and shall decide all
questions of order, subject to an appeal to the other members of the Board of
Trustees present.  In case of appeal, no member shall speak more than once
without the unanimous consent of the Trustees present.



   No person not a member of the Board of Trustees shall address the Board
of Trustees without the recognition of the presiding officer.



1-5-7-3:  COMMUNICATIONS:



   When a Trustee wishes to present a communication, petition, order,
resolution or other matter, he shall first obtain recognition by the
presiding officer, and shall briefly state its nature, before presenting the
same.



1-5-7-4:  LIMITATION ON DEBATE:



   No Trustee, without leave of a majority of Trustees present, shall
speak more than once upon the same subject, until every Trustee desirous of
speaking shall have spoken; and no Trustee shall speak longer than five (5)
minutes at any one time except by consent of a majority of the Trustees
present.



1-5-7-5:  CONDUCT OF MEMBERS DURING DEBATE:



   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private discourse.



1-5-7-6:  VOTING MANDATORY UNLESS EXCUSED:



   Every Trustee who shall be present when a question is stated from the
chair shall vote thereon unless excused by the Board of Trustees or unless to
vote thereon would constitute a legal conflict of interest in which case the
Trustee shall abstain from voting or take such other action as is required by
law.



1-5-7-7:  ORDERS, MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS:



1-5-7-7-1:  SPECIAL ORDER:



   Any matter before the Board of Trustees may be set down as a special
order of business at a certain time if a majority of the Trustees present
vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.



1-5-7-7-2:  MOTIONS:



   No motion shall be put or debated unless it is seconded.  When a
motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer or Village
Clerk if requested by any Trustee before debate.



   In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered on the minutes of
the Board of Trustees, the names of the Trustees moving and seconding the
same shall also be entered on the minutes.



1-5-7-7-3:  ORDINANCES - VOTING - RULES FOR ATTENDANCE AT MEETING BY VIDEO
OR AUDIO CONFERENCE:



   Every ordinance and resolution, including any proposed amendment
thereto, shall be reduced to writing and presented to the President and Board
of Trustees at any Board meeting before vote thereon by the members is
taken.  Copies thereof shall be furnished to each Board member.



   All resolutions and motions (1) which create any liability against the
Village, or (2) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its
money, or (3) which authorize the sale of any Village property and all
ordinances shall be decided by a roll call vote, the result of which vote
shall be recorded, and all ordinances passed by the Village Board shall be
deposited with the Village Clerk.



   Any meeting of the Board of Trustees at which a quorum of the Board of
Trustees is physically present may be attended by a Trustee by means of video
or audio conference under the following conditions:



   a.     The Trustee cannot be physically present at the meeting due
to (i) personal illness or disability; (ii) employment purposes or the
business of the Village; or (iii) a family or other emergency.



   b.     The Trustee desiring to attend a meeting of the Board of
Trustees by means of video or audio conference for one of the reasons stated
above must notify the Village Clerk before the meeting unless advance notice
is impractical.



   c.     The absent Trustee’s voice on the audio conference, after
being identified by the rest of the Board as belonging to the Trustee, shall
be simultaneously broadcast to the public present at the meeting and open to
the media, and the Trustee shall also be able to hear any public comment
regarding any issue or matter discussed at the meeting, if any.



   d.     The Trustee shall publicly state the reason for not being
physically present at the meeting.



(3225, 2-1-99; Amd. Ord. 4349. 3-17-08)



1-5-7-7-4:  QUESTIONS:



   If the question under consideration contains several distinct
propositions, any member may have the same divided.



   When a motion is under debate the only motions in order shall be: (1)
to adjourn to a day certain; (2) to adjourn; (3) to lay on the table; (4) the
previous question; (5) to refer; (6) to amend; (7) to substitute; or (8) to
postpone indefinitely or to a day certain.  Of these, numbers (2), (3) and
(4) shall be decided without debate.



1-5-7-8:  ACTION ON MOTIONS:



1-5-7-8-1:  TABLING:



   An unqualified motion to lay a question on the table is not debatable,
but a motion to lay on the table and publish, or with other condition, is
subject to amendment and debate.



   A motion to take a subject matter from the table may be adopted at the
same meeting, provided two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees present vote therefor.



1-5-7-8-2:  PREVIOUS QUESTION:



   When the previous question is moved and seconded, it shall be put in
this form:  "Shall the main question now be put?"  If this is carried, by a
2/3 vote all further amendments and all further motions and debate shall be
excluded, and the question put, without delay, upon the pending amendments in
proper order, and then upon the main question.



1-5-7-8-3:  INDEFINITE POSTPONEMENT:



   When a motion is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up
at the same meeting.



1-5-7-8-4:  MOTION TO REFER:



   A motion to refer to the Committee of the Whole shall take precedence
over a similar motion for a special committee.



(Amd. Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



1-5-7-8-5:  AMENDMENT OF MOTION:



   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an
amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained by the chair.



   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but
an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.



   On an amendment to "strike out and insert", the paragraph to be amended
shall first be read as it stands; then the words proposed to be stricken out,
those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will stand if so
amended shall be read.



(3/08)



1-5-7-8-6:  SUBSTITUTE MOTIONS:



   A substitute for any original proposition in debate may be entertained
when further amendment is not admissible; if accepted by the mover of such
original proposition, or by the affirmative vote of a majority of the
Trustees present, it shall entirely supersede such original proposition, and
cut off all amendments appertaining to such original proposition.



1-5-7-9:  RECONSIDERATION:



   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting or at the first regular meeting held thereafter.  A motion for
reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the negative, shall not
be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered.  No motion to
reconsider the approval or denial of the recommendation of an advisory body
required to hold public hearings shall be entertained except at the same
meeting at which the original action was taken or after the matter has been
referred to the advisory body for a further hearing and recommendation.



   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by members who voted
on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered unless otherwise
provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received a
majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground
that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by Statute for the
passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case a motion to reconsider
may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such
question to be reconsidered, so long as the issue presented is the same, no
new information is forthcoming, and the rights of third parties have not
intervened.



1-5-7-10:  ADJOURNMENT:



   A motion to adjourn the Board of Trustees shall always be in order
except: 1) when a member is in possession of the floor; 2) while the yeas and
nays are being called; 3) when the members are voting; 4) when adjournment
was the last preceding motion; and 5) when it has been decided that the
previous question shall be taken.



   An unqualified motion to adjourn cannot be amended but a motion to
adjourn to a time named may be and is open to debate.



1-5-7-11:  AMENDMENT, REPEAL OR SUSPENSION OF RULES:



   These rules may be amended or repealed at any regular or special
meeting of the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that written notice of
such amendments or motions for repeal shall have been presented to the Board
of Trustees at a prior meeting of the Board of Trustees.



   These rules may be temporarily suspended at any meeting by vote of a
majority of the Trustees present.



1-5-7-12:  ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER ADOPTED:



   The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published
edition of Robert's "Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the Board of
Trustees in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not
inconsistent with the special rules of this Board of Trustees or the Statutes
or laws of the State of Illinois.



1-5-7-13:  POSTING RULES:



   The Village Clerk shall prepare and display in the Board Room of the
Village Hall a condensed digest of the provisions of the PUBLIC AND NEWS
MEDIA PARTICIPATION Section of this Chapter.  The Village Clerk shall
further post a complete copy of the PUBLIC AND NEWS MEDIA PARTICIPATION
Section of this Chapter on the bulletin board in the Village Hall.  (Ord.
657, 6-9-75)



1-5-7-14:  COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE:



   One hour prior to each regularly scheduled Board of Trustees meeting,
the Village Board will meet as a Committee of the Whole, unless there are no
items for the Committee of the Whole to consider. The agenda for the
Committee of the Whole shall be prepared by the Village Clerk in consultation
with the Village Manager and Village President.



   A portion of the Committee of the Whole meeting shall be dedicated to
previewing upcoming non-routine agenda items, including a standing item for
the consideration of Agenda Initiatives. A time for public comment shall be
conducted. No final action, beyond action setting future agenda items and/or
Agenda Initiatives, would be taken at a meeting of a Committee of the Whole.



   The following agenda items would be brought before the Committee of the
Whole: (1) the expenditure of money over $250,000; (2) development
agreements; (3) amending the Village Code; (4) the implementation or
modification of policies; (5) budget amendments; and/or (6) an Agenda
Initiative filed by a Board member.  Items that do not fall within these
categories, and require Board approval, are to be placed on the regular Board
of Trustees meeting agenda. The failure to preview a non-routine agenda item
at a Committee of the Whole shall not prohibit its consideration and/or
action at a future Board of Trustees meeting.



   Since the purpose of the Committee of the Whole is to allow an
opportunity to engage in more informal discussions, the rules of
parliamentary practice for standing committees comprised in the latest
published edition of Robert's "Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the
Committee of the Whole in all cases to which they are applicable, and in
which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of the Committee of
the Whole or the statutes or laws of the State of Illinois.



   Board of Trustees Agenda Initiatives: An “Agenda Initiative”
process would provide that any individual Trustee could get an initiative
placed on the Committee of the Whole agenda by instructing the Village
Manager, either verbally or in writing, prior to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
on the Friday preceding the meeting, to place the item on the Committee of
the Whole agenda. Village/legal staff time would be restricted until after at
least three Trustees vote to move the Agenda Initiative forward.



   Agenda Initiatives would include: (1) the expenditure of money; (2)
modifications to the Village Code; (3) formation/modification of Village
policies; (4) the introduction of an ordinance or resolution; (5) the
formation/modification of committees; (6) budget changes; and/or (7) the
appropriation of Village/legal staff time. At each Committee of the Whole
meeting, a portion of the meeting would be dedicated to the consideration of
any Agenda Initiatives that have been filed.



(Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



1-5-7-14-1:  PREVIOUSLY DELIBERATED ITEMS:



   No item shall be placed on the Board of Trustees or the Committee of
the Whole agenda which, in the opinion of the Village Attorney, is
substantially similar to an item or concerns subject matter which is the same
as an item that was previously defeated by the Board of Trustees or the
Committee of the Whole, respectively, for a period of one (1) year after the
item was defeated unless:



      1.   The rules are suspended by a majority of the members of
the Board of Trustees or the Committee of the Whole; or



      2.   A matter is moved to be reconsidered by a majority of the
members of the Board of Trustees or the Committee of the Whole.



(Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



1-5-7-14-2:  SPECIAL COMMITTEES:



   Special committees shall be created from time to time as directed by
the Board of Trustees.



1-5-8:  PUBLIC AND NEWS MEDIA PARTICIPATION:



   In order to secure the rights of the citizens of the Village to a fair
and just representation of all the citizens by their elected officials, and
to guarantee those duly elected officials an orderly and dignified forum in
which to represent the rights of the said citizens, and to safeguard the
rights of any resident of the Village and those persons having business with
the Board of Trustees, and any visitors in physical attendance at a Board of
Trustees meeting to hear and to see, without obstruction, the proceedings and
actions of the elected officials, and to permit the persons in the news media
to observe and report the proceedings and actions of the Board of Trustees,
no person or persons will be allowed to engage in any activity that will
disturb or disrupt the orderly proceedings of the Board of Trustees and for
the attaining of this objective, the following provisions are hereby adopted
and the following rules of conduct are hereby established:



   1.   The Office of the Village Manager (Clerk) shall provide for the
Board Room of the Village Hall to be divided into three (3) sections, as
follows:



      (1).   One section for the seating of the Board of Trustees,
Village Clerk, officers, employees and consultants of the Village, and
members of advisory boards and commissions of the Village, which shall be
distinctly designated.



      (2).   One section furnished with sufficient tables or desks
and chairs reserved for the members of the news media.



      (3).   One section furnished with chairs for all other persons
constituting the audience at said meeting.



   2.   No alcoholic beverages in any form or other intoxicating
substance shall be permitted during the time of the meeting of the Board of
Trustees.



   3.   No person, other than members of the Board of Trustees, the
Village Clerk, officers, employees, and consultants of the Village, and
members of advisory boards and commissions of the Village will be permitted
to enter the section of the main meeting room set aside for the members of
the Board of Trustees during the time of the meeting of the Board of Trustees
unless permission is granted by the presiding officer.  Any person or
persons so permitted to enter said section shall place himself and conduct
himself in such manner as directed by the presiding officer. 



   Photographs, in addition to those permitted in the following paragraph,
interviews, conversations, recording, or other contact with the members of
the Board of Trustees, Village officers, employees, consultants, members of
advisory boards and commissions of the Village, and with witnesses or persons
appearing before the Board of Trustees will be allowed only during a recess
or after the close of the meeting of the Board of Trustees.



   4.   Members of the audience and members of the news media,
including photographers, will not be permitted free movement about the
meeting room during the time of the meeting of the Board of Trustees.  Any
member of the audience and any member of the news media, including
photographers, may enter and leave the meeting room at any time, provided
such entrance and exit is made quietly and in an orderly fashion.  If a
photographer must move about the room, such movement shall be allowed,
provided it is minimal, does not obstruct the view of any other person in
physical attendance, and the photographer does not enter the section
designated for the members of the Board of Trustees and others as set forth
in this Section.



   5.   Members of the audience or members of the news media will not
engage in conversation during the time of the meeting of the Board of
Trustees.



   6.   The Village of Orland Park shall record, by audio and/or video
means, all regular and special meetings of the Village Board of Trustees and
all Village Standing Committees.  The recordings are public records and
shall be subject to inspection and copying by any person in accordance with
Sections 140/1, et seq., of the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS
140/1, et seq.).  The recordings shall be maintained by the Village Clerk
and disposed of in accordance with the Illinois Local Records Act (50 ILCS
205/1, et seq.).  The recordings will be posted on the Village website on
the first business day following each recorded Village Board or Committee
meeting.



      Whenever the Village Board sits as a tribunal or conducts a
hearing at which witnesses are to testify, and a witness asserts his/her
right under state or federal law, as now or hereafter may be applicable, to
refuse  to testify if the proceedings are to be recorded, the Village
President or presiding officer shall order and direct that all such recording
cease during the testimony of the witness, and the Village President or
presiding officer shall enforce such order by all lawful means.



      Persons attending an open and public meeting of the Village Board
or any of its Standing Committees, Commissions, Agencies and Advisory Boards
may, at their own expense, record the proceedings with an audio, video, still
or motion picture device or may broadcast the proceedings.  In this
instance, if the Village Board (or the governing board of a Village
Committee, Commission, Agency or Advisory Board) finds by a majority vote
that the recording or broadcast cannot continue without noise, illumination
or obstruction of view that constitutes or would constitute a persistent
disruption of the proceedings, any such person shall be directed by the
Village President or presiding officer to discontinue recording or
transmitting.



   7.   Persons wishing to address the Board of Trustees at the time
allotted by the Board of Trustees for public discussion shall make this
desire known in writing to the Village Clerk before seven o’clock (7:00)
P.M. of the night of said meeting.  Said person shall be permitted to speak
only upon recognition of the presiding officer.



   8.   No equipment may be set up or in any way be used so as to
obstruct the view of any person in the audience or any members of the news
media.  (Ord. 657, 6-9-75)



   9.   The Board of Trustees, herein defined to include its
Committees, Commissions and Advisory Boards, of the Village of Orland Park
welcomes public participation and will hear any interested individual
pursuant to the guidelines outlined in this policy.  Before appearing before
the Board, the members of the public are urged to seek solutions to their
concerns through administrative channels.  If there are no members of the
public wishing to address the Board, the Board may continue with its meeting.



      The following rules shall govern speakers who address the Board:



      (1).   The time allowed for each person to speak will be three
(3) minutes.  Speakers are asked to strictly adhere to time allocated.



      (2).   Speakers must identify themselves and their topic(s)
before speaking.



      (3).   Speakers may provide written copies of their concern to
the Board.



      (4).   Groups are asked to designate a single spokesperson.



      (5).   Board members may or may not respond to comments from
speakers.  The Village President or other presiding officer may respond as
appropriate and, for example, direct speakers to the appropriate staff member
for assistance.  Issues requiring possible action by the Board may be added
to a future agenda.  Issues that may need to be addressed by the
administration will be duly noted.



      (6).   Abusive language and/or personal attacks will not be
permitted and shall promptly be ruled out of order by the Village President
or other presiding officer.



      (7).   Speakers at special meetings shall limit their topics
to matters appearing on the special meeting agendas.



      (8).   Individuals addressing the Board must at all times
adhere to the Village policies and other rules as may be necessary for the
efficient and orderly conduct of the meeting.



The Board vests in the Village President or other presiding officer, the
authority to terminate the remarks of speakers who fail to adhere to the
above rules.



All public comment shall be addressed to the Board as a whole and no comments
shall be addressed to individual members of the Board, Village staff or other
members of the public.



There shall be no debate on any matters raised during public comment.  The
Board may, however, refer any matter of public comment to the Village
Manager, Village staff, an appropriate agency for review, or may place the
matter on a subsequent agenda for discussion.



No final action may be taken on any public comment or concern which requires
an ordinance, resolution, or written contract, or which has the effect of
approving any expenditure of funds.  The Board may, however, direct that any
matter raised on these subjects be set for a future agenda, including the
preparation of ordinances, resolutions or other documents for consideration
at such time.



(Ord. 657, 6-9-75; Amd. Ord. 5208, 8-7-17; Amd. Ord. 5225, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord.
5263, 1-15-18)



1-5-9:  SERGEANT AT ARMS:



   The President of the Board of Trustees or acting chairman of the Board
of Trustees shall appoint the Sergeant at Arms and such assistants as he
deems necessary who shall preserve order, obey the directions of the Board of
Trustees and of the presiding officer, and perform all duties usually
appertaining to the office of Sergeant at Arms of deliberative assemblies. 
(Ord. 1288, 10-24-83)



1-5-10:     VILLAGE PRESIDENT; LINE OF SUCCESSION:



   Pursuant to the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act (5 ILCS
275/1 et seq.), in the event of an attack upon the United States or a natural
or manmade disaster in the Village resulting in the unavailability of both
the Village President and Village President Pro-Tem, or the unavailability of
the Village President when no Village President Pro-Tem has been elected, the
duties and all of the rights and powers of the office of Village President
shall be discharged by the designated emergency interim successors in the
order specified below.  Emergency interim successors for the Office of
Village President are hereby designated as follows:



      1.     Most Senior Trustee available



      2.     Village Manager



      3.     Assistant Village Manager



      4.     Chief of Police



      5.     Deputy Chief of Police



   Other than taking the oath of office required in order to exercise the
rights and powers and discharge the duties of the office of Village
President, an emergency interim successor hereunder shall not be required to
comply with any other provision of law relative to taking office.  The
emergency interim successor shall exercise the rights and powers and
discharge the duties of the office of Village President until such time that
either the Village President or previously elected Village President Pro-Tem
are available to resume the duties of office, or the Board of Trustees elects
a Village President Pro-Tem.



(Ord. 4382, 6-16-8)



CHAPTER 6
MANAGERIAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT



SECTION:



1-6-1:   Managerial Form of Government Adopted



1-6-1:  MANAGERIAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT ADOPTED:



   Pursuant to referendum, the Village Managerial Form of Government is
established in Orland Park.



CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS OF THE VILLAGE



SECTION:



1-7-1:   Village Manager



1-7-1-1:   Office Established



1-7-1-2:   Appointment



1-7-1-3:   Term of Office



1-7-1-4:   Powers, Duties and Functions



1-7-1-5:   Dual Offices and Employment Prohibited



1-7-1-6:   Conflict of Interest Prohibited



1-7-1-7:   Compensation



1-7-1-8:   Resignation



1-7-1-9:   Removal, Dismissal



1-7-1-10:   Bond



1-7-1-11:   Oath of Office



1-7-2:   Village Treasurer



1-7-2-1:   Creation; Appointment



1-7-2-2:   Bond; Oath



1-7-2-3:   General Duties



1-7-2-4:   Warrants



1-7-2-5:   Special Assessments; Application



1-7-2-6:   Books and Accounts



1-7-2-7:   Reports



1-7-2-8   Disposition of Moneys



1-7-2-9:   Records to Successor



1-7-2-10:   Assistant Village Treasurer



1-7-3:   Village Finance Director



1-7-3-1:   Creation; Appointment



1-7-3-2:   Powers and Duties



1-7-3-3:   Salary



1-7-3-4:   Resignation or Removal From Office



1-7-4:   Director of Building Department



1-7-4-1:   Creation; Appointment



1-7-4-2:   Powers and Duties



1-7-5:   Village Fire Safety Inspector



1-7-5-1:   Creation



1-7-5-2:   Appointment



1-7-5-3:   Compensation



1-7-5-4:   Powers, Functions and Duties



1-7-5-5:   Dismissal



1-7-6:   Village Budget Officer



1-7-6-1:   Creation



1-7-6-2:   Appointment



1-7-6-3:   Powers and Duties



1-7-6-4:   Oath



1-7-6-5:   Bond



1-7-6-6:   Compensation



1-7-7:   Deputy Clerk



1-7-7-1:   Creation



1-7-7-2:   Appointment



1-7-7-3:   Powers and Duties



1-7-7-4:   Compensation



1-7-1:  VILLAGE MANAGER:



1-7-1-1:  OFFICE ESTABLISHED:



   There is hereby established the office of Village Manager for the
Village.  The Village Manager shall be the administrative head of the
government of the Village and shall be responsible for the efficient
administration of all departments of the Village.



1-7-1-2:  APPOINTMENT:



   The Village Manager shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees.  He
shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative
qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his
knowledge of municipal government in respect to the duties of his office
hereinafter set forth.  The Village Manager need not be a resident of the
Village.



1-7-1-3:  TERM OF OFFICE:



   The Village Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term.



1-7-1-4:  POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:



   The Village Manager shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations
of the Village and shall supervise and exercise general authority over all
Village departments, department heads, Village employees, general offices of
the Village, and other administrative departments, offices and activities
that may be created by ordinance or established by the Board of Trustees,
unless provided otherwise by ordinance or action of the Board of Trustees. 
The Village Manager shall be answerable only to the Board of Trustees.



   The Village Manager shall work and cooperate with all Village officials
and employees and the attorneys, accountants and other consultants
representing the Village, and such persons shall render to him the assistance
and shall furnish him the oral or written information and material relating
to the affairs of the Village as he may request.



   In addition, the Village Manager has the following specific powers,
duties and functions:



   1.   He shall enforce the laws and ordinances within the Village.



   2   He shall exercise control of all departments and divisions of
the Village created by the Illinois Municipal Code and by any section of this
Chapter or any other ordinance of this Village.



   3.   He shall have all the powers and exercise all the duties
granted in the Illinois Municipal Code to municipal clerks and comptrollers
with respect to the preparation of a report of the estimated funds necessary
to defray the expenses of the Village for the fiscal year for the
consideration of the President and Board of Trustees prior to the preparation
of the annual budget ordinance.



   4.   He shall appoint and remove all officers who are not required
to be elected by Article 3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, except Officers
appointed through Civil Service and except the Village Treasurer and the
Deputy Clerk.  (Ord. 3416, 9-5-00)



   5.   He shall be responsible for, and have the authority to recruit,
interview, employ or terminate the employment of all Village employees. 
Such responsibility and authority shall include all department heads and the
Chief of Police.



   6.   He shall act as a business manager for the Village and as such
shall work with all Village departments to coordinate and supervise the
administrative work of each department.



   7   He shall be the purchasing agent for the Village except where
specific provisions to the contrary are made by Village ordinance.  As such,
he may issue rules and regulations governing requisitions and the transaction
of the business of purchasing between himself as purchasing agent and the
heads of departments, officers and employees of the Village.  As purchasing
agent, he shall have the authority and duty to seek qualified vendors to
supply the Village and any department, board or officer thereof with needed
materials, equipment, services and insurance and purchase same subject to the
following restrictions:



      i.   No purchase, lease or agreement for contractual services
may be entered into or made, the cost of which exceeds the unexpended and
unencumbered amount in a budget category, until and unless the Board of
Trustees has increased that budget category.



      ii.   The Village Manager may enter into leases on behalf of
the Village or agreements for contractual services needed by the Village or
any department, board or officer thereof, but any such lease or contractual
service agreement of greater than one year's duration shall require prior
approval by the Board of Trustees.



      iii.   Leases or agreements for contractual services of one
year or lesser duration shall be subject to the limitations specified below.



      iv.   For a purchase or lease of materials, goods, equipment,
services or insurance, the cost of which is less than $20,000.00, the Village
Manager shall request price quotations from several vendors or service
providers, unless only a single source is available, and choose from among
them as he/she may determine is in the best interests of the Village.  The
Village Manager may, in his/her discretion, delegate to a Village Department
Head the authority to purchase or lease materials, goods, equipment, services
or insurance, the cost of which is less than $5,000.00, except that the
Village Manager may, in his/her discretion, delegate to the Finance Director
the authority to purchase or lease materials, goods, equipment, services or
insurance, the cost of which is $5,000.00 or more but less than $10,000.00. 
No such purchase or lease, the cost of which is equal to or greater than
$20,000.00, shall be made or entered into by the Village Manager without
prior approval by the Village Board of Trustees.



      v.   For a purchase or lease of materials, goods, equipment,
services or insurance, the cost of which is $20,000.00 or more, the Village
Manager shall advertise for and receive sealed bids and shall present said
bids, together with his/her recommendations, to the Village Board of Trustees
for consideration.  The requirement for sealed bids is not required for a
purchase or lease of materials, goods, equipment, services or insurance which
is not, by its nature, adaptable to the bidding process, such as professional
service contracts or contracts where there is only a single source
available.  The requirement for sealed bids may also be waived by the
Village Board of Trustees by a vote of two thirds of the Trustees then
holding office.  If the requirement for sealed bids is not required or
waived, the Village Manager shall request price quotations and present these
to the Village Board of Trustees.



      vi.   The Village Board of Trustees may, in its discretion,
delegate to the Village Manager the authority to sign contracts on behalf of
the Village for the purchase or lease of materials, goods, equipment,
services or insurance, the cost of which is $20,000.00 or more, which
contracts have been approved by the Village Board of Trustees.  A purchase
order for goods and services, the cost of which is less than $10,000.00 and
which purchase order contains all required terms and conditions, may serve as
a contract. However, a purchase order for a public works project may not
serve as a contract.



      vii.   In connection with any work or public improvement bid
or proposal, the Village Manager, or his/her designee, shall fix the amount
of any performance bond or any labor and material payment bond and in
circumstances deemed appropriate by the Village Manager he/she may waive the
requirement of a performance bond and/or labor and material payment bond. 
(Ord. 4204, 11-20-06)



   8.   He shall coordinate the management of the Village Hall and all
other Village buildings, facilities and properties, provide necessary
facilities for the operations and purposes of all boards and commissions of
the Village and keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of
the Village.



   9.   He shall coordinate all Village operations affecting more than
one department, office or officers; he may, if he deems necessary, with the
consent of the President and Board of Trustees, consolidate or combine
offices, positions or departments within the Village.



   10.   He shall submit, or cause to be submitted to the President and
Board of Trustees, monthly and annual written reports of the activities and
financial status of all Village departments and operations under his
management.  The annual report shall be submitted within thirty (30) days
following the end of each fiscal year.



   11.   He shall attend all meetings of the Village Board of Trustees
and committees thereof, unless excused therefrom.  He shall be entitled to
notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the Village Board of Trustees
and shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters
before the Village Board of Trustees in a consulting and advisory capacity. 
He shall not have the right to vote.



   12.   He shall, as required from time to time, provide reports and
general information to the members of the Board of Trustees.



   13.   He shall advise, and as necessary, provide assistance to all
duly constituted boards, commissions and advisory committees of the Village.



   14.   He shall be responsible for the preparation and release of
newsletters, brochures, articles and other informational sources in order to
keep the public informed on the activities of the Village government and
shall make himself available to the residents and business community of the
Village and work with the public to receive suggestions and to hear,
investigate and attempt to resolve complaints relating to matters concerning
the administration of the government of the Village and the services rendered
by the Village.



   15.   He shall, as directed by the President and Board of Trustees,
represent the Village in matters concerning the Village and other
governmental entities.



   16.   He shall perform such other duties and services consistent
with the laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of the Village, as
the President and Board of Trustees may from time to time direct or delegate,
including any ordinance amending this Section which expands, diminishes or
otherwise modifies the provisions of this Section which the President and
Board of Trustees may from time to time adopt.  In addition to the powers,
duties and functions of the Village Manager as purchasing agent for the
Village as set forth in paragraph 7 above, the Village Manager or his/her
designee shall have the authority to execute written contracts on behalf of
the Village following approval of the actual contracts, or following approval
of the essential terms of such contracts, by the Board of Trustees. 



(Ord. 4622, 2-21-11; Amd. Ord. 5231, 10-16-17)



1-7-1-5:  DUAL OFFICES AND EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED:



   During the period of his term, or any renewal thereof, unless he
secures the prior approval of the Board of Trustees, the Village Manager
shall not be otherwise employed in any capacity, or hold any other office,
whether on a full or part-time basis, by any other person, firm or
corporation, nor shall he perform any work, consult or otherwise be engaged
by any unit of local government other than the Village.



1-7-1-6:  CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITED:



   The Village Manager shall not be interested, directly or indirectly, in
any contract, work or business of the Village, or in the sale of any article
to the Village, or in the purchase of any property belonging to the Village,
or sold for taxes or assessments, or sold by virtue of legal process at the
suit of the Village.



1-7-1-7:  COMPENSATION:



   The Village Manager shall receive such compensation as the Board of
Trustees shall from time to time establish.



1-7-1-8:  RESIGNATION:



   Upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the President and Board
of Trustees, the Village Manager may resign from his office.



1-7-1-9:  REMOVAL, DISMISSAL:



   The Village Manager may at any time be removed from his office by a
majority vote of the Board of Trustees.



   Immediately upon removal, or if by reason of death, permanent physical
or mental disability, prolonged illness or any other reason, the Village
Manager ceases to perform the duties of this office, the Board of Trustees
shall appoint a temporary Village Manager.  The temporary Village Manager
shall remain in office and carry out the duties and functions provided in
this Section until the appointment of a permanent Village Manager.



   Within a reasonable time after the removal or dismissal of the Village
Manager, a new Village Manager shall be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of this Section.



1-7-1-10:  BOND:



   The Village Manager shall furnish a surety bond in such sum and form as
required by the Board of Trustees, said bond to be conditioned on the
faithful performance of his duties.  The premium of the bond shall be paid
by the Village.



1-7-1-11:  OATH OF OFFICE:



   The Village Manager, before entering upon his duties, shall take and
subscribe to the oath of office required to be taken by officers pursuant to
the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code.  (Ord. 1290, 11-7-83)



1-7-2:  VILLAGE TREASURER:



1-7-2-1:  CREATION; APPOINTMENT:



   There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer, an
administrative office of the Village. The Village Treasurer shall be
appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees, and shall serve at the pleasure of the President and Board of
Trustees, but for a period of time not longer than the term of office of the
President making the appointment, or until a successor is appointed and
qualified. 



(Ord. 156, 6-10-57; amd. Ord. 549, 6-25-73, amd. Ord. 3098, 1-5-98)



1-7-2-2:  BOND; OATH:



   Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Village Treasurer
shall furnish bond in a sum required by the Board of Trustees, but such
amount shall not be less than that required by statute.  He shall also take
the oath of office prescribed by Statute.  (65 ILCS 5/3-14-3) 



(Ord. 549, 6-25-73; Amd. Ord 5224, 10-2-17)



1-7-2-3:  GENERAL DUTIES:



   In addition to the duties prescribed by Statute (65 ILCS 5/3-10-1 et
seq.), the Treasurer shall:



   Keep a true and accurate account showing all moneys paid into the
Treasury, and by whom and on what account received.



   Pay out such sums of money as may be owed by the Village, but only
after the presentation of claims which shall be approved by the Board of
Trustees of the Village.  All checks shall be signed by the Treasurer and
countersigned by the President or the Clerk, or such other Village officer as
the Board of Trustees shall from time to time provide.  In all cases, checks
shall state upon what particular funds they are drawn.  Any bond or interest
coupon issued by the Village, and due and payable, shall be considered a
warrant duly authorized for payment by the Treasurer. 



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



1-7-2-4:  WARRANTS:



   No moneys shall be paid by the Treasurer upon any warrant, bond or
coupon except from the moneys belonging to the particular fund or
appropriation upon which such warrant shall have been drawn; no money shall
be transferred by the Treasurer from one fund to another after it has been
received by him, nor be appropriated to any other purpose than that for which
it has been collected or paid, without the vote of a majority of the Board of
Trustees.



   The Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid,
which shall describe such warrants and show the date, amount, serial numbers,
the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom paid and the date of
payment.



   The Treasurer shall cancel all warrants paid or redeemed by him, shall
make duplicates of all receipts given by him for moneys received and obtain
and hold such other vouchers as will fully cover all his transactions.



1-7-2-5:  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; APPLICATION:



   The Treasurer shall also keep an account of each special assessment
under its general description and number and said account shall show at its
head the amount assessed for public benefits and also that for special
benefits.  All moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by
the Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to payment for the improvement
for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be used for no other
purpose, except as may be provided in the ordinance for the improvement.



1-7-2-6:  BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS:



   The books kept by the Village Treasurer shall at all times show the
exact condition of the moneys under his control, of each account and
appropriation, and of all receipts and disbursements, and such books together
with all others in his custody and belonging to the Village shall be by him
delivered to his successor.  He shall keep a separate account for each fund
or appropriation, stating at the head of each account the amount so
appropriated, and giving the several debits and credits belonging thereto.



   The books of account provided for herein shall be properly balanced at
least once in each month, in such a manner that the same, when so balanced,
shall show the true status and condition of each and every account therein
shown.



   All books, papers, vouchers, warrants, documents and all other
instruments in writing appertaining to the office of Treasurer shall be kept
at his office within the Village, which books and documents shall at all
times be open to the inspection of the President, the Trustees and the
Village Clerk.  The Treasurer shall keep such books of account as are herein
provided and as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time direct.



1-7-2-7:  REPORTS:



   1.   The Treasurer shall, each month, make a report in writing to
the Board of Trustees containing a full detailed account of all receipts and
expenditures of the Village, as shown by his books, for the preceding
calendar month.  The duplicate receipts, canceled warrants and other
vouchers covering the transactions for that month shall be attached to or
accompany that report.  After its approval by the Board of Trustees, the
Clerk shall take charge of the report and accompanying vouchers and keep the
same on file in his office.



   2.   Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this Code,
the Village Treasurer shall be required to annually, within six months after
the end of each fiscal year, prepare and file with the Village Clerk, a full
and detailed account of all his receipts and disbursements as Treasurer
during the preceding fiscal year of the Village, which account shall show the
state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year.  The account shall be
placed on file for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk.



   3.   In addition, upon receipt of the account from the Village
Treasurer, the Village Clerk shall cause to be published at least once in a
newspaper published within the Village or if there is none then in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village a notice of the filing of the
account by the Village Treasurer, which notice shall be in a form
substantially set forth as follows:



    STATE OF ILLINOIS                          )



    COUNTIES OF COOK AND WILL      )        Notice of Filing of
Municipal



    VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK            )      Treasurer's Annual
Account



   Please take notice that the annual account of all monies received and
expenditures incurred by the Village of Orland Park during the preceding
fiscal year has been filed in my office by the Village Treasurer of the
Village of Orland Park, Illinois.  Copies of said account showing receipts
and expenditures are available for public inspection in the Village Clerk's
office, Village Hall, 14700 South Ravinia Avenue, Orland Park, Illinois
60462, between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday."



   4.   The failure to publish this notice shall not be construed as a
violation of the requirements of this section, nor of the requirements of
ILCS CH. 65, Act 5 3.1-35-65, and publication of the account in pamphlet form
shall be deemed in full compliance with the provisions of this section.  A
copy of the account, as filed with the Village Clerk and bearing the
affidavit thereof, shall be filed with the County Collector within six months
after the end of each fiscal year or as soon thereafter as the same is
available for filing.



   5.   The procedure prescribed in divisions (2), (3), and (4) hereof
for the preparation, filing, and publication of the Treasurer's Annual
Account and the aforesaid notice shall be deemed to be in compliance with and
in lieu of the requirements of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 3.1-35-65, and any
amendments thereof, by virtue of and under the home rule powers of the
Village.  To the extent of any conflict, the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5 3.1-35-65 are declared to be of no force or effect under the home rule
powers of the Village.



   6   Compliance with the provisions of this section under the home
rule powers of the Village shall constitute full authority to the Cook and
Will County Collectors to disburse all appropriate tax moneys to the Village.
(Ord. 3233, 3-15-99)



1-7-2-8:  DISPOSITION OF MONEYS:



   The Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the Village and in his
hands separate and distinct from his own moneys, and he is hereby expressly
prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, any Village moneys or
warrants in his custody and keeping, for his own use and benefit or that of
any other person; any violation of this provision shall subject him to
immediate removal from office by the President and Trustees; in case of his
removal the President and Trustees, voting jointly, shall appoint a successor
who shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   The Village shall annually invite bids for the service of a depository
in which the funds and monies of this Village may be deposited.



   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village shall from time to
time hereafter determine what allocation of funds and money shall be made
with respect to said depository but in no event shall the amount so deposited
in any depository exceed the limitations imposed by statute.



1-7-2-9:  RECORDS TO SUCCESSOR:



   Whenever his term of office shall expire, whether by resignation,
removal from the Village, removal from office by the President and Trustees,
the appointment of a successor or other cause, the Treasurer shall at once
deliver to his successor in office, or such other person as may be specially
designated by resolution of the Board of Trustees, all moneys, property,
books and effects of every description in his possession, belonging to the
Village or appertaining to his office; and he shall also at once account for
and pay over to such successor or other person designated all moneys that he
shall be accountable for or owe to the Village in his capacity of
Treasurer.  Any person, having acted as Treasurer, who, on expiration of his
term of office, shall violate in any of the ways above mentioned any
provision of this Section shall be liable for all damages caused thereby.



(Ord. 156, 6-10-57)



1-7-2-10:  ASSISTANT VILLAGE TREASURER - CREATION:



The Office of Assistant Village Treasurer is hereby created.



   1.   The Village Treasurer shall appoint the Assistant Village
Treasurer, who need not be a resident of the Village.  The Village Treasurer
shall be held responsible for the fidelity of the person he or she appoints
as Assistant Village Treasurer.



   2.   In the absence or incapacity of the Village Treasurer, the
Assistant Village Treasurer shall carry out the duties of the Village
Treasurer prescribed by statute and this Chapter of the Village Code.  In
signing any document, the Assistant Village Treasurer shall sign the name of
the Village Treasurer followed with the word "By" and the Assistant Village
Treasurer's own name and the words "Assistant Village Treasurer."



   3.   The powers and duties of the Assistant Village Treasurer shall
be exercised only in the absence of the Village Treasurer from the
Treasurer's office in the Village Hall, and only when either written
direction has been given by the Village Treasurer, or when the Corporate
Authorities have determined by resolution that the Village Treasurer is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform that function.  (Ord.
3559, 11-5-01)



1-7-3:  VILLAGE FINANCE DIRECTOR:



1-7-3-1:  CREATION; APPOINTMENT:



   There is hereby created the position of employment to be known as the
Village Finance Director.



   The Village Manager shall appoint the Village Finance Director, and the
period of employment of said Village Finance Director shall be one year,
commencing May 1 and expiring on April 30, or until such time as a successor
has been appointed.  (Ord. 1069, 10-13-80)



(12/01)



1-7-3-2:  POWERS AND DUTIES: 



   The Village Finance Director shall have the power and duty to encourage
and establish efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting,
and other fiscal management procedures for all Village officers including,
but not limited to the Village Clerk's office, and all departments,
commissions and boards and, in addition, the following specific powers and
duties:



   He shall devote his full time and attention to the discharge of his
duties prescribed in this Section and all other applicable ordinances of the
Village.



   2.   He shall be directly responsible to the Village Manager as
provided for in this Chapter.



   3.   He shall compile an annual budget for use by the President and
Board of Trustees in preparation of an annual budget ordinance.  The annual
budget shall be submitted to the President and Board of Trustees and shall be
in a form and manner as directed by the President and Board of Trustees.



   4.   Subject to subsection 2 of this Section, he shall be directly
responsible for the receipt, collection, return or disbursement of the
Village revenues.  This shall include but not be limited to all matters
relating to business licenses and fees and building permits and fees.



   5.   He shall, for the purpose of aiding in the preparation of the
annual budget ordinance, review of budget estimates and control of budgeted
funds, have custody and control of all books, documents and records of all
Village officers, departments, commissions, and boards that relate to moneys
received by the Village (including Village departments, commissions and
boards), and paid out by the Village (including Village departments,
commissions and boards), debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to
the Village (including Village departments, commissions and boards).



   6.   Every Village officer, department, employee, the Recreation
Board or any other commissions and boards of the Village shall, at such times
as directed and in form acceptable to the Village Finance Director, prepare
and submit to the Village Finance Director an estimate of the amount of money
required for each activity or function to be carried on during the current
fiscal year, and such other documentation or statements of financial
condition which the Village Finance Director may require. 



   7.   He shall submit to the Board of Trustees, and the Village
Administrative Coordinator, any additional or supplemental information which
he may have, or they may request, concerning matters upon which he is
required to report.



   8.   He shall develop and execute a comprehensive long range audit
and cash flow program.



   9.   He shall develop a purchasing and disbursement procedure to be
followed by all persons authorized to make purchases and handle disbursements
on behalf of the Village, and he shall establish and maintain such procedures
as shall insure that no expenditures are made by the Village, Village
departments, commissions or boards except as authorized by the budget.



   10.   He shall act in an advisory capacity in financial matters to
the President and Board of Trustees and shall perform such other fiscal
functions and provide such other information concerning the financial affairs
of the Villages may be required by the President and Board of Trustees.



   11.   He shall assist the independent auditors of the Village and
shall assist and work cooperatively with the President and Board of Trustees.



(Amd. Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



1-7-3-3:  SALARY:



   The salary of the Village Finance Director shall be established
annually by the Village in its annual budget ordinance.  From the effective
date of this Section until the adoption of the Village's next annual budget
ordinance, the Village Finance Director shall receive the same salary as is
presently budgeted for the Village Budget and Finance Director.  (Ord. 1012,
12-3-79)



1-7-3-4:  RESIGNATION OR REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:



   Upon written notice to the Village Manager, the Village Finance
Director may resign. In the event of such resignation, the period of
employment of any successor, regardless of the date of appointment, shall
expire on April 30 as provided for in this Chapter.



   The Village Finance Director may be removed from his position of
employment by the Village Manager at any time for cause and after a full
opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges before the Village
President.  Not less than five (5) days' notice must be given prior to a
removal hearing.



   Immediately upon removal, or if by reason of death, permanent physical
or mental disability, prolonged illness or any other reason, the Village
Finance Director ceases to perform the duties of his employment, the Village
Manager shall appoint a temporary Village Finance Director.  The temporary
Village Finance Director shall continue to carry out the duties of Village
Finance Director, as provided for in this Chapter, until the appointment of a
permanent Village Finance Director.



   Within a reasonable time after the removal or dismissal of the Village
Finance Director, a new Village Finance Director shall be appointed in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.  The period of employment of
the newly appointed Village Finance Director regardless of the date of
appointment, shall expire on April 30, as provided for in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1069, 10-13-80)



1-7-4:  DIRECTOR OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT:



1-7-4-1:  CREATION; APPOINTMENT:



   There is hereby created the position of employment of Director of
Building Department of the Village.



   The Director shall be appointed by the Village Manager for the period
of one year, commencing May 1 and expiring on April 30, or until such time as
a successor has been appointed.  (Ord. 1067, 10-13-80)



1-7-4-2:  POWERS AND DUTIES:



   1.   General:  The Director of the Building Department shall:



      (1).   Have general charge and supervision of the erection,
construction, alteration, repair, demolition, removal and inspection of all
buildings, walls, structures, or portions thereof, and accessories thereto
within the Village;



      (2).   Have charge and supervision of all electrical
construction, plumbing and boiler installation and the inspection thereof;



      (3).   Examine all plans for building permit purposes;



      (4).   Have the powers and perform the duties contained in the
Building Code as set forth in the Municipal Code, the Land Development Code
of the Village and as shall from time to time be provided by Village
ordinance; and



      (5).   Enforce the provisions of the Land Development Code and
all amendments thereto.



   2.   Enforcement; Inspection:



   The Director of the Building Department shall enforce all laws and
ordinances relating to buildings or zoning.  He shall conduct all building,
plumbing, electrical, elevator and boiler inspections and enforce the Village
ordinances relating thereto.  He may engage the services of a person or
persons to assist him in making the aforementioned inspections.



   The Director of the Building Department and his duly authorized agents
and inspectors shall have the right to reasonably enter any building, whether
completed or in process of construction, alteration or repair, for the
purpose of determining whether the same is being constructed, altered,
repaired or used in accordance with law and with the ordinances of the
Village.  Refusal by the owner or person in charge or possession of such
building or structure to permit such entry shall constitute an offense.



   3.   Stop Orders:



   The Director of the Building Department shall have power to stop work
on any building or structure when such work is being done without a permit or
is being done in violation of any provision of law or of the ordinances of
the Village, or of any resolution or order of the Board of Trustees.  Such
stop order shall specify the conditions upon which work may be permitted to
proceed.  Failure to obey such stop order by any person owning or in
possession or charge of such building or structure shall constitute an
offense.



   4.   Revocation of Permits:



   The Director of the Building Department may revoke the permit for the
erection, alteration, repair or demolition of any building or structure if
the owner or other person in possession or charge of the same shall refuse to
comply with the conditions of any stop order.  (Ord. 159, 7-15-57)



1-7-5:  VILLAGE FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR:



1-7-5-1:  CREATION:



   There is hereby created the position of Village Fire Safety Inspector.



1-7-5-2:  APPOINTMENT:



   The Village Fire Safety Inspector shall be hired by the Village
Manager.  The Village Fire Safety Inspector shall be chosen solely on the
basis of his qualifications with special reference to his actual experience
in, or his knowledge of, fire safety codes and regulations in respect to the
duties of his employment hereinafter set forth.



   The Village Fire Safety Inspector may hold another position of
employment within the Village.



1-7-5-3:  COMPENSATION:



   The Village Fire Safety Inspector shall receive such compensation as
the Board of Trustees shall from time to time establish.



1-7-5-4:  POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES:



   1.   It shall be the duty of the Village Fire Safety Inspector to
enforce the provisions of the Building Code, (including the Electrical Code
and Plumbing Code), ordinances and regulations of the Village which relate to
fire safety requirements and regulations.



   2.   The Village Fire Safety Inspector shall work under the
direction of the Director of the Building Department in the performance of
his duties.



   3.   He shall make all inspections and investigations as may be
deemed necessary for such enforcement and shall establish procedures therefor.



   4.   He shall examine the construction plans of all proposed
buildings or structures within the Village for the purpose of determining
compliance with the provisions of all applicable Village codes, ordinances
and regulations relating to fire safety requirements and regulations.



   5.   As may be necessary from time to time, he shall work with and
cooperate with the Orland Fire Protection District to assure proper
enforcement of fire safety requirements within the Village.



   6.   It shall not be the responsibility of the Village Fire Safety
Inspector, nor shall he have the authority, to fight fires or to investigate
the cause of any fire within the Village, or to take any actions which would
conflict with the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction of the State
Fire Marshall.



1-7-5-5:  DISMISSAL:



   The Village Fire Safety Inspector may be dismissed from his position of
employment by the Village Manager.



(Ord. 1081, 2-9-81)



1-7-6:  VILLAGE BUDGET OFFICER:



1-7-6-1:  CREATION:



   The office of Budget Officer is hereby created.



1-7-6-2:  APPOINTMENT:



   The Finance Director shall also serve as the Budget Officer of the
Village.



1-7-6-3:  POWERS AND DUTIES:



   The Finance Director shall have the following powers and duties:



   1.   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient
planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal
management procedures in all Municipal departments, commissions, and boards.



   2.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with Section 8-2-9.3 of
the Illinois Municipal Code.  (65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.3)



   3.   Examine all books and records of the following:  all Municipal
departments, commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by and
paid out by the Municipality, all Municipal departments, commissions, and
boards; and all debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the
Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions, and boards.



   4.   Obtain such additional information from the Municipality,
Municipal departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the
Finance Director for purposes of compiling a Municipal budget, such
information to be furnished by the Municipality, Municipal departments,
commissions, and boards in the form required by the Finance Director.  Any
department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as is
requested of it available to the Finance Director shall not be permitted to
make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the Municipality until such
Municipal department, commission, or board shall comply in full with the
request of the Finance Director.



   5.   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure that no
expenditures are made by the Municipality, Municipal departments,
commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget.



1-7-6-4:  OATH:



   Before entering office, the Finance Director shall take and subscribe
the oath of office prescribed by the Statutes of the State.



1-7-6-5:  BOND:



   The Finance Director shall furnish a surety bond in such sum and form
as required by the Board of Trustees, said bond to be conditioned on the
faithful performance of his duties.  The premium of the bond shall be paid
by the Village.



1-7-6-6:  COMPENSATION:



   The Finance Director shall not be paid any compensation but may receive
the compensation for another office or position of employment held in the
Village.  (Ord. 1166, 3-8-82)



1-7-7:   DEPUTY CLERK:



1-7-7-1:  CREATION:



   The Office of Deputy Clerk is hereby created.



1-7-7-2:  APPOINTMENT:



   The Village Clerk shall appoint the Deputy Clerk, who need not be a
resident of the Village.



1-7-7-3:  POWERS AND DUTIES:



   a.   The Deputy Clerk may execute all documents required by law to
be executed by the Village Clerk, and may affix the seal of the Clerk
whenever required.  In signing any document, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the
name of the Village Clerk followed with the word "By" and the Deputy Clerk's
own name and the words "Deputy Clerk."



   b.   The powers and duties of the Deputy Clerk shall be exercised
only in the absence of the Village Clerk from the Clerk's office in the
Village Hall, and only when either written direction has been given by the
Village Clerk, or when the Corporate Authorities have determined by
resolution that the Village Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated
to perform that function.



1-7-7-4:  COMPENSATION:



   The Deputy Clerk shall receive such compensation for the duties to be
performed as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time establish.  (Ord.
3416, 9-5-00)



CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; GENERAL PROVISIONS



SECTION:



1-8-1:   Compensation and Salaries



1-8-2:   Bonds; Oath



1-8-3:   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund; Participation In



1-8-4:   Reimbursement of Automobile Expenses



1-8-5:   State Gift Ban Act



1-8-6:   Ethical Standards of Conduct (deleted by 5406, 5-6-19)



1-8-1:  COMPENSATION AND SALARIES:



   The President, Trustees, Village Treasurer and Village Clerk shall
receive the compensation established for their term of office in equal
monthly installments.



1-8-2:  BONDS; OATH:



   President:  Before entering upon the duties of his office, the
President shall furnish a surety bond in such sum and form as required by
Board of Trustees, said bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance
of the duties of the office of Village President and the payment of all
moneys received by said Village President according to law and the ordinances
of the Village.  Such bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk.  The
premium of the bond shall be paid by the Village.



   Village Clerk:  Before entering upon the duties of his office, the
Village Clerk shall furnish a surety bond in such sum and form as required by
Board of Trustees, said bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance
of the duties of the office of Village Clerk and the payment of all moneys
received by said Village Clerk according to law and the ordinances of the
Village.  Such bond shall be filed with the Village Treasurer.  The premium
of the bond shall be paid by the Village.  (Ord. 538, 4-2-73)



   Village Treasurer:  Before entering upon the duties of his office, the
Treasurer shall furnish a surety bond in such sum and form as required by
Board of Trustees, said bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance
by the Treasurer of the duties of his office and the payment over of all
public monies and special assessment monies received by him in accordance
with law and the Village ordinances and the orders and resolutions of the
Board of Trustees.  The bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk.  The
Treasurer shall also take the oath of office prescribed by Statute.  The
premium of the bond shall be paid by the Village. 



(Ord. 1246, 5-2-83)



1-8-3:  ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND; PARTICIPATION IN:



   The Village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund effective January 1, 1972; and the Village Clerk is hereby
directed to promptly file a certified copy of this provision with the Board
of Trustees of the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund.  (Ord. 460, 8-30-71)



1-8-4:  REIMBURSEMENT OF AUTOMOBILE EXPENSES:



   Any person being an officer or employee of the Village, or an
independent contractor with the Village who shall use and operate an
automobile owned or controlled by said person in the conduct of Village
business and who shall have been authorized to so use and operate said
automobile by the President and Board of Trustees or by the Village Manager
or his authorized representatives, shall be entitled to reimbursement for the
cost of the use and operation of said automobile at the rate allowed from
time to time hereafter by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States
to self-employed individuals or employees as the standard deductible mileage
rate for automobiles used for business purposes.



   The Village Comptroller shall prepare or cause to be prepared such
forms to be filed by the person entitled to reimbursement as shall be
necessary to substantiate said reimbursement.  (Ord. 1171, 4-19-82)



1-8-5:  STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:



   A.   The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article
10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 etseq., (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in
this Section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the
officers and employees of the Village to the extent required by 5 ILCS
430/70-5.



   B.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the
Village, is hereby prohibited.



   C.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the Village under the Act, is hereby
prohibited.



   D.   The participation in political activities prohibited under the
Act, by any officer or employee of the Village, is hereby prohibited.



   E.   For purposes of this Section, the terms "officer" and
"employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).



   F.   The penalties for violations of this Section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the
Act.



   G.   This Section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any
existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of Village
officers and employees.  To the extent that any such existing ordinances or
policies are less restrictive than this Section, however, the provisions of
this Section shall prevail in accordance with provisions of 5 ILCS
430/70-5(a).



   H.   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this Section shall be incorporated into this Section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities.  However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this Section by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the Village.



   I.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional
in its entirety, then this Section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any
further appeals or rehearings.  This Section shall be deemed repealed
without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village if the Act
is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.



   J.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the
Act as adopted by this Section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this Section relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
Corporate Authorities of the Village."



(Ord. 3257, 6-8-99; Amd. Ord. 3871, 4-19-04)



1-8-6:  ETHICAL STANDARDS OF CONDUCT:



   (deleted by Ord. 5406, 5-6-19)



CHAPTER 9
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



SECTION:



1-9-1:   General Statement



1-9-2:   Definitions



1-9-3:   Occupational Categories



1-9-4:   Purpose of Occupational Categories



1-9-5:   Function of Wage and Benefit Committee



1-9-6:   Wage Determination



1-9-7:   Report to the Board of Trustees



1-9-8:   Resolution of Disputes and Disagreements



1-9-1:  GENERAL STATEMENT:



   This process is intended to promote harmonious relations within the
Village between the Village government and its employees. Harmonious
relations will insure reasonable, responsible, orderly and an uninterrupted
operation of government service for the benefit of Village residents.



   As with any process, there are several roles which contribute to the
result.  In this process there are three (3) major roles: the Board of
Trustees, the Village Manager, and the employees.



   The Board of Trustees is the legislative body of the Village.  It
passes ordinances and approves the budget and expenditures. 



   Second, there is the Village Manager.  By law and ordinance, he is the
administrative head of the Village government.  Among other duties, he is
responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Village, he is responsible
for the employees and the financial reports to the Board of Trustees prior to
preparation of the annual budget.



   Third, there are the employees who perform various duties and serve
under the administrative direction of the Village Manager through his
department and division heads.



   As part of his duties, the Village Manager has the responsibility to
establish ground rules and procedures whereby employees meet with him or his
designee regarding input on employee wages and benefits.  By reviewing input
from the employees, the Manager is able to formulate recommendations for the
Board of Trustees' consideration in the preparation of the annual budget. 
From these suggestions the Board of Trustees is in a position to make
informed decisions when considering any proposed budget.



   The process shall basically consist of the Village Manager or his
designee meeting periodically with the members of the occupational categories
and other employees for the purpose of discussing wages and fringe
benefits.  Written agreements may from time to time result from these
discussions. 



   With regard to the wage and benefit process, the Village and the
employees shall consider the Village as lawful authority.  All requests
should be made in the interest and welfare of the public.  The ability of
the Village to finance any proposed changes of operations and any and all
other factors shall be considered in determining salary and fringe benefits.



1-9-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   BENCHMARK:  A strong similarity in the job description of a Village
employee and the job description from a position in one or more of the
communities used for the wage and benefit survey.



   CLASSIFIED SERVICE:  All positions or group of positions excluding
temporary, seasonal, and part-time and appointed managerial (nonclassified)
employees (see employee groups which are sufficiently a like with respect to
duties, responsibilities, and authority that they may be designated by the
same title and equitably compensated in the same range of pay and under
substantially the same employment condition).



   FRINGE BENEFITS:  This refers, but is not limited to, such items as
sick leave, vacation, holidays, continuing education reimbursement program,
leaves of absence and such insurance programs as health, life, dental, and
retirement.



   OCCUPATIONAL CATEGORY:  The group of occupations or jobs contained in
one or more of the nine (9) categories of this policy.



   EMPLOYEE GROUPS (Classified Service):  Job classifications are broken
down into different occupational categories.  Each job classification shall
be listed in a category.  Each classification and its occupational category
(assignment) shall be reviewed from time-to-time to insure relevancy.



   WAGES:  Shall include base pay, overtime compensation, compensatory
time and any pay premium that may be considered by the Village.



1-9-3:  OCCUPATIONAL CATEGORIES:



   The occupational categories are:



   1.   Clerical, Secretarial, Office Machine Workers which include:



      Clerk Typist I, Clerk Typist II, Clerk Typist III, Account Clerk,
Account Technician I, Secretary I, Secretary II, Executive Secretary and
Account Technician II, Principal Clerk.



   2.   Telecommunications which include:



      Telecommunicator.



   3.   Labor, Trades and Crafts which include:



      Bus Driver, Maintenance Worker I, Mechanic I, Maintenance Worker
II, Water Plant Operator I, Mechanic II, Maintenance Worker III.



   4.   Professional, Administrative, Technical which include:



      Drafting Technician, Assistant Psychologist, Engineering
Technician, Engineer I, Utility Inspector, Building Inspector, Surveyor,
Electrical Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Staff Planner, Engineer II.



   5.   Law Enforcement - Police which include:



      Trainee and Police Officers.



   6.   Law Enforcement - Supervisory which include:



      Sergeants.



   7.   General Managerial - Supervisory which include:



      Recreation Program Supervisor, Support Service Director,
Psychologist, Street, Water and Sewer Foremen, Accounting Supervisor,
Assistant Village Attorney, Assistant Finance Director.



   8.   Managerial (nonclassified) which include:



      Parks and Recreation Director, Planning and Development Director,
Public Services Director, Village Comptroller/Director of Finance, Village
Attorney, Police Chief, Director of Code Enforcement, Superintendent of
Operations, Village Engineer, Environmental Health Director (the above named
employees in the Managerial Group are not classified into a group but shall
deal directly with the Village Manager on an individual basis).



   9.   Confidential Employees which include:



      Job classifications of those employees whose participation in any
other occupational category could create a conflict situation for employee or
Village in the establishment or continuation of this process.  Generally, a
confidential employee is an employee, who in the regular course of his or her
duties, assists and acts in a confidential capacity to persons who formulate,
determine and effectuate management policies with regard to labor relations
or who in the regular course of his or her duties has authorized access to
information relating to the effectuation or review of the Village's
personnel, wage and benefit.



1-9-4:  PURPOSE OF OCCUPATIONAL CATEGORIES:



   The purpose of an occupational category is for its membership to meet
and discuss wage and benefit interests of its category.  Also, each group
should elect at least one and not more than three (3) of its full time
members for participation on the Wage and Benefit Committee.  Should an
occupational category fail to designate a representative, the Village Manager
may designate a full time employee member of an occupational category to be a
representative to the Wage and Benefit Committee.  The Village Manager's
designation of a representative in the absence of an elected representative
from an occupational group is to insure the presence of someone from each
group so that there can be a flow of information regarding wages and benefits.



   Prior to November 1 of each year, the Village Manager and his designees
shall prepare a tentative schedule for meeting at least once with each
occupational category; and after such meeting the representatives of the
occupational categories (Wage and Benefit Committee) will from time to time,
meet with the Village Manager and his designee(s) to discuss the status of
wages and benefits.



1-9-5:  FUNCTION OF WAGE AND BENEFIT COMMITTEE:



   From time to time as necessary, the representatives of the occupational
categories (Wage and Benefit Committee) shall meet, individually or as a
group, with the Village Manager and designee(s) for the purpose of discussing
wages and benefits and utilizing the wage determination process.



   The occupational category representatives and the Village Manager will
meet and review information relating the market comparability information
used by the Village in analyzing wages and benefits.  Basically, the
Committee's scope of review shall include but are not limited to the Regional
Governmental Salary and Fringe Benefit Survey by the Cook County Bureau of
Administration Position Classification Agency, published semi- annually for
market evaluation, and the review of other chosen municipalities' market
information and the determination of benchmarks for positions within the
occupational categories of the Village.



1-9-6:  WAGE DETERMINATION:



   The job descriptions within an occupational category will be compared
to the descriptions from the sample municipalities agreed to by the Village
Manager.  When a job description from the Village and another or other
communities substantially match, then a benchmark for that position is
identified.  The average maximum rate of pay for that position shall be
determined by adding the maximum rate of pay for that benchmark and dividing
that number by the number of communities for that benchmark.  Thus, an
average maximum rate of pay results for that type of position.  The average
maximum rate of pay shall be compared to the Village's maximum rate of pay
for that benchmark position and an average dollar adjustment due that
benchmark will be derived.  The average adjustment due each benchmark within
an occupational category shall be totaled, and an average shall be derived
for an overall market adjustment for those positions that are not
benchmarked.  This is necessary because there may be no position or job
description within the occupational category that can be benchmarked with the
sample communities.



1-9-7:  REPORT TO THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:



   The Village Manager will periodically throughout his discussions with
the Wage and Benefit Committee relating to wages and benefits review the
status of said discussions with the President and Board of Trustees.



   Once discussions are completed between the Village Manager and the
occupational categories, the Village Manager shall be authorized to sign
agreements with each occupational category.



   Agreements ratified by the corporate authorities, shall be binding upon
the Village and the employees as to benefit and wage terms contained therein
and for the time period specified therein, unless modified in writing by both
parties to the said agreement.



1-9-8:  RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES AND DISAGREEMENTS:



   The procedure for the resolution of disputes and disagreements
concerning wages and benefits found in the AFSCME contract on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk shall be followed for all Village employees,
unless another contract is applicable.



CHAPTER 10
VILLAGE FINANCES



SECTION:



1-10-1:   Deposits for Village Services



1-10-1-1:   Deposit Required



1-10-1-2:   Additional Payments, Refund



1-10-1-3:   Attorney and Collection Agent Fees and Costs



1-10-2:   Execution of Financial Documents



1-10-3:   Contracts for Public Works Projects; Advertisement and Bid
Procedures



1-10-4:   Wage Rates for Public Works Projects



1-10-1:  DEPOSITS FOR VILLAGE SERVICES:



1-10-1-1:  DEPOSIT REQUIRED:



   It shall be required, as a condition precedent to the consideration by
the Village of any applications, petitions or other requests filed with the
Village for, but not limited to: the annexation of land to the Village; the
connection to, or other contracts for Village utility and other municipal
services; subdivision or other land development plans, regardless of whether
the land is to be annexed to the Village or has previously been annexed, that
such applicant deposit a sum of money, in an amount designated by the Board
of Trustees, with the Village Clerk or such other agent of the Village
designated by the President and Board of Trustees.  The deposit made shall
be paid at the time an application, petition or request is filed with the
Village and shall be a condition precedent to the consideration of such
application.  The deposit required shall be to defray the costs incurred by
the Village for attorneys (including negotiation fees), title examinations,
plat preparation, newspaper publication expenses, zoning and subdivision
reviews by staff, Village Board, Plan Commission and consultants (to relate
the future development of the entire Village to the area concerned), and all
special planning and engineering studies required to relate public facility
improvement needs for the area concerned and to adjacent properties, and any
other related fees and expenses.



1-10-1-2:  ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS, REFUND:



   The amount of the deposit shall not be a limitation on the Village and
shall not prevent the Village from collecting a greater amount in the event
such deposit is not adequate to pay the Village's necessary costs.  All
additional payments required after the initial deposit shall be paid within
ten (10) days after invoice submitted to the applicant by the Village Clerk
or other designated agent of the Village.  All such fees and additional
payments collected shall be credited to the General Corporate Fund of the
Village. 



1-10-1-3:  ATTORNEY AND COLLECTION AGENT FEES AND COSTS:



   The failure to pay any debt due the Village, including but not limited
to, amounts owed on account of a fee, lease, rent, service, water or garbage
collection charge, sale of real or personal property, overpayment,
administrative or judicial judgment, fine, penalty, restitution, damages,
interest, tax reimbursement, recovery of a cost incurred by the Village or
other source of indebtedness to the Village, after the period granted for
payment has expired by any person liable for such debt shall constitute a
violation of this section.  Judgment shall be entered against any person who
violates this Section in the amount of the debt remaining unpaid on the date
the judgment is entered plus litigation and collection costs, attorney's fees
and an amount representing all fines and penalties assessed pursuant to this
Section or any other Chapter of this Code.  Nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair any other cause of action or legal remedy. (Ord. 5250,
12-18-17)



1-10-2:  EXECUTION OF FINANCIAL DOCUMENTS:



All financial documents and instruments and all transfers of funds of the
Village shall be made and executed bearing the signatures of any two (2) of
the following Village officers:



Village President



Finance Director



Assistant Finance Director



Village Treasurer



Village Manager



provided, however, that approval of any Trade Authorization (purchase or sale
of securities) or Cash/Asset Movement (account to account transfer, wire
transfer, check or draft, ACH transfer or delivery of Village financial
assets) must bear the signature of either the Finance Director or Assistant
Finance Director, in addition to the signature of the Village President,
Village Treasurer or the Village Manager. 



(Ord. 1016, 1-7-80; Amd. Ord. 5185, 5-15-17; Amd. Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



1-10-3:  CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS; ADVERTISEMENT AND BID
PROCEDURES:



   1.    All contracts for any work or other public improvement which
is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, when the expense thereof will be $20,000.00 or more, shall be
constructed either (A) by a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder
after advertising for bids, in the manner provided for in this Section,
except that any such contract may be entered into by the proper officers
without advertising for bids, if authorized by a  vote of two thirds (2/3)
of all the Trustees then holding office; or (B) in the following manner, if
authorized by a vote of two thirds (2/3) of all the Trustees then holding
office:  The Director of Public Works or other proper officers designated by
ordinance, shall superintend and cause to be carried out the construction of
the work or other public improvement and shall employ exclusively for the
performance of all manual labor thereon, laborers and artisans whom the
Municipality shall pay by the day or hour; and all material of the value of
$20,000.00 or more used in the construction of the work or other public
improvement, shall be purchased by contract let to the lowest responsible
bidder in the manner provided for in this Section."



(Amd. Ord. 5231, 10-16-17)



   2.   When advertisement for bids is to be made, the Village Manager
shall cause a call for such bids to be advertised at least once not less than
ten (10) days before the date for opening such bids, such advertisement to be
posted on the Village's website, transmitted or communicated (electronically
or otherwise) to appropriate trade organizations and bid management service
providers or transmitted electronically to those known to the Village Clerk
as potential bidders.



      The advertisement for bids need give only a general description
of the work to be done or the materials to be furnished, but detailed
drawings, plans, profiles and specifications as prescribed by the Village
Manager or his/her designee for such improvement shall be made and placed on
file in the office of the Village Clerk prior to such advertisement and shall
at all times be open to public inspection.



      Such notice shall also contain such conditions and restrictions
as to bids, prerequisites as to bidders, obtaining of plans and
specifications, security, deposits, withdrawal or rejection of bids,
proposals, contracts and performance bonds as the Village Manager, or his/her
designee, my direct.



      In all advertisements, the right to reject any and all bids shall
be expressly reserved.



      The public notice shall be in substantially the following form:



      LEGAL NOTICE



      STATE OF ILLINOIS



      COUNTY OF COOK



      VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK



      ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS



      The Village of Orland Park, Illinois, will receive sealed bids or
proposals for the (insert work or public improvement) until ______ p.m. on
the _____ day of _____________, 20____, at the office of the Village Clerk,
Orland Park, Illinois.  All proposals received will be publicly opened and
read aloud in the __________________ at the Village Hall at _____________
(a.m./p.m.) on _________________, 20___.



      The work or public improvement on which bids or proposals are
requested will require the following (insert a general description of the
work to be done or the materials to be furnished).



      The contract items including plans and specifications are on file
and available for inspection at the office of the Village Clerk.  (Herein
set forth any additional conditions or restrictions ordered by the Village
Manager or his/her designee).



      No bid shall be withdrawn after the opening of proposals without
the consent of the Village for a period of ______ days after the scheduled
time of opening and reading bids.  (Herein set forth any requirement for
guarantee of the bid that may be required).



      The Village reserves the right to reject any and all bids or
proposals and to waive any informalities, technicalities and irregularities
in bidding.



      The successful bidder will be required to furnish a satisfactory
performance bond in the sum of $______________.



      Dated at Orland Park, Illinois, this _____ day of ______________,
20___.



   3.   All bids shall be sealed and addressed to the Village Clerk and
shall conform to the conditions and restrictions set forth as to the work or
other public improvement by the Village Manager or his/her designee.  Bids
may be opened and examined by the President and Board of Trustees in open
meeting at the time and place fixed in the public notice, if so designated,
or may be opened and examined by such personnel of the Village at such time
and place as may be designated by the Village Manager and so stated in the
advertisement for bids.  Awarding of the contract or rejection of said bids
may be postponed to a later date.  In the discretion of the President and
Board of Trustees, any and all bids may thereafter be rejected.



      Village officials shall comply with the provisions of Section
5/33 e 12 of the Criminal Code (720 ILCS) making it a felony to interfere
with public contracting or to engage in bid rigging.



(Amd. Ord. 5234, 11-20-17)



   4.   Under this section, the acceptance of bids sealed by a bidder
and the opening of these bids at a public bid opening may be performed
utilizing an electronic process for communicating, accepting, and opening
competitive bids. An electronic bidding process must provide for, but is not
limited to, the following safeguards:



      i.   A unique username and password for the specified
electronic database must be assigned to the primary person conducting the
competitive, sealed, electronic bid process.  Sealed bids submitted 
electronically will be publicly opened at the same time as all other sealed
bids.



      ii.   The specified electronic database must be on a network
that



         a.   Is in a secure environment behind a firewall;



         b.   Has specific encryption tools;



         c.   Maintains specific intrusion detection systems;



         d.   Has redundant systems architecture with data
storage backup, whether by compact disc or tape; and



         e.   Maintains a disaster recovery plan.



      iii.   It is the intent of this section to maintain the
integrity of the sealed bidding process provided for in this section, to
further limit any possibility of bid-rigging, to reduce administrative costs
of the Village, and to enhance efficiencies in communications with bidders.



(Amd. Ord. 5273, 2-19-18)



1-10-4:  WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:



   1.   To the extent and as required by "An Act regulating wages of
laborers, mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the
State, county, city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any
one under contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended (820
ILCS 130/1 et seq.), the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality
for laborers, mechanics and other workmen engaged in the construction of
public works coming under the jurisdiction of the Village is hereby
ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction
work in the Cook County area as determined by the Department of Labor of the
State of Illinois as revised, a copy of that determination being incorporated
herein by reference.  The definition of any terms appearing in this Section
which are also used in aforesaid Act shall be the same as in said Act.



   2.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said
general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment except public works construction of the Village to the extent
required by the aforesaid Act.



   3.   The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for
inspection by any interested party in the main office of the Village this
determination of such prevailing rate of wages, and the Clerk shall mail a
copy of this determination to any employer, and to any association of
employers and to any person or association of employees who have filed, or
file, their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination
stating the particular rates and the particular class of workmen whose wages
will be affected by such rates.  The Village Clerk shall also promptly file
a certified copy of this Section with both the Secretary of State and the
Department of Labor of the State of Illinois.  (Ord. 1041, 6-23-80)



CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC RECORDS



SECTION:



1-11-1:   Rules and Regulations Under the Freedom of Information Act



1-11-1-1:   Clarifications



1-11-1-2:   Request for Information



1-11-1-3:   Compliance



1-11-1-4:   Extension



1-11-1-5:   Denial



1-11-1-6:   Notice of Appeal



1-11-1-7:   Designation of Responsible Employees



1-11-1-8:   Index of Records



1-11-1-9:   Fees and costs



1-11-1-10:   Filing Procedures for Requests and Response



1-11-1-11:   Posting



1-11-1-12:   Existing Records



1-11-1-13:   Distribution of Requests



1-11-1:  RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT:



   The rules and regulations relating to access of public records of the
Village, are hereby adopted and established as set forth below as the rules
and regulations under the Freedom of Information Act.  (5 ILCS 140/1)



   The purpose of these rules and regulations is to delineate procedures
whereby there will be an orderly compliance with the requirements of the
Freedom of Information Act (hereinafter referred to as "Act"), both by the
person requesting information and by the Village of Orland Park, Illinois, in
responding to such requests.  However, neither the Act nor these rules are
intended to be used to violate individual privacy nor for the purpose of
furthering a commercial enterprise, or to disrupt the duly undertaken work of
the Village of Orland Park.  A request falling within these restrictions
shall be denied.  Furthermore, when a Proper written request for inspection
or copying of records is made, the request shall be reviewed.  If the
request is proper, compliance will be made in accordance with these rules and
law.



   If an extension is proper in accordance with Section 3 of the Act, the
requester shall be notified as required by law.



   If a denial is proper in accordance with one of the reasons in Section
7, or the Preamble of the Act, the requestor shall be notified as required by
law.



1-11-1-1:  CLARIFICATIONS:



   In addition to the definitions provided in the Act, several other
clarifications are given:



   A working day is a day when all the Village departments are open for
business.  Working days are considered Monday through Friday excepting
recognized holidays.



   Times for inspection or copying shall be on working days between the
hours of 9:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.



   Any copies shall be made by the Village of Orland Park.



   Copies made in compliance to a request shall not be mailed and will be
available at the office of the designated person.



1-11-1-2:  REQUEST FOR INFORMATION:



   The request for information shall be in writing and may be on a form
provided by the Village. The request shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:



      1.   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of
requestor;



      2.   Information requested;



      3.   Whether request is to inspect or to receive a copy (or
certified copy) of the information;



      4.   Date of request and date response is due.



   The "Request for Information" forms shall be available at the office of
the Deputy Village Clerk, 14700 Ravinia Avenue, Orland Park, Illinois.



   Completed request forms shall be submitted to the office of the Deputy
Village Clerk and marked received. A copy of the completed request form
containing the title and address of the employee who is responsible for the
request will be given to the requestor.



   The Deputy Village Clerk shall direct the request to the designated
employee responsible for processing the request. The employee processing the
request will comply, extend the time for compliance, or deny the request as
provided by law. Said processing shall be noted on a response form containing
a minimum of the following information:



      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of requestor;



      2.   Date request received;



      3.   Records requested;



      4.   Type of response:



         i.   Comply with request, with information on when and
where records may be inspected or how copies may be obtained,



         ii.   Additional time to review request needed; reasons
for delay and date when response will be made,



         iii.   Deny request, with reasons for denial; notice of
right to appeal or judicial review,



         iv.   Referral of request to another public body which
has custody or control of information.



      5.   Name and title of person responding to or denying a
request.



(Amd. Ord. 5029, 10-19-15; Amd. Ord. 5180, 4-18-17)



1-11-1-3:  COMPLIANCE:



   If the designated employee processing the request determines that the
requested information is not exempt, the designated employee shall so notify
the requestor and arrange for the inspection or delivery of the copies within
five (5) working days.



   Inspection shall occur at the office of the designated employee.



   Copies requested shall be made available to the requestor at the office
of the designated employee; however, copies shall not be made available until
any applicable fees allowed under the Act have been paid.



(Amd. Ord. 5029, 10-19-15)



1-11-1-4:  EXTENSION:



   If within the five (5) working day period for compliance the designated
employee determines that an additional five (5) working days is needed and is
permitted by the Act (Section 3), the designated employee shall notify the
requestor in writing the reasons within the initial five (5) working day
period, and attempt telephone notification. During the extended time period
the designated employee shall notify the requestor of a decision to comply or
a decision to deny.



   In the case of compliance, arrangements for the inspection or delivery
of copying shall occur within the extended five (5) working day period.
Compliance will occur at the office of the designated employee.



   In the case of denial due to one of the reasons specified in Section 7
of the Act, the designated employee shall notify the requestor in writing the
reason(s) for denial, within the extended period, and attempt telephone
notification.



(Amd. Ord. 5029, 10-19-15)



1-11-1-5:  DENIAL:



   A denial of a request for information shall be made by the designated
employee, and the requestor will be notified in writing with the reasons
therefor.



   The reasons for denial are stated in Section 7 of the Act, and also in
the Preamble of the Act. The written denial shall be signed by the employee
and shall be mailed within the five (5) working day period or within the
extended five (5) working day period, whichever is applicable. A denial
letter shall include information regarding the requestor's right to appeal to
the Public Access Counselor or the court, as set forth in the Act.



(Amd. Ord. 5029, 10-19-15)



1-11-1-6:  NOTICE OF APPEAL:



   A denial letter shall include information regarding the requestor's
right to appeal to the Public Access Counselor or the court, as set forth in
the Act.



(Amd. Ord. 5029, 10-19-15)



1-11-1-7:  DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE EMPLOYEES:



   The Village Manager shall by administrative order designate the name,
title, and business address of the employees who shall be responsible for
requests directed to the departments within which said employees work.  He
may from time to time designate alternates as employee availability
dictates.  Any designations shall be included in the short description of
the Village of Orland Park.



1-11-1-8:  INDEX OF RECORDS:



   An index of all Village records shall be created, maintained, and
updated as necessary.



   The index of documents shall be in numerical order for each department
(e.g., for Police Department PD-1, PD-2, etc.).



1-11-1-9:  FEES AND COSTS:



   For records prepared or received on or after July 1, 1984, the actual
cost of copying or certifying is as follows:



   8-1/2 x 11 - $0.10 each side



   Larger than 8-1/2 x 11 - $0.15 each side



   Each Certification - $0.10 each side



   The above fees and costs may be waived or reduced where the Village
Manager determines that the information primarily benefits the general public
and it is in the public interest to waive or reduce the fees.



   However, any possible waiver or reduction shall weigh equal protection
and due process considerations.



   For records prepared or received prior to July 1, 1984, the actual cost
of retrieval and review (Manpower) will be charged in addition to the costs
listed above.



   Documents that have a central public benefit shall be made available at
no cost.



1-11-1-10:  FILING PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTS AND RESPONSE:



   The Village Manager shall direct a filing system for requests and
denials to be created in accordance with the Act.  Copies of all notices of
denial shall be retained by the Village in a single central office file that
is open to the public and indexed according to:



   The type of exemption asserted; and



   The type of records requested, to the extent such categorization is
feasible.



1-11-1-11:  POSTING:



   These rules and the record index together with the description of the
Public Body as required by the Act, shall be prominently posted in each
administrative office of the Village, to-wit:



   Village Hall, 14700 South Ravinia Avenue



   Police Department, 15100 South Ravinia Avenue



   Public Works Department, 15655 South Ravinia Avenue



   Recreation and Parks, 14600 South Ravinia Avenue



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



1-11-1-12:  EXISTING RECORDS:



   The Village is in no way obligated to maintain or prepare any record
which is not already being maintained by the Village.



1-11-1-13:  DISTRIBUTION OF REQUESTS:



   A copy of each request and denial shall be mailed to the President and
each Trustee and a copy shall be placed in the mail slot of the President and
each Trustee.



CHAPTER 12
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS



SECTION:



1-12-1:   Bond Issuance Guidelines



1-12-2:   Commercial Evaluation Checklist



1-12-3:   Industrial Evaluation Checklist



1-12-1:  BOND ISSUANCE GUIDELINES:



   The President and Board of Trustees as a general policy will favorably
consider issuing commercial or industrial revenue bonds to qualified
businesses and industries upon the assurance that the taxpayers are fully
protected and the affirmation that the business or industry will benefit the
Village.  To insure the carrying out of these general policies, the
following guidelines and criteria are hereby established:



   1.   Applications for commercial or industrial revenue bonds shall
be made to the Village Manager in the form prescribed by the Village
Manager.  The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and such supporting financial
documents and information as is necessary to make a complete and thorough
analysis of the business or industry.  Information requested shall include:



      (1).   Name of the firm that will purchase the bonds, (if
available).



      (2).   A SEC. 10-K report of the corporation if it is required
to file.



      (3).   The last five (5) annual reports of the corporation.



      (4).   The latest preliminary financial status report of the
current fiscal year, if available.



   The Village Manager, upon the advice of staff and consultants, may
require additional information from the applicant.



   2.   All fees, including printing, legal, fiscal, review and cost of
preparation of all ordinances, resolutions, agreements and other legal and
financial documents that are necessary to authorize and deliver the
commercial or industrial revenue bonds, shall be at the expense of the
applicant, but may be financed as part of the bonded project.



   3.   Applicant shall contract for the sale of the bonds at terms
agreeable to the applicant and his bank or investment banker.  (Ord. 1114,
9-28-81)



   4.   The fee to the Village for authorizing the issuance of
commercial or industrial revenue bonds, whether a new issue or a refunding of
a previous issue, shall be an amount agreed upon by the Village Manager and
applicant, provided, however, that said total fee shall, in no event, be
greater than permitted by law at the time of issuance such that said bonds
will become arbitrage bonds.  The fee set forth in this subsection shall be
in addition to all other fees, costs and expenses of issuance set forth in
this Chapter.  (Ord. 1601, 10-27-86)



   5.   Before the Village issues commercial or industrial revenue
bonds, the President and Board of Trustees will require the following
statements:



      (1).   A statement from the Village Attorney that he has
reviewed or will review all documents pertinent to the application and bond
issue.



      (2).   A statement from the financial consultant of the
Village that, based on the consultant's study of the information supplied and
from other available sources, nothing has come to his attention to indicate
that: (a) the applicant is not in a position to undertake its commitments or
(b) it is inadvisable for the Village to lend its name to the proposed
project even though it is not undertaking any financial obligations.  The
financial consultant of the Village shall also state the amount of any fee he
will charge for his services payable by the applicant and to be included as
part of the estimate of cost of the bond issue.



      (3).   A statement from the Plan Commission that the business
or industry is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan of the Village and
that the business or industry would be an asset to the Village.



      (4).   A statement from the Village Comptroller and Village
Manager that suitable arrangements have been made for the payment of all fees.



      (5).   A statement from the Village Manager that he has
reviewed all documents and recommends to the President and Board of Trustees
that they authorize the issuance of the commercial or industrial revenue
bonds.



      (6).   The President and Board of Trustees reserve the right
to have the applicant appear before them to explain the proposed development
and to answer any questions.



      (7).   Upon completion of all steps, the President and Board
of Trustees shall consider approval of commercial or industrial revenue bond
issue.



1-12-2:  COMMERCIAL EVALUATION CHECKLIST:



   The following commercial evaluation checklist shall be considered:



   (1).   Economic:



      1.   Financial stability.



         i.   Prospectus;



         ii.   Reports to stockholders;



         iii.   Account audit of the applicant’s most recent
five (5) fiscal years prepared and reported on by an independent certified
public accountant;



         iv.   Financial statements and records;



         v.   Evidence of valid contractual arrangements with
other established businesses which might insure the financial success of the
tenant.



   (2).   Type of Product



   (3).   Number of employees.



      i.   Part-time;



      ii.   Seasonal.



   (4).   Number of employees expected to reside in Orland Park.



   (5).   Number of new jobs created.



   (6).   Number of management-level employees.



   (7).   Type of skills required by employees.



   (8).   Yearly payroll/average employee salary.



   (9).   Projected appraised/assessed value of the project's real
property in Orland Park.



   (10).   The number of major tenant relocations since 1950.



   (11).   Estimated gross annual sales for the first five (5) years of
operation.



   (12).   Copy of market analysis.



   2.    Environmental:



      (1).   Size of the plant (sq. ft.).



      (2).   Amount of land required by the plant (acres).



      (3).   Proximity of the plant's location to area zoned
residential and school and park sites.



      (4).   Pollution.



         i.   Water/type of effluent;



         ii.   Air/toxic substances;



         iii.   Odor;



         iv.   Glare;



         v.   Noise.



      (5).   Use of pollution control devices by the plant.



1-12-3:  INDUSTRIAL EVALUATION CHECKLIST:



   The following industrial evaluation checklist shall be considered:



   1.   Economic:



      (1).   Financial stability.



         i.   Prospectus;



         ii.   Reports to stockholders;



         iii.   Account audit of the applicant's most recent five
(5) fiscal years' prepared and reported on by an independent certified public
accountant;



         iv.   Financial statements and records;



         v.   Evidence of valid contractual arrangements with
other established businesses which might insure the financial success of the
tenant.



      (2).   Type of product.



      (3).   Number of employees at the new plant.



         i.   Part-time;



         ii.   Seasonal.



      (4).   Number of employees expected to reside in Orland Park.



      (5).   Number of new jobs created.



      (6).   Number of management-level employees.



      (7).   Types of skills required by the plant's employees.



      (8).   Yearly payroll/average employee salary.



      (9).   Projected appraised/assessed value of the plant's real
property in Orland Park.



      (10).   The number of plant relocations since 1950.



   2.   Environmental:



      (1).   Size of the plant (sq. ft.);



      (2).   Amount of land required by the plant (acres);



      (3).   Proximity of the plant's location to area zoned
residential and school and park sites;



      (4).   Pollution.



         i.   Water/type of effluent;



         ii.   Air/toxic substances;



         iii.   Odor;



         iv.   Glare;



         v.   Noise.



      (5).   Use of pollution control devices by the plant.  (Ord.
1114, 9-28-81)



CHAPTER 13
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD



SECTION:



1-13-1:   The Program



1-13-2:   Economic Development Advisory Board



1-13-2-1:   Establishment



1-13-2-2:   Meetings and Minutes



1-13-3:   Advisory Board Duties and Powers



1-13-4:   Additional Uses of Economic Development Loan Program Funds



1-13-5:   Economic Development Revolving Loan Fund



1-13-6:   Qualifications for the Revolving Loan Fund



1-13-7:   Review and Recommendation



1-13-8:   Approval of Loan Request



1-13-1:  THE PROGRAM:



   The Economic Development Loan Program attached as Exhibit A is hereby
approved.  A copy of the description of said program is available at the
Village Clerk's office.  (Ord. 1648, 2-25-87, Exhibit A amended Ord. 3596,
2-4-02)



1-13-2:  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD: 



(Ord. 3313, 11-15-99)



1-13-2-1:  ESTABLISHMENT:



   There is hereby established an Economic Development Advisory Board (the
"Advisory Board”) of the Village of Orland Park.  The Advisory Board shall
consist of twelve (12) members: nine (9) voting and three (3) ex officio
nonvoting members.  The three (3) ex officio members shall include the
Village President, the Director of Development Services and a Village Trustee
who shall be appointed by the Village President.  The voting members shall
be appointed by the Village President with the consent of the Village Board. 



   The Economic Development Advisory Board shall elect one (1) of its
members to serve as chairperson and one (1) of its members to serve as vice
chairperson.  All members shall serve without compensation, for one year
terms, which shall begin on the first Monday in June and expire on the first
Monday in June of the following year. 



(Ord. 3596, 2-4-02; Amd. Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



1-13-2-2:  MEETINGS AND MINUTES:



   The Advisory Board will establish its own schedule, which it will
provide to the Village Board.  It is anticipated that the Board will meet
approximately six (6) times per year.  Advisory Board members must be either
physically present at the meeting or participate in the meeting through
pre-arranged technologies, provided however, a quorum for meetings must be
physically present. 



   Meetings of the Advisory Board shall be called by the Chair with notice
of the meeting being forwarded to members with an agenda with at least
fifteen (15) days' notice.  The Village Clerk shall also be given notice so
that the Clerk can provide the appropriate Public Notice according to the
Open Meetings Act.



   The quorum for meetings shall be five (5) voting members. 



   Economic Development Advisory Board meeting minutes are to be approved
for distribution by the Chair and confirmed at the next Ordinary Meeting of
the Advisory Board.  The Minutes will be distributed to Advisory Board
members and the Village Clerk. 



(Ord. 2082, 2-4-91; Amd. Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



1-13-3:  ADVISORY BOARD DUTIES AND POWERS:



   The Economic Development Advisory Board shall act as the advisory board
to the Village of Orland Park Board on matters pertaining to economic
development in the Village of Orland Park.  These duties include:



   1.   Conduct economic policy discussions and make recommendations to
the Village President and Board of Trustees on economic development issues,
including, but not limited to, economic development goal setting, policy
recommendations, strategic economic development planning, marketing and
market analysis for future business recruitment and retention/expansion
activities.



   2.   Review annual marketing/action plans and make recommendations
during plan formulation.



   3.   Individual members of the Advisory Board may be asked to join
the Village President, Board of Trustees Members or staff to participate in
recruiting visits and/or economic development meetings.



   4.   Advise the Village President and the Director of Development
Services and assist in identifying assets, resources and incentives
appropriate for implementation of the Village of Orland Park's economic
development strategy.



   5.   Serve as a community ambassador for persons or companies
seeking to invest in, or relocate to, the Village of Orland Park. 



   6.   Individual members of the Advisory Board may be asked to serve
as representatives of the Village of Orland Park at state, regional and local
economic development forums, conferences, and/or trade shows subject to the
availability of funds and Village Board approval. This is an effort to
provide enhanced economic development opportunities for the Village of Orland
Park.



   7.   Support and encourage the location of new enterprises in the
Village of Orland Park.



   8.   Support and encourage the development of tourist business in
the Village of Orland Park.



   9.   Review regional, local, State and/or federal legislation and
policy decisions in order to identify the impact they may have on the Village
of Orland Park. 



   10.   Establish two subcommittees, a Financial Assistance Review
Subcommittee and an Economic Development Policy Subcommittee.  Each
subcommittee will report to the full Advisory Board at each Advisory Board
meeting.



   11.   Adopt and amend bylaws and regulations for the Advisory Board
and its subcommittees. Bylaws and regulations are subject to Village Board
approval.



   12.   Review and evaluate applicable applications for economic
development loan program of the Village of Orland Park and to recommend to
the Village President and Board of Trustees approval of applications for
economic development loan program.



   13.   Identify, submit and accept on the behalf of the Village,
grants, loans, or gifts related economic development efforts subject to
review and approval by the Village Board.



   14.   Assist with the Village's Business Retention Visit Program
(VBRV), as needed, including the identification of Orland Park businesses who
would benefit from the program.



   15.   Review revolving business development loan applications and
make funding recommendations to the Village Board.



   16.   Assist the Village with identification and recruitment of
business sponsorships and coordinate meetings between potential sponsors and
Department Directors to discuss how funds can best be utilized for various
Village initiatives and projects. 



(Ord. 1648, 2-25-87; Amd. Ord. 2082, 2-4-91; Amd. Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



1-13-4:     ADDITIONAL USES OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM FUNDS:



   Funds currently available and designated for the Economic Development
Loan Program may be utilized and expended for economic development purposes,
other than loans to new and established businesses, at the discretion and
approval of the Village Board of Trustees. 



(Ord. 5118, 8-15-16; Amd. Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



1-13-5:     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN FUND:



   The Village of Orland Park's Economic Development Revolving Loan Fund
(RLF) was established in 1987 as an incentive for targeted businesses to
locate or expand in the Village.



   Maximum loan amounts are received on a case by case basis. Interest is
charged at half of prime rate at either the time a complete application is
received or at closing, whichever rate is lower at the time the closing
papers are prepared. Legal and financial-analysis fees for loan initiation
only incurred by the Applicant are paid by the Village, however, all other
loan closing costs will be deducted from final loan disbursement.



   Requests for loans are evaluated by the Village's Economic Development
Advisory Board (EDAB) against public policy objectives established for the
RLF program, including the level of private investment, job creation, and new
tax generation. Eligible projects include acquisition of real property,
installation of utility infrastructure, construction or expansion of
commercial or industrial buildings, and purchase of equipment. Funds for
construction activities are available as a permanent loan upon completion of
construction. Village funds are not available for working capital. 



(Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



1-13-6: QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE REVOLVING LOAN FUND:



   To be eligible for a loan, a project must meet all of the following
minimum qualifications:



   1.   The funds must be used for the purchase or construction of
fixed assets such as land, buildings, and capital equipment. Funds cannot be
used for working capital. Refinancing an existing RLF loan will be considered
only when there is substantial benefit to the Village or if the applicant can
demonstrate that a hardship exists.



   2.   The project must be located within the Village limits of Orland
Park. Preference is given to non-retail projects located in designated
industrial areas.



   3.   The project must create or retain permanent office, industrial,
warehouse, distribution, or related jobs.



   4.   The developer or company must demonstrate firm lender and
equity commitments, sign a letter of commitment regarding investment and job
creation, and cooperate with Village staff and the EDAB.



   5.    Office, industrial, warehouse, distribution, and related
businesses are given preference in reviewing loan requests. Retail
establishments and restaurants will be considered but are given second
priority.



   6.   The applicant must be able to demonstrate that the project
would not be feasible without the Village loan. The project must not begin
until the loan is given final approval by the Village Board or a preliminary
Resolution of Intent is approved by the EDAB; commencement of the project
prior to approval will disqualify the loan request from consideration.



   7.   The benefit to the Village in the form of tax dollars, jobs, or
other measures must be significant enough to warrant Village participation. 



(Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



1-13-7:  REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION:



   Once a completed application has been received, the loan request will
be scheduled for consideration at the next regularly scheduled EDAB meeting.
Meetings are generally held once every quarter at Orland Park's Village Hall.



   In reviewing the merits of the request, the EDAB gives consideration to
the following factors:



   1.    The enhancement of the overall tax base, including property
taxes returned to the Village.



   2.    Diversification of the property tax base through construction
of new office, industrial, warehouse, distribution, and related facilities.



   3.   A tax revenue/return analysis that insures the tax burden for
residents will be favorable.



   4.   Encouragement of private investment through these public loan
dollars.



   5.   Location of projects within areas of the Village targeted for
industrial and commercial growth.



   6.   Creation or retention of quality full-time permanent jobs over
the course of the project and beyond.



   7.    Adequate credit worthiness of the loan.



   8.   Conformance of the project to Village land use and economic
development goals, policies, and objectives. 



(Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



1-13-8:  APPROVAL OF LOAN REQUEST:



   Following review of the application, the EDAB will make a
recommendation to the Board of Trustees to approve or deny the loan. If a
request receives preliminary approval from the EDAB, a preliminary approval
letter will be mailed to the applicant, stating the level of funding and any
conditions of the loan. If the request is not approved, the applicant will be
provided with an explanation of what changes should be made for
reconsideration, or an indication that the application will receive no
further consideration by the EDAB.



   The loan request, along with the EDAB's recommendation, will be
forwarded to the Village Board of Trustees, who will make a final
determination to approve or deny the loan request at a regular Board meeting.
The project must not commence until the Village Board gives final approval
for the loan or the EDAB grants preliminary approval of a Resolution of
Intent. 



(Ord. 5204, 7-17-17)



VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK



ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM



February 1997



EXHIBIT "A"



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK



   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM



TABLE OF CONTENTS



                                    Page



Introduction                                 5



   Objectives of Orland Park's Economic Development Loan
Program         5-6



      Tax Base



      Jobs



      Enhance Development in Key Sectors of the Village



      Self Sufficiency



   Approach to Orland Park's Economic Development Loan 
Program         6-7



      Overview



      Advantages Which Orland Park has Vis-à-vis Its Surrounding
Environment



      Visible Results, A Program With Early Successes



   Creation and Organization of the Economic Development Loan
Program      7-8



      Creation of the Revolving Loan Finance Program



      Creation of Orland Park Economic Development Advisory Board



      Formulation of Incentives to Firms and Developers



   Economic Development Revolving Loan Program - Draft
Regulations      8-14



EXHIBITS



   Exhibit 1-   Sample
Application                     15-29



   Exhibit 2-   Weighting Criteria/Review
Mechanism            30-39



Introduction



   The proposed Orland Park-Economic Development Strategy details a number
of steps to enhance market penetration of Orland Park in order to stimulate
job creation and private investment.  The strategy is particularly oriented
to encourage investment in specifically designated geographical areas and
types of business activity as determined by the Advisory Board of Trustees. 
The first step in the overall strategy is the creation of the Economic
Development Loan Program.  The above is patterned (basically) after the
successful federal program - the Urban Development Action Grant Program
(UDAG).  Administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
the UDAG program allows for the creation of public-private partnerships to
induce job creation and investments.  As such, private dollars must be in
place in order for the public funds to be committed to the project.



   The use of public monies for this Economic Development Loan  Program
serves three critical purposes:



   1.   Provides a ready and visible source of funds for encouraging
investment in the Village by developers and industries.



   2.   Improves tax base through increased investments, payrolls, and
spin-off investments.



   3.   Demonstrates strong local economic development capacity.



   Proper utilization of currently unrestricted funds of the Village
enables Orland Park to leverage such monies in a manner determined by program
criteria similar to the UDAG program.  As a result, Village participation
will be contingent upon the private developer/firm committing to a certain
level of investment, job creation, and operation.  Evidence of the above
would be furnished by the developer/firm; while complemented by analysis of
staff and the review of evidentiary materials submitted - in order to
determine conformance with village policy and program objectives - the
decision would be made by the Economic Development Advisory Board and,
finally, the Advisory Board of Trustees as to the funding of the individual
projects.



OBJECTIVES OF ORLAND PARK'S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM



Tax Base



   The use of public monies is directly related to tax base.  Every
effort will be made to insure that the expenditure of Village funds results
in increased private investment.  The increased investment is expected to
generate revenues in the form of new real estate taxes, sales tax, and
repayment of revolving loans.  In short, the Village's concern will be to
develop practical and effective approaches to stimulating capital investment
that enlarges the tax base.  The broadened tax base is necessary to maintain
and expand essential public services, sustain Orland Park communities and
neighborhoods, and general infrastructure necessary to a healthy economy.



Jobs



   Jobs are and will be one of the main objectives.  The Program will
seek to retain private sector jobs in the Village, to foster and sustain job
growth in industrial concerns to attract new firms to the Village, and to
help firms within Orland Park expand their business opportunities.



Enhance Development in Key Sectors of the Village



   The Advisory Board of Trustees desires to optimize utilization of
Village land ways that complement overall policy objectives of the Village. 
In particular, the Village has acquired a large parcel of land upon which
certain municipal facilities will be erected and is desirous of promoting
complemental private uses of residual portions of the land - uses which will
provide additional taxes to defray operating costs of municipal services and
uses which will result in achievement of a long-term objective of this area
becoming a true "Village Center".  Additionally, the Village has identified
certain other strategically located areas whose potential for industrial
and/or commercial/office development is significant and desires to see such
areas developed in accordance with standards which meet overall Village
objectives.



Self-Sufficiency



   The Village recognizes that Federal and State monies, once available to
assist in private development efforts, have been significantly constrained. 
In order to control its own destiny and assure residents of quality
development, the Village views the Economic Development Loan Program as a
mechanism to assist in continuing strong and desired development.  In this
respect, the Village will be better able to control its own destiny - without
requiring dependence on dwindling Federal or State monies.



APPROACH TO ORLAND PARK'S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN PROGRAM



Overview



   To be successful in meeting these key objectives, Orland Park must
prepare to compete in an increasingly difficult economic environment. 
Elements of the program must address both actual cost factors for business
and the perceptions which surround capital investment and real estate for the
longer run.  This means that the program must aim at enlisting the private
sector, not solely in form of civic duty, but in business interest.



Advantages Which Orland Park Has Vis-a-Vis Its Surrounding Environment



   Orland Park brings to the economic competition some significant
advantages which will enable it to impact substantially upon the local
economy; namely:



   ·    its powers as a home rule unit of government under Illinois 
law;



   ·    strong private sector interest and participation;



   ·    strong ties with the local financial community;



   ·    the formation of an Economic Development Advisory Board;



   ·    the creation of a Special Service area;



   ·    an experienced staff Economic Development Director;



   ·    efforts of the Village President and Trustee to demonstrate
visible leadership; and



   ·    willingness to improve business climate.



   Much of the work necessary to implement such a program has  already 
been initiated or put in process by the Village, its staff, and its
consultants.



Visible Results, A Program with Early Successes



A vital element in launching a program which captures the confidence of the
private sector is that the program bring early and visible results.  This
means that we must concentrate scarce development resources, and sufficiently
target such resources to gain early program success.



   Clearly, such achievements will affect the perception of investors,
lenders and development specialists who can begin to see strong market
advantage to an Orland Park location.



   A key element of the overall development strategy then is the
development of a positive market psychology.  With sufficiently well-defined
targets, the Village is confident that it can spur business investment at a
large enough scale to gain major development momentum.



CREATION AND ORGANIZATION OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM



Creation of the Revolving Loan Finance Program



Overall Goal:  Maximize private investment in conjunction with leveraged
public resources.



Specific Objectives:



    Objective 1:  Provide a ready and visible source of funds for
developers and industries.



    Objective 2:  Improve tax base through increased investment, payroll,
and spin-off investments.



    Objective 3:  Demonstrate a strong local economic development capacity
as well as an aggressive public sector interest in business investment and
job creation.



   The Economic Development Advisory Board will prepare
regulations/criteria as ell as procedures for evaluating proposals presented
to it.  The Advisory Board will review proposals in light of eligible costs
and activities as contained in the regulations.  A project's ability to
generate new taxes or repayment of Village loans will be ranked in relation
to other projects, as well as other criteria (location in designated areas,
creation of jobs, etc.). The process provides a new finance vehicle that can
be utilized by businesses wishing to expand or locate in Orland Park.  In
addition, the plan is flexible enough to accommodate a variety of business
needs, expansion, relocation, machinery and equipment purchase.



Orland Park Economic Development Advisory Board



Overall Goal:  Use local resources as well as linkages to development
programs to improve capital access for firms located or expanding in Orland
Park.



Specific Objectives:



    Objective 1:  Develop a review mechanism to evaluate development
proposals pertaining to the Revolving Loan Program.



    Objective 2:  Develop an inventory of available economic development
incentives to increase availability of capital for businesses.



    Objective 3:  Coordinate and program incentives and capital to
designated areas of the Village.



   The Advisory Board will initially review and evaluate proposals
submitted under the Revolving Loan Program.  Through its linkages to the
private sector, the Advisory Board is well-positioned to be aware of firms
that wish to expand, relocate within, or locate in the Village.  The
Advisory Board can expect to leverage its resources through:



   ·    Combinations of finance incentives such as Industrial Revenue
Bonds or SBA 7(a) and 503 loan programs.  The Advisory Board can recommend
the use of such incentives to be used in conjunction with Village resources
or as an alternative. (The firm would be responsible for application
preparation).



   ·    Implementation of projects that are acceptable to the
Advisory Board and provide a highly visible marketing tool.



   ·    Providing business-oriented solutions to interested firms. 
The Advisory Board is composed of highly respected public and private
officials that offer a company an opportunity to directly communicate with
the Village government, business organizations, the finance community, and
other Orland Park businessmen at one time.



Formulation of Incentives to Firms and Developers



Overall Goal:  Utilize existing and planned program resources and
inducements to focus on development objectives.



Specific Objectives:



    Objective 1:  Provide an approach that responds to business needs and
bottom line savings.



    Objective 2:  Maximize local resources as well as other available
public resources to leverage private investments.



    Objective 3:  Create positive market momentum in designated areas with
visible program implementation.



   The Advisory Board will focus some early attention on the development
of incentives for Village defined designated areas - for which maximum
efforts for assistance from multiple resources will be appropriate.



ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM - DRAFT REGULATIONS



   I.   Purpose:



   Allocate funds from a revolving loan fund to assist projects that
require public investment in order to strengthen Orland Park's economic,
employment, tax base, and diversification of enterprise.  The  program is
intended to leverage private investment that is committed to Orland Park as a
result of the Village's participation.  The total amount of outstanding
loans at any given time cannot exceed the total amount of loan funds
available in the program.  (Ord. 4464, 2-16-09)



   II.   Eligible Projects:



   Eligible projects are to be comprised of a group of integrally related
private and public activities to be carried out to meet the objectives of the
program.  There are four types of eligible projects:



      1.   Commercial projects - predominantly office or commercial
in nature.



      2.   Industrial projects - predominantly warehousing,
manufacturing or industrial in nature.



      3.   Village Center Complex projects - developments located in
or near the Village Center Complex and determined to be complementary to the
highest and best use of this area.



      4.   Existing business projects - improvements undertaken by
and on behalf of viable businesses which are located in the Village prior to
the onset of the Economic Development Loan Program.



   III.     Eligible Activities:



   Assistance will be made available to commercial and industrial
enterprises/projects in connection with the following activities:



          1.   Acquisition of real property



      2.   Extraordinary public facilities and improvements
(necessary to project implementation)



         ·    water and sewer facilities;



         ·    street improvements;



         ·    public utilities other than water and sewer;



         ·    flood and drainage facilities; and



         ·    other public facilities not listed above, but
necessary to implement program objectives.



        3.   Acquisition, construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or installation of:



         a.  Commercial or industrial buildings and structures
including:



            i.   Purchase of equipment and fixtures which are
part of the real estate;



            ii.   Capital equipment to be utilized in the
operations of the concern;



            iii.   Energy conservation improvements designed
to encourage the efficient use of energy resources.



            iv.   Commercial or industrial real property
improvements.



      4.   Refinancing  (Ord. 4464, 2-16-09)



NO ASSISTANCE WILL BE AVAILABLE FOR WORKING CAPITAL.  (Ord. 4464, 2-16-09)



   IV.    Application For Funds:



      1.   Scope:



         Village funds are intended to attract new private
investment for commercial or industrial developments that increase jobs and
improve the tax base.  The proposed project must be able  to be carried out
in a timely fashion generally not to exceed 2 years from the announcement of
preliminary approval.  The applicant shall apply for Village funds that
together with other public and private resources will be adequate to complete
the project.  While a recipient may remain eligible for Village program
funding for other projects, no additional funding will be available in the
future to complete a project already approved.  (Ord. 4464, 2-16-09)



      2.   Submission Requirements:



         a.   A description of the project to be undertaken
including;



            ·    Property control (option, contingent
contract, fee simple title, lease, etc.) and description.



            ·    Project costs, e.g., property acquisition,
equipment costs, construction estimates, etc.



            ·    The parties involved, e.g.-, owners,
developers, firms, etc.  A brief description/ background of the parties is
to be included.  Relevant contact persons must be identified.



            ·    Sources and applications of funds; private
lender, equity, Village funds, other public funds.



         b.   Number and types of jobs to be created and
retained; average salary or wage, annual payroll.  Basis for estimates,
e.g., past trends, industry averages, production requirements, etc. 
Construction jobs to be created, if applicable, as well as expected length of
construction period would be included.



         c.   Documentation of private commitments necessary for
completing the project as described in IV (2)(a).  The commitments must be
in the form of:



            i.   Developer letter of commitment.



            ii.   Private lender finance commitment.



            iii.   Commitments from other public agencies or
groups if proposed as part of the project's funding.



   No application will be considered feasible and effective unless there
is evidence of a firm private commitment from the proposed private developer
and lender(s) that is adequate to complete the project.



   Letters for project financing (loans, equity, etc.) which commit the
parties to specific project activities must demonstrate that the private
investment will occur; contingent only upon commitment of the Village
funds.  The parties must commit to a particular activity or to financing,
and must signify their willingness, once preliminary application occurs, to
sign a legally binding commitment to that effect.



         d.   A clear description of the use of the Village's
funds and a, justification for the amount.  Basically the funding is
contingent upon the parties demonstrating firm commitments to implement the
project.  The Village's decision to fund the project requires submission of
a complete application package including analysis of tax revenues returned to
the Village.  The parties must demonstrate that the benefits accruing to the
Village in the form of increased tax base are sufficient to justify the
Village's participation in the project.  Other criteria such as location in
a designated area, creation of jobs, and leverage of private investments will
be considered.



         e.   A detailed schedule for accomplishing each part of
the proposed project.  The schedule should include a timetable with
estimates of project expenditures and job creation.



         f.   Maps, aerial photos, site plans or other graphic
descriptions of the project site that demonstrate access, surrounding land
uses, and related property information.



         Site plans must show:



            i.   Present conditions, land uses, and ownership;



            ii.   Proposed private and public development
including clear identification of where the funds are to be spent.



         g.   An analysis of the impact of the project on the
Village's economic and fiscal base, e.g., property tax increments, State
sales and income tax return, payroll increments, retail sales increase, etc.



         h.   The record of the developer/firm in carrying out
past projects, or experience and information regarding ability to
successfully complete the project.



         i.   Financial statements of the borrower/applicant
(most recent and last three years).



         j.   Private loan applications, if available.



         k.   Identification of training programs or other
opportunities for employees.



         l.   Evidence that the proposed project is consistent
with Village-wide development plans and programs.



   V.   Criteria For Selection:



      1.   General



         Loan assistance will be made available in order to achieve
the greatest conformance to public program and policy objectives.  To be
considered for project selection, a proposal must - at the minimum - have a
firm private commitment (equity/private lender funds) of 2.0 private dollars,
unless the Village Board makes a specific finding of necessity for a lower
ratio.  To 1.0 public dollars.  If other public funding is required, this
amount will not enter into the leverage ratio, but firm public commitments
are necessary to be considered for loan assistance.  (Ord. 4464, 2-16-09)



      2.   Requirements which must be met to be considered for loan
assistance



         a.   A firm private commitment - No projects will be
funded unless there is a firm private commitment to finance and carry out the
project. The private commitment must have a clear, direct relationship to the
activities for which funding is being requested.



         b.   Leveraging ratio - Each project considered for
selection for funding must have a leveraging ratio of at least 2.0 to 1.0. 
Unless the village board makes a specific finding of necessity for a lower
ratio.  (Ord. 4464, 2-16-09)



      c.   A firm commitment of public resources - If a project
requires a commitment of other public resources, then it must be a firm
public commitment.



      d.   Project costs will include, for purposes of computing the
leverage ratio:



         ·    Fixed assets (land, building, improvements,
capital equipment).



         ·    New private investments, contingent upon Village
participation.



         ·    Projects within the-corporate boundaries of
Village.



      e.   The amount of the leveraging ratio - In selecting
projects for funding, the Village will consider whether the amount of private
leverage to be generated by a given project is greater than that of other
projects.  In other words, the higher the leveraging ratio, the more likely
it is that the project will be selected for preliminary approval.  Recapture
of Village funds for a second use increases the private leverage thereby
making a project more competitive.  The minimum leveraging ratio is 2.0 to
1.0 (private dollars to public dollars), unless the Village Board makes a
specific finding of necessity for a lower ratio.  (Ord. 4464, 2-16-09)



      f.   The impact of the proposed project on the fiscal base of
the community  - The fiscal impact of the proposed project will be measured
by the annualized increase in real estate and other taxes such as corporate,
sales or income taxes accruing to the Village as a result of the project's
implementation.  In selecting projects for funding, the Village will
consider whether a given project will generate a greater amount of net new
annual tax revenues in relationship to the requested public finds amount than
other projects.



      g.   The impact of the proposed project on the physical
conditions of the community - The Advisory Board will assess the impact of
each project in relation to other uses within the Village.



      h.   The impact of the proposed project on the economic
conditions of the community - The creation of new jobs, payroll, and jobs
retained.



      i.   The likelihood of accomplishing the project in a timely
fashion within the total resources which will be provided - Events such as
the status of land assembly, zoning permits, any necessary historic or
environmental clearances will be considered.  The Village requires projects
to be completed within a two-year period from the date of announcement of
preliminary funding approval.



   VI.   Village Review and Action on Applications



      1.   Economic Development Advisory Board



         An Advisory Board will be appointed by the President and
Board of Trustees.  The Economic Development Advisory Board will consist of
eleven individuals who will meet and be authorized to recommend the loan
and/or other Village participation which satisfied program and application
criteria described above.  The Advisory Board shall render a decision within
three weeks if all necessary application and supporting information has been
provided.  (Ord. 3596, 2-4-02)



      2.   Village Staff



         Village staff shall coordinate the activities of the
Economic Development Advisory Board and its subcommittees, and coordinate the
bringing of proposals, supported by necessary documentation, to the Advisory
Board.  (Ord. 3596, 2-4-02)



      3.   Preliminary Approval 



         Subsequent to review of application materials and necessary
documentation, the Economic Development Advisory Board shall issue
preliminary approval to an applicant.  The above constitutes the first step
in a process which a result in a signed, legally binding agreement between
the Village and developer/firm.  The terms and conditions of the agreement
are not finalized until the applicant and the Village have set forth a
reasonable schedule for submission of the legally binding commitments between
all parties involved that meet each and every condition set forth in the
agreement. 



      Legally binding commitments which must be evidenced include, but
are not limited to:



         a.   All government approvals and permits necessary for
the commencement of activities described in the application;



         b.   Title to all land necessary to the project (or
valid leases);



         c.   A redevelopment agreement to be entered into
between applicant and the Village which sets forth:



            ·    necessary applicant activities



            ·    amount and sources of financing



            ·    time schedule for accomplishment of
activities



            ·    necessary public activities



            ·    loan agreement



         d.   Written certification from a private lender
certifying that the amount stated in the application is available for
financing of the project;



         e.   Evidence of private equity funds in amounts and
available as set forth in legally binding commitments described above.



   Draw down of the Loan Fund shall be contingent upon legal review and
approval of legally binding commitments described above.



   VII.   Project Amendment and Revisions:



   If revisions to the application subsequent to the preliminary approval
are significant, e.g., if they alter the scope, location, scale, or timing of
the project, the following procedures must be followed:



      a.   New or significantly altered activities must meet
criteria for selection at the time of request for amendment;



      b.   Additional information necessary to the application re:
proposed revisions must be submitted to the Village Staff; (Ord. 3596,
2-4-02) and



      c.   The Economic Development Advisory Board must be notified
in writing and consider the project/application in its revised form, per
requirements of Section VI.  (Ord. 1648, 2-25-87)



EXHIBIT 1



   SAMPLE APPLICATION



   SAMPLE



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK



   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN APPLICATION



APPLICATION INDEX



               SECTION               PAGE



   A.   Application Procedures and
Information               17



   B.   Summary Information/Cover
Page               18-19



   C.   Project
Description                     19-22



   D.   Borrower Information                     22



   E.   Village of Orland Park Economic Development Loan
Request      23



   F.   Market Information                     24



   G.   Job and Tax
Information                     25



   H.   Project
Schedule                        26



   I.   Annual
Follow-Up                        27



                                                 
EXHIBITS



          1.  Property Information



          2.  Form of Property Control



          3.  Cost Estimates



          4.  Lender Commitment



          5.  Borrower Commitment



          6.  Financial Information



          7.  Business Projections



A.  APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND INFORMATION



   1.   Notice of Receipt of Application



   The Economic Development Advisory Board (EDAB) will notify the
applicant that the application has been received and is acceptable for
processing.  The EDAB will also initially review the application and make
recommendations to the Advisory Board of Trustees.



   2.   Review and Preliminary Approval



   EDAB will review all applications which are deemed acceptable for
processing in accordance with Program Regulations.  If a project received
preliminary approval, the action will be announced by the EDAB, and a
preliminary application approval letter will be mailed to the applicant by
EDAB, stating the amount of the funds.  If the proposed project is no,
approved, the applicant will be provided with an explanation of what changes
should be made for reconsideration, or that the application will receive no
further consideration.



   3.   Application Format



   Make all requests for Orland Park participation according to the format
described in the application.  Submit a separate application for each
proposed project, bind each copy of the application and attach all necessary
exhibits.  Applications should conform to the index and instructions as
described herein.



   4.   Submission of Applications



   Forward the original and two copies of the application to:



   Economic Development Director



   Village of Orland Park



   14700 Ravinia Avenue



   Orland Park, Illinois 60462



   5.   Amendments and Additions to the Application



   Applications should be fully documented, but applicants may provide, or
may be asked to provide, additional clarifying information during review. 
Copies of any additional information must be provided to the EDAB when
requested.



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK



   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN APPLICATION



   APPLICATION #_________________________



B.  SUMMARY INFORMATION:



   1.   Legal Name and Address of Applicant:



                   
___________________________________________________________________________



                  Name



                 
____________________________________________________________________________



   Address                                         
  City            State                Zip Code         
      County



                 
___________________________________________________(____)____________________



   Contact Person                              Title   
                                Telephone Number



   2.   Type of Project:  Industrial__________ Commercial____________
Retail_________________



   3.   Type of
Business:______________________________________________________________



_____________________________________________________________________________



   4.   Federal Tax ID Number    or Borrower's Social Security
Number 



      (Please check the appropriate  category)



   5.   Form of Organization of Borrower(s):



      a.   _____  Individual Proprietorship



      b.   _____  Partnership:  _____  General    _____Limited



                    Illinois_____            Other
State_____



      c.   _____ Corporation:    _____  Private    _____ Public



                  State  of 
Incorporation_____________________________ Date:___________



      d.   _____ Other: 
__________________________________________________________



   6.   Is the Company Wholly or Partly Owned by Any Other Business?



      _____No          _____Yes         
(Explain)___________________________________________



      ___________________________________________________________________
________



   7.   Village of Orland  Park  Loan  Requested 
$__________________________________________



C.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION



   1.   Project Location



   Address   
__________________________________________________________________



   Site Size   
__________________________________________________________________



   Building(s) Size   
____________________________________________________________



*  Attach as Exhibit 1 legal description, real estate tax index numbers, and
survey or site plan, if      available.



   2.   Nature of the project (acquisition of buildings, machinery, new
construction or rehabilitation, business expansion or development). 
Describe in one paragraph (if commercial project, indicate lead tenant(s) or
users identified to date).



   3.   Reasons for use of Village of Orland Park Loan. (Why is the
Loan necessary to your company or project).



   4.   Sources and Uses of Funds



   Amount of Village of Orland Park Loan $_______________________________



                                                   
                    Village of Orland Park



                                            Total
Uses            Loan                Debt               
Equity



Use



   Purchase of Land         
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Purchase of Existing



   Facility                         
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Rehabilitation               
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   New Construction         
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   New Machinery and



   Equipment                     
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Used Machinery and



   Equipment                     
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Legal/Accounting Fees 
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Architect/Engineering Fees
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Financing Fees             
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Contingency/Others       
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



   Totals                             
   $__________   __________   _________   _________



* Attached form of property control (option, contract, lease, fee simple,
etc.) to application as            Exhibit 2.



*  Attach estimates of machinery, rehabilitation, or construction to
applicant on as Exhibit 3.



   5.   Private Lender



   Amount of Loan _________________                       
Rate/Term___________________



   Lender___________________________________________________________________
___



                 
Address_____________________________________________________________________



                  Contact
Person_______________________________________________________________



                  Phone
Number_______________________________________________________________



                  *  Attach lender commitment as Exhibit 4.



   6.   Source of Equity



   Equity Amount  _________________                    Source 
______________________



*  Attach borrower commitment as Exhibit 5.



   Funds will be provided only if entities described in Sections 5 and 6
above offer firm commitments to participate and each such entity demonstrates
that it has the financial capacity to deliver the resources to which it has
committed.  Provide evidence of both firm commitment and financial capacity.



All commitment letters required in this part should include the general
provisions below:



   --    State that the signator has the authority to commit his/her
organization.  Ordinarily this means the chairman of the Advisory Board or
the chief executive officer of a financial institution or corporation, the
general partner of 4 limited partnership, the chief executive or governing
body of a governmental agency, and the appropriate state agency
representative.



   --    Attach copy of corporate resolution (with corporate seal
affixed) indicating that signators with borrowing authority are identified.



   --   Specify the size or amount, the terms and conditions of the
commitment, and the uses, purpose, and timing of each part of the investment.



   --    Where applicable, include the signator’s commitment to
provide a specified number and type of jobs, and the scheduling of when the
employment is to take place.



   In addition to the general provisions, lender commitment letters should
include:



      a.    Description of the type of loan (e.g., first mortgage,
permanent financing. construction financing, etc.) which the lender is
making; the amount and status (approved, conditionally approved) and the 
commitment letter should state any special conditions of the loan.



      b.   The normal condition such as the amount of the loan, the
interest rate, the term, and the collateral (i.e., first mortgage, chattel
mortgage).



      c.   Statement that the loan has completed all necessary
requirements of the approval process of the lender, e.g., approval of loan
committee.



   If the issuance of bonds is involved in the financing of the proposed
project, attach the following:



      a.   A copy of the inducement resolution from the issuing
entity.



      b.   A letter from the proposed underwriter or investor
committing to purchase the bonds.  Such letter must include the amount and
use of bond funds, and all terms and conditions of purchase.



D.  BORROWER INFORMATION



   1.   Background of Borrower (briefly describe the Borrower's
experience within the industry or similar projects and management and
personnel responsible for project implementation).



   2.   Attach the latest financial statement (dated within three (3)
months of application date) as well as last three (3) years financial
statements as Exhibit 6.



   3.   Attach business projections as Exhibit 7.



E.  VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK LOAN REQUEST



   1.   Amount of Loan requested     
$__________________________________________________



   2.   Proposed term 
______________________________________________________________



   3.   Proposed amortization schedule 
________________________________________________



   4.   Proposed rate 
_______________________________________________________________



   5.   Collateral



   6.   Other terms and conditions



F.  MARKET INFORMATION



   Complete the following questions - if more space is required, attach
relevant information.



   1   Why did you select the proposed location?



   2   What is your target market. e.g., major customers, suppliers?



   3   If your firm is expanding, what are the reasons for increased
business?



G.  JOB AND TAX ESTIMATES



Permanent Job Projection



                                                   
                      Full-Time                Part-Time 
            Estimated



                                                   
                          Jobs                   
Jobs                    Payroll_



() Number of jobs projected for



the project after completion



      of the project.



            One year after
completion   ________   ________   ________   



   



            Two years after
completion      ________   ________   ________



            Total         ________   ________   ________



 



            Basis for estimate:



() Number of jobs currently   ________   ________   ________   



            at project site (net out



            from (1) if project jobs



            are not retained)



      (3)  Number of
Shifts         ________   ________   ________



Construction Job Projection



   Projected Total Construction  Jobs           
   ______________________________________



Tax Revenues



    (1)  Basis for real property tax assessment:



            Acquisition cost (or current market value



            of the property)                           
                                        $ 
____________________



            Estimate of improvements                       
                          $  ____________________



            Total                                   
                                                $ 
____________________



    (2)  Basis for sales tax estimates (utilize



      conservative assumptions and describe



      methodology used to calculate sales taxes):



            Annual sales tax revenues *                     
                          $  ____________________



      *  Indicate whether the figure is an average over a number of years.



H.  PROJECT SCHEDULE



   Using  the format below, document the projected schedule for
completion.  If the proposed project has more than one Phase, replicate and
complete the form for each Phase.



                                                   
                                                   
                                Estimated



                                                   
                                                   
                                  Project



                                                   
                                    Start           
  Complete          Expenditures



   Property Acquisition



   Private Construction or Rehab



   Equipment Purchase



   Job Creation



I.  ANNUAL FOLLOW-UP



(The follow-up form must be returned to the Economic Development Advisory
Board twelve (12) months after approval of the loan.  This is to inform the
Village and the Advisory Board of the borrower's progress and conformance
with activities contained within the application).



   Project Information



   1   Name of Borrower 
____________________________________________________________________



   2   Address of
Borrower___________________________________________________________________



   3   Contact Person ____________________________  Phone
No._________________________________



   4   Project Location (if different from 2. 
_______________________________________________________



   
_______________________________________________________________________________
____



   5   Jobs



               Actual         Estimated Jobs



Application Estimates      Jobs to Date         Over Next 12
Months



   6   Taxes



    Taxes Projected in Application                      
Actual                                             
Next 12 Months



    Real Estate Taxes:



    Sales Taxes:



   7   Investment



    Investment Estimate                               
Actual Investment



      In Application                                    
          To Date                                   
    Next 12 Months



   Submitted By:  ___________________________



   Date:                ___________________________



SAMPLE



                                                   
                                                   
    Re:  (project name)



   Dear (developer/firm):



   The _____________(lender) commits to provide a loan* in an amount not
to exceed $ __________________



   to_________________________________________(borrower) for purposes of
(project description) located



   at ______________________(address), Orland Park, Illinois.



   The terms of the loan are as follows:



    -- Maturity



    -- Amortization Schedule/Repayment Schedule



    -- Interest Rate



    -- Prepayment



    -- Finance Fees



    -- Security



    -- Guarantees (if necessary)



    -- Other terms as set forth by the lender



   This loan commitment is subject to the following terms and conditions:



(Describe the conditions under which the lender is making the commitment. 
For purposes of the Village review, all conditions precedent must be
satisfied in order for the Village to commit its funds.  An acceptable
outstanding contingent condition would be the developer's receipt of Village
funds.)



   Sincerely,



____________________________



   Title



   Lending institution/firm



   Accepted by the Borrower:



                                                   
                                 



____________________________            Date___________________



   Signature



   Title



*Should tax-exempt securities (IRBs), be utilized, the lender would commit to
purchase the tax-exempt securities.



SAMPLE BORROWER COMMITMENT



____________________, 1987



   Subject to the Village's participation of $__________________ per the
Business Finance Plan, the undersigned agree to the following investments as
described:



(The Borrower would list the:



    -- location of the project



    -- control of the site



    -- project costs and proposed sources of funds, all identified
clearly.  Also include terms of repayment if               
revolving loan fund used).



   As a result of the development described above, the undersigned will
commit its best efforts to create (retain) jobs over a month/year period (a
brief explanation of the rationale for projections is to be included).



   The Village participation is necessary for the borrowing reason(s).



    (the reasons for the Village participation must be included as well as
an attached application that contains        all necessary project
information).



   The undersigned is willing to sign a legally binding commitment upon
award of the funds.



   As title of the signator, the undersigned has the authority to commit
the organization.  As a result of the receipt of the Village funds in an
amount of $______________________________the above described investments, job
creation and operations month period would occur within the Village of Orland
Park over a_________ month period beginning_______________________ and
ending_______________________.



   Sincerely,



_________________________________



   Title



   Company/Organization



   EXHIBIT 2



   WEIGHTING CRITERIA/REVIEW MECHANISM



Evidence of Meeting



Public Policy Objectives



   The enclosed form is a review mechanism for determining the priorities
of various projects submitted to the Village by developers or firms.  The
form is a scoresheet whereby each project would be rated numerically on the
basis of meeting program and public policy objectives.  Basic public policy
objectives are:



   I.   The improvement of the overall tax base (property taxes, sales
and income taxes returned to the Village).



   Il.   A tax revenue/return analysis that insures the tax burden for
residents will be favorable.



   III.   The leverage of private dollars and investments by public
dollars.



   IV.   Location within designated areas.



   V.   New jobs created over the course of the project.



   If the individual project were to meet all objectives completely (on
the basis of a high evaluation score), Village funds would be able to be
applied to the project - given the developer/firm's request and willingness
to enter into legally binding commitments.  If a project did not meet any of
the above objectives, or did so minimally, no participation or a reduced
level of participation would be recommended.



Priority Score                         Ranking



   High                            TopTier - Preferred
projects



(75-100 pts.)



   Moderate                    Middle Tier - Given limited
resources



(25-74 pts.) 



   Low                            Bottom Tier - Marginal
projects,



(0-24 pts.)                              less return with
respect to Village objectives



   Basically, the scores represent priority rankings among alternative
projects.  Only Top Tier and Middle Tier projects would be acceptable to the
Village based upon their relative ranking.  The major criteria area of
concern will relate to repayment of the Village proceeds.  Secondary ranking
criteria are concerned with job creation or retention and location in
designated areas.  The Economic Development Loan Program recognizes the
importance of development projects. but requires that the use of Village
funds be as fiscally responsible as possible.  Projects which can produce a
substantial tax increment or repay loan proceeds are rewarded with more
points, allowing them to move into the top tier.



Basis Program Qualifications



   1.   The eligible project costs are restricted to:



      ·    fixed assets (land, building, capital equipment)



      ·    new private investments



      ·    projects within the corporate boundaries of Orland Park



   2.   (a)  How permanent jobs are created as a result of the
project; or



      (b)  Jobs are retained by the project.



   3.   Focus will be on designated areas:



      ·    Village Center Complex



      ·    Industrial and Office Development in the Southwest
Sector



   Points outside of the designated areas will be eligible, but in order
to obtain maximum leverage of resources, these areas will be highlighted.



   4.   The developer/firm demonstrates: 



      ·    firm lender and equity commitments



      ·    a letter of commitment re: Job creation, investments



      ·    cooperation with Village staff and the Economic
Development Advisory Board



   5.   The return of the Village in the form of either tax dollars,
jobs or other measures must be significant to warrant Village participation.



   As a minimum, each project would have to meet the above objectives in
order to qualify for the Economic Development Loan Program.  Should a
project meet the objectives, review utilizing this form, and other supporting
data, would commence.



Scoring Criteria



Base Criteria



   Maximum Points                                     
            Criteria                                 
                Score



   20         1)  Revenue/Return Analysis*



               a)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



               less than 1.0x   ______  0



               b)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



               1.0x to 1.24x   ______  5



               c)  Debt Service Coverage-Ratio



               1.25x to 1.50x   ______ 10



               d)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



               1.51x to 2.0x   ______ 15



               e)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



               greater than 2.0x   ______ 20



   15            2)   Leverage Ratio - Utilization of



               Public Loan Funds Expressed as



               Ratio of Private Dollars to Public Dollars



               a)  Less than 3.0 to 1.00   ______  0



               b)  3.0 - 3.9 to  1.05   ______  5



               c)  4.0 - 4.9 to  1.0   ______ 10



               d)  5.0 or greater to 1.0   ______ 15



   10            3)   Increase in Annual Sales and



                  Other Non-property Taxes to Village



               a)  Less than  $5,000   ______  0



               b)  $5,000 to  $9,999   ______  5



               c)  Greater than $10,006   ______ 10



   10            4)   Increase in Real Property Tax



                  Base to Village



                  a)  0-10%   ______  0



                  b)  11-25%   ______  5



                  c)  26% or greater   ______ 10



*  Refer to attached methodology.



Scoring Criteria (cont)



   Maximum Points                                     
          Criteria                                   
         Score



   10            5)   Interest Rate Requested on Loan



               a)  Less than 3%   ______  0



               b)  3% to 5.9%   ______  5



               c)  6% or above   ______ 10



   10            6)   Permanent Job Creation/Retention



                  Per $1,000 Loan Requested From



                  Village (all expressed as full-time



               equivalent)



               a)  Less than 50   ______  0



               b)  50-100   ______  5



               c)  100 or more   ______ 10



   75              TOTAL BASE CRITERIA



Priority Criteria



   Maximum Points                                     
        Criteria                                     
                  Score



   10            1)   Project located in designated
   ______



                  area of Village



   5         2)   Project likely to result in    ______



               additional commercial development



               in designated area of Village



               (opinion of certified planner



               to this effect)



   5         3)   Project likely to  diversify     ______



               tax base of Village by adding



               business/services  currently  not



               significant in Village  (opinion



               of financial consulting  firm  to



               this effect)



         5         4)   Firm employees less than 50
   ______



               persons



   25      TOTAL PRIORITY CRITERIA



METHODOLOGY:  REVENUE/RETURN ANALYSIS



Steps



   A.   Real Estate Taxes:



      1.   Compile detailed list of improvements or increments to
real property:



         --   Architect certified cost of improvements
(rehabilitation, construction, fixtures).



         --   Increments in value due to change in assessment
percentage, i.e., from property assessed as vacant to commercial/industrial.



         --   Other changes that would be reflected in tax bill
(based upon current or more recent tax bill).



      2.   Determine value of tax increment based upon data
collected in 1) plus most recent tax information.



      3.   Calculate projected property tax increment; include
project schedule and the timing of estimated revenue streams.



   B.   Other Taxes:



      1.   Estimate income or sales taxes that would be returned to
the Village (based upon current formulas utilized by the State of Illinois
Department of Revenue).



      2.   Determine combined value of tax increments utilizing
conservative assumptions for 1).



   C.   Revolving Loan Repayment



      1.   Calculate the loan repayment based upon the requested
(per the application):



         --   interest rate



         --   term



         --   amortization schedule



         --   amount



      2.   Determine annual debt service to be repaid by the
firm/developer.



   D.   Estimated Debt Service:



   Calculate municipal debt service payments (based upon current market
assumptions); per the amount of Village proceeds committed to the project.



   E.   Revenue/Return Analysis



      1.   Add all estimated revenues to be returned to the Village
(steps A-C).



      2.   Net out expected abatements.



      3.   Divide estimated revenues by estimated Debt Service (step
D) to obtain debt service coverage ratio.  Assign scoring weights
accordingly.  (Ord. 1648, 2-25-87)



Small Business  Scoring  Criteria



Note: Only businesses employing 50 people or less and requesting a loan of
$100,000 or less will be eligible for Small Business Scoring Criteria. 
Branch offices or subsidiaries of larger firms would not qualify if total
employment exceeds 50 people    Small businesses will utilize the Base
Criteria below (maximum score: 75 points), but will utilize the same Priority
Criteria  (maximum score: 25 points) along with other loan applicants.



Base Criteria



   Maximum Points      Criteria                  
            Score



   20         1) Revenue/Return Analysis*



         a) Debt Service Coverage Ratio    ______  0



               less than 1.00X



            b)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



            1.0x to 1.24x    ______  5



            c)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



            1.25x to 1.50x   ______ 10



            d)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



            1.51x to 2.0   ______ 15



            e)  Debt Service Coverage Ratio



            greater than 2.0x   ______ 20



   15         2)  Leverage Ratio-Ratio of Private Dollars



            to Orland Park Revolving Loan Fund Request



            a) 3.0 to 1.0      ______  5



            b) 3.1 - 4.9 to 1.0   ______ 10



            c) 5.0 or greater to 1.0   ______ 15



   15      3)   Permanent Job Creation



            a)  5% to 20% increase in new jobs   ______  5



            b)  21% to 50% increase in new jobs   ______ 10



            c)  50% increase or greater in new jobs   ______
15



*  Debt Service coverage ratio is based upon comparison to 50% of the prime
interest rate at time of



  application submission and acceptance.  (Ord., 1798, 8-15-98)



   10      4) Small Business Expansion**



   a)  Existing business is expanding    ______ 10



  operations with Orland Park



            b)  Business is locating within    ______ 10



            Orland Park in order to expand



            Operations



Small Business  Scoring  Criteria (cont.)



Base Criteria



   Maximum Points      Criteria                  
          Score



   10         5) Small Business/Entrepreneur



            Related Criteria



            a)  Owner(s) of business concern    ______  5



            is the operations manager



            or chief executive officer



            b). Owner of business concern has   ______  5



            developed product through



            patents, copyrights, specific



            technical or production features



            are unique to the applicant,



            e.g., licensing agreements



         6)   New construction



            a)  New construction of facilities   ______  5



            Is part of project budget.



   75   TOTAL BASE CRITERIA



**  Expansion demonstrated by larger amounts of square footage required,
historic of sales and employment growth, or one or more facilities. (Ord.
1798, 8-15-88)



CHAPTER 14
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF NON-VEHICULAR CODE VIOLATIONS



SECTION:



1-14-1:   Purpose, Reservation of Right; Authority



1-14-2:   Administrative Composition



1-14-3:   Procedures



1-14-4:   Administrative Hearings



1-14-5:   Administrative Review



1-14-6:   Judgment and Collection



1-14-7:   Election of Remedies Non-Exclusive



1-14-1:  PURPOSE; RESERVATION OF RIGHT; AUTHORITY:



   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method
of enforcing the Village's regulations through administrative adjudication of
charges of non-vehicular violations of the Village Code.  All provisions of
the Village Code may be enforced through the administrative adjudication
system, provided the system shall have no authority to impose a penalty of
incarceration or adjudicate an offense under the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code
which is a traffic regulation governing moving vehicles, or to impose a fine
in excess of $50,000.00.  The Village reserves its right to employ all other
means and methods available under the law to enforce its Village Code,
including direct application to the Courts.



   Section 1-2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-2) allows
home rule municipalities to provide by ordinance for a system of
administrative adjudication of municipal code violations to the extent
permitted by the Illinois Constitution.  The Village is a home rule
municipality.  The Illinois Constitution provides that a home rule unit may
exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and
affairs (Illinois Constitution, Art. VII, Sec. 6(a)(1970)).  The Illinois
Constitution also provides that a home rule unit may exercise and perform
concurrently with the State any power or function of a home rule unit to the
extent that the General Assembly by law does not specifically limit the
concurrent exercise or specifically declare the State's exercise to be
exclusive (Illinois Constitution, Art. VII, Sec. 6(i)(1970)).  The Illinois
Constitution further provides that the powers and functions of home rule
units shall be construed liberally.



1-14-2:   ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:



   The system of administrative adjudication of non-vehicular regulations
violations shall be composed of a Code Hearing Unit which shall be comprised
of a Hearing Officer, and may include any one or more of the following:  an
administrator, a computer operator/system coordinator and hearing room
personnel (deputy), with the power, authority and limitations as are
hereinafter set forth:



   A.   Powers of the Hearing Officer - The Hearing Officer shall have
all of the powers granted to hearing officers under State law, set forth at
65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-4, the provisions of which are incorporated herein by this
reference, including the power to:



      1.   Preside over all administrative hearings as the
adjudicator.



      2.   Administer oaths.



      3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to
the existence of the Code violation.



      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant papers or documentation upon the request of the
parties or their representatives.



      5.   Rule upon objections and the admissibility of evidence.



      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing.



      7.   Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at
the hearing, of whether a Village Code violation exists.  The determination
shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision,
and order setting forth the fine, penalty, or action with which the person
found liable must comply.



      8.   Impose penalties consistent with applicable Village Code
provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged
violation.  Notwithstanding those violations for which the Illinois
Municipal Code limits the fine or penalty to seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) the Hearing Officer shall have the authority to impose fines and
penalties up to $50,000.00.



      9.   In no event shall a Hearing Officer have the authority to:



         a.   Impose a penalty of incarceration.



         b.   Impose a fine in excess of $50,000.00



         c.   The maximum monetary fine under subsection (b),
above, shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure
compliance with the municipality’s ordinances and shall not be applicable
to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the
municipality.



   B.   Powers of the Administrator - The Administrator shall be
empowered and is authorized and directed to:



      1.   Operate and manage this system of administrative
adjudication of non-vehicular Village Code violations.



      2.   Adopt, distribute and process Village Code violation
notices and other notices as may  be required to carry out the purpose of
this Chapter.



      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed
after a final determination of a Village Code violation.



      4.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to
operate and maintain this administrative adjudication system.



      5.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties and otherwise pursue
all post-judgment remedies available under law.



      6.   Compromise or otherwise settle Violation Notices prior to
a hearing date.  However, any such compromise should be made of record by
the Administrator on the date the Violation Notice was scheduled to appear
for hearing, with an explanation by the Administrator as to the reasons for
such compromise.  The Hearing Officer is also required to approve any such
compromise or settlement at the hearing.



   C.   Powers of the System Coordinator - The system
coordinator/computer operator shall operate and maintain computer programs
for the administrative adjudication system created hereunder, on a day-to-day
basis, including but not limited to:



      1.   Input of violation notice information.



      2.   Input of hearing and notice dates.



      3.   Input of fine and penalty assessments and payments.



      4.   Issuance of receipts for payment.



      5.   Issuance of succeeding notices of hearing dates or court
dates and/or final determination of liability as directed by the
administrator or by the hearing officer in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter set forth.



      6.   Maintenance of accurate records of appearances and
non-appearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and
penalties assessed and paid.



   D.   Powers of the Hearing Room Personnel - The hearing room
personnel shall be full-time, part-time or auxiliary police officers.  The
hearing room personnel shall:



      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum.



      2.   Have and carry out such authority as is granted to
courtroom deputies of the Circuit Court.



      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be
required to maintain hearing room decorum as directed by the Hearing Officer,
or by the Administrator.



   E.   Selection and Appointment of Personnel - The persons who shall
hold the positions of hearing officer, administrator, computer
operator/systems coordinator, and hearing room personnel under this Chapter
shall be selected, and appointed according to the following procedures:



      1.   The Village President is hereby authorized to appoint (a)
person(s) to hold the position of Hearing Officer.



      2.   In making selections, the Village President shall
consider all pertinent information, including at a minimum:



         a.   Candidate's ability to comply with the job
descriptions as set forth herein; and



         b.   Background and performance date made available to
the Village President on file with the Village, or otherwise obtained by the
Village; and



         c.   Whether the candidate meets the statutory criteria
as an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least
three (3) years.



      3.   Administrator, System Coordinator and Hearing Room
Personnel:



         a.   The Village Manager shall assign the duties of
administrator, system coordinator and hearing room personnel to Village
employees.



   F.   Compensation:  Compensation to be paid for any of the
above-stated positions shall be established annually by the Village President
Board of Trustees.



   G.   Training of Personnel:  Prior to a hearing officer conducting
these administrative adjudication proceedings, the hearing officer must either



      1.   Demonstrate a minimum of three years experience as a
hearing officer for a program of administrative adjudication of violations of
non-vehicular regulations; or



      2.   Successfully complete a formal training program pursuant
to 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-4(c).



1-14-3:   PROCEDURES:



   The system of administrative adjudication of non-vehicular regulations
violations shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures to
assure defendants are afforded due process of law:



   A.   Issuance of Violation Notices -Village Code violation notices
("violation notices") may be issued by any authorized person and shall
contain information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary value
as hereinafter stated. Certain violation notices may be issued in the form of
a ticket allowing the recipient to pay the stated fine prior to any hearing.
If the recipient fails to pay the required fine within the allotted time
under the ticket, the violation notice will be processed through the
administrative adjudication system as otherwise provided for in this Article.



   B.   Authorization - All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police
officers and other specifically appointed individuals including, but not
limited to the Village's Code Official (Director of Building) and his/her
designees shall have the authority to issue violation notices.



   C.   Detection of violations - Any individual authorized to issue a
violation notice who detects a violation of any non-vehicular regulation
shall issue a notice of violation thereof and shall serve the violation
notice as herein provided.



   D.   Content - Violation Notices shall contain, at a minimum:



      1.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of
issuance).



      2.   The particular Village Code section or regulation
violated.



      3.   The common address of the building or property alleged to
be in violation (the "cited property"), if applicable.



      4.   The signature and identification number, if applicable,
of the person issuing the violation notice.



      5.   The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at
which the charge may be contested on its merits.  This date shall be no less
than fifteen (15) days after the date of service of the violation notice.  A
hearing may be set at a date less than 15 days after the date of service of
the violation in an emergency situation where the violation constitutes a
threat to public interest, safety or welfare.



      6.   At statement of penalties for failure to appear at the
hearing.



      7.   If the violation notice is issued as a  ticket, the
notice shall include the amount of the fine and the date required for payment
of the fine. The notice under the ticket shall also apprise the recipient
that the failure to pay the stated fine within the allotted time will operate
to process the violation notice within the administrative adjudication system
as otherwise provided for by this Chapter.



   E.   Service of Violation Notices - Service of violation notices
shall be made in a manner reasonably calculated to give the defendant actual
notice, by:



      1.   Handing a copy of the violation notice to the person
charged; or



      2.   Delivering a copy of the violation notice to the person
charged by certified mail, return receipt.  Such service shall be completed
as of the date of deposit in the United States Mail.



      3.   If a Building Code violation is alleged where the person
charged is an owner or manager of the property, posting a copy on the cited
property.



   F.   Certification - The correctness of facts contained in the
violation notice shall be certified by the issuing person by:



      1.   Signing his/her name to the violation notice at the time
of issuance; or



      2.   In the case of a violation notice produced by a computer
device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all Violation Notices produced by the device
while under his/her control.



   G.   Business Records - The original or complete copy of the
violation notice shall be retained and kept as a record in the ordinary
course of Village business.



   H.   Prima Facie Evidence - Any violation notice issued, signed and
served in accordance herewith, or a complete copy of the notice, shall be
deemed prima facie correct and shall be considered prima facie evidence of
the facts alleged therein.



   I.   Admissibility - The violation notices shall be admissible in
any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



1-14-4:   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:



   An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate an alleged
Village Code violation on its merits, or to contest the validity of a
violation notice.  Specifically, hearings shall be held to adjudicate
alleged violations of all Village Code sections except those that are
excluded by law from the Village's administrative adjudication system:



   A.   Time and Date - Hearings shall be on the date, time and place
as set forth in the violation notice issued and served.



   B.   Recording - Hearings shall be tape recorded.



   C.   Non-Appearance - Persons who do not appear on their scheduled
hearing date shall have a default judgment entered against them.



   D.   Hearing Rights - Persons appearing to contest an alleged
Village Code violation may be represented by counsel of their own choice at
their own expense, may present witnesses, may present testimony and
documents, may cross examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance
of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production
of relevant documents.



   E.   Evidentiary Standard - The formal and technical rules of
evidence to not apply in an administrative hearing conducted in compliance
with this Chapter.  Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted, pursuant
to state law set forth at 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-6, only if it is of the type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs.



   F.   Determination of Liability - Hearings shall result in a default
judgment, or a determination of liability or non- liability, made by the
Hearing Officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony.  The Hearing
Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties
in accordance with this Chapter and issue a notice of final determination
that shall contain, at a minimum, the following information and warnings:



      1.   The findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer.



      2.   A date by which the violation must be brought into
compliance with the Village Code.



      3.   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed
is a debt due and owing the Village.



      4.   A warning that the findings, decision and order of the
hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a
court of competent jurisdiction.  And in the case in which a defendant fails
to comply with a judgment ordering the correction of a Village Code violation
or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of the Village code
violation, a statement that any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce
the judgment, including but not limited to, attorneys' fees, court costs and
costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, shall be a debt due and
owing the municipality and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.



      5.   A notice of judgment entered by default shall be
forwarded to any person who fails to appear and shall contain the same
information as a determination of liability, but shall also state that the
judgment may be set aside by the hearing officer if, within twenty-one (21)
days of issuance of the judgment, a petition is received stating what the
hearing officer determines is good cause for failure to appear.  The Hearing
Officer, upon making a determination of good cause shall, within the
twenty-one (21) day period, provide the petitioner with notice of a new
hearing date or denial of the petition.  The default judgment shall state
that it shall constitute a final determination of liability if such petition
is not received, if the petition is denied or if after setting of a new
hearing date the person fails to appear.



   G.   Final Determination - The determination of liability shall
constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be
subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law as set forth
in 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.



1-14-5:   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:



   Administrative Review of final determinations issued by the Hearing
Officer under this Title shall be subject to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Law as is set forth in Section 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, which sections are incorporated
herein by reference.



1-14-6:   JUDGMENT AND COLLECTION:



   A.   Enforcement - Upon expiration of the period in which judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of a Village Code violation unless stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the Hearing
Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court
of competent jurisdiction.



   B.   Court Costs, Attorneys' Fees and Costs of Collection - In any
case in which a person has failed to comply with a Hearing Officer's judgment
ordering the correction of a Village Code violation or imposing any fine or
other sanction as a result of a Village Code violation, any expenses incurred
by the Village to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to,
attorneys' fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or 
foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or by
the Hearing Officer shall be a debt due and owing the Village and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.



      1.   Prior to any expenses being fixed by the Hearing Officer
pursuant to this subsection, the Village shall provide notice to the person
that states that the person shall appear at a hearing before the Hearing
Officer to determine whether the person has failed to comply with the
judgment.  The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not
be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served.  If notice
is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin on the date the
notice was deposited in the mail.



      2.   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article 12
of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.) or by the Uniform
Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal
estate, or both, of the person in the amount of any debt due and owing the
Village under this Section.  The lien may be enforced in the same manner as
a judgment lien would be enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction.



      3.   Release of a Recorded Memorandum of Judgment.  Any
memorandum of judgment, recorded pursuant to Section B.2. above, may be
released upon payment to the Village of the judgment amount and, subject to
obtaining the approval of the hearing officer in accordance with Section B.1.
above, payment of the amount expended by the Village to record the memorandum
of judgment, the amount that will be expended by the Village to record the
release (satisfaction) of judgment, and a fee of five hundred and no/100
dollars ($500.00) to cover the Village's administrative costs and expenses,
including legal fees, in preparing and recording the memorandum of judgment
and the release (satisfaction) of judgment.



   C.   Attorney and Collection Agent Fees - In the event a fine or
penalty is assessed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, a default in
the payment of a fine or penalty or any installment of a fine or penalty may
be collected by any means authorized for the collection of monetary
judgments. The Village and the Village attorney or the Finance Director or
their designees may retain attorneys and private collection agents for the
purpose of collecting any default in payment of any fine or penalty imposed
by this Chapter, or any installment of any fine or penalty. Any fees or costs
incurred by the Village with respect to attorneys or private collection
agents retained by the Village shall be charged to the offender.



(Amd. Ord. 5052, 12-21-15)



1-14-7:  ELECTION OF REMEDIES NON-EXCLUSIVE:



   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall prevent the Village from
pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money judgments.



(Ord. 3721, 1-6-03; Amd. Ord. 5023, 9-8-15)



CHAPTER 15
INDEMNIFICATION



SECTION:



1-15-1:   Indemnification



1-15-1:     INDEMNIFICATION:



   A.   The Village Board finds that it is the public policy of the
State of Illinois that members of governmental bodies shall not be liable in
damages for the exercise of their discretion in determining policies.  This
public policy is set forth in 745 ILCS 10/2-201 which provides as follows:



      "Except as otherwise provided by Statute, a public employee
serving in a position involving the determination of policy or the exercise
of discretion is not liable for an injury resulting from his act or omission
in determining policy when acting in the exercise of such discretion even
though abused."



   B.   In light of subsection A above, if any claim or action not
covered by insurance is instituted against any elected or appointed Village
official, employee or authorized volunteer in connection with any act or
omission in determining policy, the Village shall, to the fullest extent
allowed by the law:



      1.   Appear and defend against the claim or action;



      2.   Indemnify the elected or appointed Village official,
employee or authorized volunteer for his or her court costs and attorneys
fees incurred in the defense of such claim or action;



      3.   Pay or indemnify the elected or appointed Village
official, employee or authorized volunteer for a judgment based on such claim
or action; and



      4.   Pay or indemnify the elected or appointed Village
official, employee or authorized volunteer for a compromise or settlement of
such claim or action, provided that the settlement is approved by a majority
of the members of the Board of Trustees.



   The term "elected or appointed Village official" shall mean any former
or current Village President, Trustee or member of any Village board,
committee and commission.



   C.   The foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the
following:



      1.   Any liability, attorneys fees or costs with respect to
any matter in which the elected or appointed Village official, employee or
authorized volunteer is finally adjudged to be guilty of a criminal act. 
(To the extent that any criminal proceeding shall be pending at the time of
indemnification or any criminal proceeding shall thereafter be instituted,
any indemnification paid or promised shall be conditioned upon the
termination of the criminal proceeding without a finding of guilt.);



      2.   Any liability or judgment against an elected or appointed
Village official, employee or authorized volunteer which is payable to the
Village itself or where the Village was injured and the elected or appointed
Village official, employee or authorized volunteer either obtained personal
benefit or financial gain as a result of his or her wrongful conduct;



      3.   Any liability, attorneys fees or costs incurred as a
result of a Village-initiated or approved investigation into the misconduct
of the elected or appointed Village official, employee or authorized
volunteer;



      4.   Any liability, attorneys fees or costs incurred as a
result of the elected or appointed Village official's, employee's or
authorized volunteer's failure to reasonably cooperate or participate in the
defense of any claim, action, suit or proceeding with any person, party or
entity; or



      5.   Any liability excluded by a written waiver from the
elected or appointed Village official, employee or authorized volunteer."



(Ord. 3726, 1-20-03)



TITLE 2 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



CHAPTER  1   GENERAL STATEMENT
         (Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



CHAPTER  2   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY



CHAPTER  3   BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



CHAPTER  4   BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



CHAPTER  5   RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD



CHAPTER  6   HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE



CHAPTER  7   JOINT EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD



CHAPTER  8   VETERANS COMMISSION



CHAPTER  9   PLAN COMMISSION



CHAPTER 10   HEARING OFFICER



CHAPTER 11   OPEN LANDS FUND COMMISSION



CHAPTER 12   MUSEUM DEVELOPMENT AND ADVISORY BOARD



CHAPTER 13   TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
         (Ord. 5271, 2-19-18)



CHAPTER 14   ELECTRICAL COMMISSION



CHAPTER 1
GENERAL STATEMENT



SECTION:



2-1-1:   General Statement



2-1-1:   GENERAL STATEMENT:



   Unless otherwise hereinafter provided or as otherwise provided by
Illinois statute, the following requirements shall be applicable to all
advisory Boards and Commissions of this Title 2:



   (a)   Residency: All Board and Commission members must be residents
of the Village or Village business owners, provided that a majority of the
Board and Commission members are residents of the Village;



   (b)   Agendas: All Boards and Commissions must prepare an agenda for
each meeting, which agenda must be publicly posted;



   (c)   Minutes: All Boards and Commissions must keep and maintain
minutes of each meeting, which minutes shall be submitted to the Village
Board of Trustees and shall contain detailed recommendations where and when
appropriate. Such minutes shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and the
Village Board of Trustees shall provide written responses to the said
recommendations in a timely manner;



   (d)   Chairpersons: The Chairperson of each Board and Commission
shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of
the Village Board of Trustees and the Chairperson’s roles and
responsibilities shall be as follows:



      (i)   Ensure that agendas are prepared for each meeting and to
place items on the agendas;



      (ii)   Preside over and conduct the meetings; and



      (iii)   Act as liaison to the Village President and Board of
Trustees.



   (e)   Trustees’ Participation: Trustees shall not be voting
members of Boards and Commissions, but may act as ex-officio members or
liaisons to the Village President and Board of Trustees as determined
appropriate by the Village President and Board of Trustees;



   (f)   Periodic Review: Following each election cycle for the Village
President, a review of existing advisory Boards and Commissions, and their
affiliated no-for-profit entities, if any, shall be conducted by the Village
President and Board of Trustees. Such review shall include the duties,
responsibilities and by-laws to ensure relevance to current needs and
direction for amendments as deemed appropriate.



(Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY



SECTION:



2-2-1:   Establishment; Purposes; Membership; Statutory Authority



2-2-2:   Limitations



2-2-3:   Definitions



2-2-4:   ESDA Coordinator; Office



2-2-5:   Functions



2-2-6:   Orders, Rules and Regulations



2-2-7:   Utilization fo Existing Agency, Facilities, and Personnel



2-2-8:   Service as Mobile Support Team



2-2-9:   Agreements with Other Political Subdivisions



2-2-10:   Emergency Action



2-2-11:   Compensation



2-2-12:   Reimbursement by State



2-2-13:   Purchases and Expenditures



2-2-14:   Oath



2-2-15:   Local Disaster Emergencies



2-2-16:   Testing of Disaster Warning Devices



2-2-17:   Immunity



2-2-18:   Authority to Accept Services, Gifts, Grants or Loans



2-2-19:   Prohibition of Political Activity



2-2-1:  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSES; MEMBERSHIP; STATUTORY AUTHORITY:



   A.   There is hereby created within the Village governmental
organization an entity to be known as the Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency, hereinafter referred to as the Orland Park ESDA. This entity shall be
responsible for the coordination of all emergency management programs within
its jurisdiction and with private organizations, other political
subdivisions, the State and Federal government in accordance with the
provisions of “The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act”, 20 ILCS
3305/1, et seq., hereinafter “The Act.”



   B.   The purpose of the Orland Park ESDA shall be the coordination
of emergency services functions, which may be necessary for or proper to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury, and damage resulting from any
natural or technological causes.



   C.   The Orland Park ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such
additional members as may be selected by the Coordinator and approved by the
Chief of Police.



   D.   All emergency services functions of the Orland Park ESDA shall
at all times be in accordance with the provisions of the Act and all rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-2:  LIMITATIONS:



   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to:



   A.   Interfere with the course or conduct of a labor dispute, except
that actions otherwise authorized by this Ordinance or other laws may be
taken when necessary to mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health
or safety;



   B.   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public
affairs; but any communications facility or organization (including but not
limited to radio and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may
be requested to transmit or print public service messages furnishing
information or instructions in connection with a disaster;



   C.   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
fire fighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of
any personnel thereof, when on active duty; but State and political
subdivision Emergency Operations Plan shall place reliance upon the forces
available for performance of functions related to emergency management;



   D.   Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the Village
President or designee to proclaim martial law or exercise any other powers
vested in him/her under the constitution, statutes, or Codes or Ordinances of
this Village, independent of or in conjunction with any provisions of this
ESDA Ordinance; limit the Village’s home rule authority; or prohibit any
contract or association pursuant to Article VII, Section 10 of the Illinois
Constitution.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-3:  DEFINITIONS:



   A.   “Act” means the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act,
or IEMA.



   B.   “Administrative Code 301" means Title 29, Chapter I,
Subchapter C, Part 301, which establishes requirements for emergency
operations plans; exercises of emergency operations plans; accreditation and
certification of ESDAs; workers’ compensation coverage and workers’
occupational diseases coverage for volunteers; and the emergency management
assistance grant program. The provisions of this Part apply to all emergency
services and disaster agencies established pursuant to the Act.



   C.   “Coordinator” means the staff assistant to the Village
Manager with the duty of coordinating the emergency management programs of
the Village.



   D.   “Disaster” means an occurrence or threat of widespread or
severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural
or technological cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake,
wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring
emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination,
blight, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought,
infestation, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, explosion,
riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action.



   E.   “Emergency Management”: means the efforts of the federal,
state and local governments to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, implement and
maintain programs for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and
recovery.



   F.   “Emergency Services and Disaster Agency” means the agency
established by the Village Code within the Village of Orland Park to
coordinate the Emergency Management Program within its jurisdiction and with
private organizations, other political subdivisions, the state and federal
governments.



   G.   “Emergency Operations Plan” means the written plan of the
Village and its departments and other stakeholders describing the
organization, mission, and functions of the village government and supporting
services for responding to and recovering from disasters.



   H.   “Emergency Services” means the coordination of such
functions by the Village and other political subdivision, other than
functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be
necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury and
damage resulting from any natural or technological causes. These functions
include, without limitation, direction and control, communications,
warning/emergency information, public information, disaster
intelligence/damage assessment, evacuation, mass care, health and medical,
mortuary services, resource management and other functions related to
civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or
incidental to protecting life or property.



   I.   “Illinois Emergency Management Agency” or “IEMA” means
the agency established by the Act within the executive branch of State
Government responsible for coordination of the overall emergency management
program of the State and with private organizations, political subdivisions
and the federal government.



   J.   “Mobile Support Team” means the utilization of personnel to
be dispatched by the Governor, or, if he/she so authorizes the IEMA Director,
to supplement local political subdivisions for emergency management programs
in response to a disaster.



   K.   “Municipality” means any city, village or incorporated town.



   L.   “National Incident Management System (NIMS)” means
emergency management in the United States is done at the local and state
level. The Department of Homeland Security has standardize equipment,
organizational structures, and terminology to create better response and
preparedness to large and small scale disasters across the country. The
National Incident Management System is a collection of principles and methods
that is utilized by local, state, federal emergency managers as well as the
private sector and NGOs. NIMS aims to better improve the nation’s response
to emergencies. Its goal is a better system that can more efficiently
allocate resources in the event of a disaster and facilitate cooperation
among diverse entities and agencies.



   M.   “Political Subdivision” means any county, city, village,
incorporated town or township if the township is in a county having a
population of more than 2,000,000.



   N.   “Principal Executive Officer” means chairman of the county
board, supervisor of a township if the township is in a county having a
population of more than 2,000,000, mayor of a city or incorporated town,
president of a village, or in their absence or disability, the interim
successor as established pursuant to Section 7 of the Emergency Interim
Executive Succession Act.



(5 ILCS 275). (Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-4:  ESDA COORDINATOR; OFFICE:



   A.   The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the
Village Manager and shall serve until removed by same.



   B.   The ESDA Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to
the direction and control of that Village President and/or the Police Chief.



   C.   The ESDA shall have an office and the Village Manager is
authorized to designate space in a Village building, or elsewhere, as may be
provided for the ESDA.



   D.   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to
serve as the Coordinator, the Police Chief and/or his/her designee shall be
and act as Temporary Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided
herein.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-5:  FUNCTIONS:



   A.   The Village of Orland Park shall be within the jurisdiction of
and served by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and by an Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency responsible for emergency management programs.



   B.   The Village Manager, or his/her interim emergency successor,
shall notify the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Region 4 Coordinator
and the Cook County Emergency Management Agency of the manner in which the
Village is providing or securing emergency management, identify the executive
head of the ESDA and furnish additional information relating thereto as the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency requires.



   C.   The ESDA Coordinator shall prepare and keep current an
Emergency Operations Plan for the ESDA geographic boundaries. It shall be
submitted to the IEMA and the Cook County Emergency Management Agency for
review and approval, in accordance with paragraph of Section 10 of the Act
and the Administrative Code 301.



   D.   The ESDA Coordinator shall prepare and distribute to all
appropriate officials in written form a clear and complete statement of the
emergency management responsibilities of all Village departments and
officials and of the disaster chain of command.



   E.   The ESDA Coordinator shall coordinate emergency management
functions within the Village limits as are prescribed in and by the Orland
Park Emergency Operations Plan under the National Incident Management System,
and programs, orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency and in addition, shall conduct such
functions outside of those territorial limits as may be required pursuant to
such mutual aid agreements and compacts as are entered into under
subparagraph 5 of paragraph c of Section 6 of the Act.



   F.   The Village of Orland Park upon advice from the ESDA
Coordinator and/or the Police Chief may enter into contracts and incur
obligations necessary to place it in a position effectively to combat such
disasters in order to protect the health and safety of persons and to protect
property, and to provide emergency assistance to victims of those disasters.
If such a disaster occurs, the Village may exercise the powers vested under
this Section in the light of the exigencies of the disaster and, excepting
mandatory constitutional requirements, without regard to the procedures and
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering into contacts, the incurring of obligations, the
employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of
supplies and materials, and the appropriation, expenditure and disposition of
public funds and property.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-6:  ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:



   A.   The Village Board shall have the authority to promulgate
orders, rules and regulations upon the advice of the ESDA Coordinator and/or
the Police Chief for the purpose of emergency management and in times of
disaster.



   B.   The ESDA shall execute and enforce such orders, rules and
regulations as may be made by the Village Manager or his interim emergency
successor under the authority of the IEMA Act. The ESDA shall have available
for inspection at its office all orders, rules and regulations made by the
Village Manager or his interim emergency successor, or under the Village
Manager authority and which have been provided by the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-7:  UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES, AND PERSONNEL:



   The ESDA acting through the Village Manager or his/her interim
emergency successor may utilize the services, equipment, supplies and
facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies within its
jurisdiction the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and personnel
of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed, upon request, to
cooperate with and extend such services and facilities as may be needed.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-8:  SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:



   A.   All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency as provided by law.



   B.   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by
the Director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency.



   C.   Any member of a mobile support team, who is a Village employee
or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State
Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights
and immunities incident to such employment or office.  Any such member who
is not a paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving, shall be
entitled to at least one dollar per year compensation from the State of
Illinois.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-9:  AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:



   The ESDA Coordinator may, in collaboration with other public agencies
within his/her immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual
aid arrangements with other political subdivisions or municipalities within
this State for reciprocal disaster response and recovery assistance in case a
disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted. Such mutual aid shall not,
however, be effective unless and until approved by each of such political
subdivisions. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the Orland Park
Emergency Operations Plan and the Village Emergency Management Program, and
in the event of such a disaster as described in Section 4 of the Act; it
shall be the duty of the ESDA to render assistance in accordance with the
provisions of such mutual aid arrangements.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-10:  EMERGENCY ACTION:



   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other
hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of
the Village ESDA to cooperate fully with the State of Illinois ESDA and with
the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-11:  COMPENSATION:



Members of the Village ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the
Village, if called for training by the State Director of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency shall receive for the time spent in such training
the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not
such Village employees or officers shall receive for such training time such
compensation as may be established by the Village President and Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-12:  REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:



   The Village Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund,
any reimbursement by the State of Illinois to the Village for expenses
incident to training members of the Village ESDA as prescribed by the State
Director of ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a
mobile support team while serving outside the Village in response to a call
by the Governor or State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other
reimbursement made by the State incident to ESDA activities as provided by
law.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-13:  PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:



   The Board of Trustees may on recommendation of the Village Coordinator
of ESDA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village
in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion
of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and
safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the
case of such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.



   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator
of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in
view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or
obligations, as authorized by “The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency Act of 1975", as amended; provided, that if the Village President is
available at such time, the Coordinator shall act subject to the direction
and restrictions imposed by said Village President.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-14:  OATH:



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:



   "I, ______________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the
United States and territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both
public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take
this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion;
and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am
about to enter.  And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate,
nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of
this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated
with the Village ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor become a member
of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.”



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-15:  LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:



   A.   A local disaster may be declared only by the Village President,
or his/her interim emergency successor, as provided in Section 7 of the
Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act (5 ILCS 275/7 et seq.). It shall
not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of 7 days except by or
with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Village Clerk.



   B.   The effect of a Declaration of Disaster is to activate the
Emergency Operations Plan of the Village and to authorize the furnishing of
aid and assistance thereunder.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-16:  TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICES:



   A.   The ESDA shall be allowed to test disaster-warning devices
including outdoor warning sirens on the first Tuesday of each month at 10
o'clock in the morning.



   B.   The ESDA may also test disaster-warning devices including
outdoor warning sirens during disaster training exercises that are
specifically and expressly approved in advance by the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-17:  IMMUNITY:



   Neither the Village, any political subdivision of the Village, nor,
except in cases of negligence or willful misconduct, the Village President or
his/her interim emergency successor, the ESDA Coordinator, the Police Chief
or any department head of the Village, or the agents, employees, volunteer or
representatives of any of them, engaged in any emergency management response
or recovery activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with the
IEMA Act or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to the IEMA Act is
liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a
result of such activity. This Section does not, however, affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he/she would otherwise be entitled
under this IEMA Act under the Workers’ Compensation Act or the Workers'
Occupational Diseases Act, or under any pension law, and this Section does
not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or
compensation under any Act of Congress.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-18:  AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS:



   A.   Whenever the federal government or any agency or officer
thereof or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the
Village, services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by the way of
gift or grant, for purposes of emergency management, the Village, acting
through the Village President or his/her interim emergency successor, may
accept such offer and upon such acceptance, may authorize an officer of the
Village to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on
behalf of the Village.



   B.   The Village, acting through the Village President or his/her
interim emergency successor, shall have the authority to establish a special
fund if needed to accept such gifts, grants or loans. The establishment of
such a special fund shall be in accordance with all Village ordinances
relating to this subject matter and the laws of the State of Illinois. All
services, gifts, grants or loans accepted pursuant to the Section shall be
subject to Village auditing procedures (20 ILCS 3305/17).



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



2-2-19:  PROHIBITION OF POLITICAL ACTIVITY:



   The ESDA established by this Ordinance shall not be employed directly
or indirectly by any person for political purposes.



(Ord. 5365, 12-17-18)



CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



SECTION:



2-3-1:   Appointments



2-3-2:   General Duties



2-3-1:  APPOINTMENTS:



   There is hereby established the Board of Local Improvements for the
Village, which shall consist of the Village President and all the members of
the Board of Trustees.



2-3-2:  GENERAL DUTIES:



   The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it by Statute or Village ordinance.  (65 ILCS 5/9-2-7;
Ord. 352, 9-11-67)



CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



SECTION:



2-4-1:   Board Established



2-4-2:   Qualifications



2-4-3:   Rules, Organization of the Board



2-4-4:   Duties Regarding Police and Fire Departments



2-4-4-1:   Appointments



2-4-4-2:   Hearings



2-4-4-3:   Additional Duties



2-4-1:  BOARD ESTABLISHED:



   There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners which
Board shall function in conformity with Division 2.1 of Chapter 65, Act 5,
Article 10 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.  65 ILCS 5/10-2.1 et seq. 
This Board will consist of three (3) members, all of whom shall be appointed
by the President with the consent of the Board of Trustees, whose terms of
office shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors shall
be appointed by the Village President and Board of Trustees.



2-4-2:  QUALIFICATIONS:



   The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall possess
the qualifications required of other officers of the Village, shall take oath
or affirmation of office, and give bond in the same manner as other appointed
officers of the Village. 



   No person holding an office under the Village shall be a member of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or the Secretary thereof.  The
acceptance of any such office by a member of the Board shall be treated as a
resignation of his or her office as a member of the Board or the Secretary
thereof.  No person shall be appointed a member of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage up to the
degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the Village.  No more
than two members of said Board shall belong to the same political party
existing in the Village at the time of such appointments and as defined in
Section 10-2 of the State Election Code.  If only one or no political party
exists in the Village at the time of such appointments, then State or
national political party affiliations shall be considered in making such
appointments.  Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the
person appointed as a member of the Board.



   Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written
charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty days in his, her
or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the Board of Trustees of
the Village.  A majority vote of the elected members of such governing body
shall be required to remove any such member from office.



2-4-3:  RULES, ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD:



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall make such rules to
carry out the purpose of this Chapter, shall make such appointments and
removals, and shall have such other and further powers as are provided by
Statute.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may employ a secretary or
may designate one of its own members to act as secretary.  The secretary
shall keep the minutes of the Board's proceedings, shall be custodian of all
papers pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held, and shall perform such other duties as the Board shall
prescribe.  The secretary may be paid a reasonable compensation for
services, to be fixed by the Board of Trustees.  (Ord. 484, 4-24-72)



2-4-4:  DUTIES REGARDING FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS:



2-4-4-1:  APPOINTMENTS:



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all officers
of the Police Department of the Village, except the Chief of Police who shall
be appointed by the Village Manager, provided that all appointments to such
department other than that of the lowest rank shall be from the rank next
below that to which the appointment shall be made, except in the appointment
of the Chief of Police who shall be appointed by the Village Manager.  (Ord.
1292, 11-7-83)



2-4-4-2:  HEARINGS:



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall hold hearings on any
charges brought against any policeman or fireman, except the Chief of Police
or Fire Chief, as provided by Statute.



2-4-4-3:  ADDITIONAL DUTIES:



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall perform any additional
duties required by Statute.



(65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.; Ord. 484, 4-24-72)



CHAPTER 5
RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD



SECTION:



2-5-1:   Recreation Advisory Board Established; Members



2-5-2:   Functions and Duties



2-5-1:  RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS:



   There is hereby established a Board to be known as the Recreation
Advisory Board of the Village.



   The Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of thirteen (13) members to
be appointed by the President of the Village, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees.  Members shall serve for one (1) year terms, which
shall begin on the first Monday in June and shall expire on the first Monday
in June of the following year.  One (1) of the members of said board shall
be a person who is a teenager and one (1) of the members of said Board may be
a resident of unincorporated Orland Township. At least one (1) member from
each of the Open Lands Fund Commission, Museum Development and Advisory
Board, Economic Development Advisory Board and Stellwagen Family Farm
Foundation Board of Directors shall also be appointed to the Recreation
Advisory Board to facilitate communication with those Boards and
Commissions. 



(Ord. 2735, 5-15-95; Amd. Ord. 5287, 4-2-18)



   (a)   Public Arts Subcommittee.



      1.   A Public Arts Subcommittee that focuses on public arts
shall be established and shall consist of three (3) persons who are members
of the Recreation Advisory Board and who shall be appointed by the Village
President with advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



      2.   The Subcommittee will be responsible for promoting
programming of the public arts in the Village.



      3.   The Subcommittee will act as liaison with the Orland Park
Public Library regarding public arts programs.



   (b)   Additional Subcommittee. An additional Subcommittee of said
Recreation Advisory Board consisting of members of the Recreation Advisory
Board may be created by the Chairperson with advice and consent of the
members of the Recreation Advisory Board. The responsibilities of such
Subcommittee shall be as determined by the Recreation Advisory Board and
approved by the Village Board of Trustees.



(Amd. Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



2-5-2:  FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES:



   The Recreation Advisory Board created hereunder shall advise the
Recreation Department, the Parks and Grounds Department, the Village
President and Board of Trustees while performing the following functions:



   1.   Advise and make recommendations on field and facility usage and
scheduling priorities at those locations.



   2.   Advise and make recommendations as to equipment, facilities,
personnel, programs and activities in the operation and maintenance of a
recreation system.



   3.   Advise and make recommendations to the Board of Trustees as to
the suitability of sites for park and recreation purposes with respect to
tracts of real estate referred to and for consideration by the Board of
Trustees.



   4.   Advise and make recommendations on programming and activities
within the Recreation Department.



   5.   Advise, make recommendations and coordinate with the Orland
Park Public Library on programming related to public arts.



   6.   Assist the Recreation Department with sponsorship development.



   7.   Assist the Recreation Department with special events as
volunteers.



   8.   Coordinate with the Economic Development Advisory Board to
assist with economic development that pertains to the use of recreational
facilities.



(Ord. 1077, passed 1-12-81; Amd. Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



CHAPTER 6
HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE



SECTION:



2-6-1:   Committee Created



2-6-2:   Membership; Functions



2-6-3:   Powers and Duties



2-6-4:   Meetings



2-6-1:  COMMITTEE CREATED:



   There is hereby created a committee known as the Housing Advisory
Committee for the Village hereinafter called Committee.  The Committee shall
be an ad hoc Committee, activated upon request of the Village President and
Board of Trustees.  (Ord. 1720, 11-23-87, Amd. Ord. 3268, 7-6-99)



2-6-2:  MEMBERSHIP; FUNCTIONS:



   Said ad hoc Committee, when activated by the Village President and
Board of Trustees shall be comprised of the members of the Village Plan
Commission acting from time to time plus four (4) other persons appointed
jointly by the Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 3268, 7-6-99)



2-6-3:  POWERS AND DUTIES:



   The Committee created hereunder shall be an ad hoc Committee activated
upon request of the Village President and Board of Trustees and assigned
specific housing related projects.  Such projects shall include, but not
limited to, the following:



   1.   Evaluate senior housing options and provide recommendations.



   2.   Evaluate affordable housing options and provide recommendations.



   3.   Explore other housing types such as neo-traditional housing,
dwellings in mixed-use buildings, and accessory dwellings, and provide
recommendations.



   4.   Review any neighborhoods with problems and make
recommendations.  (Ord. 3268, 7-6-99)



2-6-4:  MEETINGS:



   The members of the Committee shall meet as often as said Committee
members shall deem necessary and shall make reports of their findings and
recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees as soon as
practicable. 



CHAPTER 7
JOINT EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD



SECTION:



2-7-1:   Establishment



2-7-2:   Boundaries



2-7-3:   Composition of Board



2-7-4:   Public Safety Answering Point



2-7-5:   Powers and Duties of Board



2-7-6:   Term of Office



2-7-7:   Vacancies



2-7-8:   Annual Meeting



2-7-9:   Board Advised as to Appointments



2-7-10:   Transfer of Funds



2-7-1:  ESTABLISHMENT:



   The Joint Emergency Telephone System Board of the Village of Orland
Park and the Village of Orland Hills is hereby established.



2-7-2:  BOUNDARIES:



   The Village of Orland Hills shall be part of the Orland Park 911
Emergency Telephone System for the purpose of providing 911 emergency
telephone service to all residents residing within the boundaries of the
Village of Orland Hills.



2-7-3:  COMPOSITION OF BOARD:



   The Joint Emergency Telephone System Board of Orland Park and Orland
Hills, Illinois, shall consist of five (5) members, appointed on the basis of
their experience and ability.  The members of the Joint Emergency Telephone
System Board of Orland Park and Orland Hills, Illinois, shall serve without
compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses.



2-7-4:  PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT:



   1   Four (4) members of the Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
of Orland Park and Orland Hills shall be representatives of the Village of
Orland Park, which will be the public safety answering point in the enhanced
911 system implemented in the Village of Orland Park.



   2.     One (1) member of the Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
shall be a representative of the Village of Orland Hills Trustees.  The
Orland Fire District representative shall be appointed by the Village
President of the Village of Orland Park, upon the recommendation of the Board
of Trustees of the Orland Fire Protection District.



   Members representing the Village of Orland Park shall be appointed by
the Village President of Orland Park, with the advice and consent of the
Village of Orland Park Trustees.  Members representing the Village of Orland
Hills shall be appointed by the Village President of Orland Park, upon the
recommendation of the Village President of the Village of Orland Hills, with
the advice and consent of the Village of Orland Hills Trustees.  (Ord. 4653,
6-20-11)



2-7-5:  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:



   The powers and duties of the Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
shall be as defined by the intergovernmental cooperation agreement
establishing the Joint Emergency Telephone System Board.  Such powers and
duties shall include, but need not be limited to the following:



   1.   Planning a 911 system.



   2.   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading or
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems.



   3.   Receiving monies from the surcharge imposed under Section 50
ILCS 750/15.3 and from any other source, for deposit into the Emergency
Telephone System Fund.



   4.   Authorizing all disbursements from said Fund.



   5.   Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the
implementation or upgrade of the system.



   6.   To adopt bylaws providing for its procedures, organization, and
officers; provided, however, that the Village of Orland Park shall be the
custodian of the Emergency Telephone System funds.



   7.   To do all things related to the purposes for which it was
created not prohibited by law.



2-7-6:  TERM OF OFFICE:



   Members shall serve for one-year terms, which shall begin on the first
Monday in June and expire on the first Monday in June of the following
year.  There shall be no limit to the number of terms a member may serve. 
(Ord. 2735, 5-15-95)



2-7-7:  VACANCIES:



   A vacancy on the Joint Emergency Telephone System Board may be
occasioned by the resignation, death, physical or mental capacity, or
continued absences from scheduled meetings by a member.  The appointing
authority shall have the power to determine the existence of a vacancy.  All
vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days from the date the appointing
authority determines a vacancy to exist in the same manner as provided for
the making of the original appointment.



2-7-8:  ANNUAL MEETING:



   There shall be an annual meeting of the Joint Emergency Telephone
System Board in the month of April of each calendar year.  The original
Joint Emergency Telephone System Board and such successor Joint Emergency
Telephone System Board, shall conduct its organizational activities at such
meeting.  Other regular and special meetings shall be held and convened as
the Joint Emergency Telephone System Board may provide in its rules.  The
Village President of the Village of Orland Park has the authority to call the
Joint Emergency Telephone System Board into session by giving each member
thereof written notice at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time
the meeting is to begin.  The regular meeting place of the Joint Emergency
Telephone System Board shall be the Village of Orland Park police facility,
15100 S. Ravinia Avenue, Orland Park, Illinois, but the Joint Emergency
Telephone System Board may schedule meetings at other locations.  (Ord.
4653, 6-20-11)



2-7-9:  BOARD ADVISED AS TO APPOINTMENT:



   All members of the Joint Emergency Telephone System Board shall be
advised as soon as possible whenever the power of appointment to the Joint
Emergency Telephone System Board is exercised.



2-7-10:  TRANSFER OF FUNDS:



   The Village of Orland Hills shall authorize the transfer of all funds
collected pursuant to said surcharge within its Municipal boundaries to the
Joint Emergency Telephone System Board designated pursuant to Illinois
Compiled Statutes, 1992 Chapter 50, Act 750, Section 15.4 as amended, and
consistent with the terms therein.  (Ord. 1964, 2-5-90)



CHAPTER 8
VETERANS COMMISSION



SECTION:



2-8-1:   Establishment



2-8-2:   Membership; Term; Compensation



2-8-3:   Goals



2-8-4:   Duties



2-8-5:   Meetings



2-8-1:  ESTABLISHMENT:



   There is hereby created a Commission known as the Veterans Commission,
hereinafter referred to as Commission. 



(Ord. 5269, 2-5-18)



2-8-2:  MEMBERSHIP; TERM; COMPENSATION:



   The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the
Village President and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
and one (1) non voting Village staff member (the "Veterans Program
Assistant") appointed by the Village Manager to act as staff liaison and
recording secretary.



   1.   Members shall serve for one year terms, which shall begin on
the first Monday in June and expire on the first Monday in June of the
following year.  Members shall be selected on the basis of experience and/or
knowledge of veteran affairs and concerns, and the members shall have served
in one of the American military branches and have been honorably
discharged.  Members shall serve without compensation. 



   2.   If any member shall fail to attend four (4) regular meetings
within any one year period, without reasonable excuse, such failure shall
constitute sufficient grounds for termination of the member's appointment. 
The chairman shall immediately file notification of nonattendance with the
Village Clerk for placement on the agenda of the Board of Trustees, and the
Board shall, after notice to the member, by appropriate action, consider
whether to terminate the member's appointment.  If the decision of the Board
is to terminate the appointment, the vacancy thereby created shall be filled
as soon as reasonably practical.



   3.   A special meeting may be called by the Village President or by
request of three (3) Commission members.



   4.   A quorum may be the majority of the actually appointed members.



   5.   The chairman shall be a member designated, at the time of
appointment, by the Village President.



   6.   Any expenditures shall only be those sums as may be approved by
the President and Board of Trustees. 



(Ord. 5269, 2-5-18)



2-8-3:  GOALS:



   The goals of the Commission shall be as follows:



   1.   Promote veterans' awareness and welfare within the Village.



   2.   Maintain a suitable memorial within the Village for Orland Park
veterans.



   3.   Represent the Village at veterans' functions.



   4.   Promote the basic American values within the Village.



   5.   Raise funds to be used for Village veteran activities and/or
donated to groups providing veteran assistance. 



(Ord. 5269, 2-5-18)



2-8-4:  DUTIES:



   The Commission functions hereunder shall include, but not be limited to
the following:



   1.   Study and consider possible activities, informational,
educational and recreational, which may be planned by the Village relating to
veterans' affairs.



   2.   Recommend to the President and Board of Trustees activities
relating to veteran affairs.



   3.   Provide joint sponsorship of programs with Village veterans'
groups such as Veterans of Foreign Wars and the American Legion.



   4.   Plan and give programs relating to veterans' affairs in the
school districts.



   5.   Provide a program for special recognition of veterans and their
families.



   6.   Provide plaques of recognition for Village residents who become
candidates in the armed forces academies.



   7.   Assist in fund raising activities to fund Commission activities
as described in this Chapter and to fund groups providing veteran assistance.



   8.   Recommend to the Village President and Board of Trustees the
veterans groups deserving of financial assistance.



   9.   Represent the Village at veterans' functions, including the
planning, preparation, organization and conducting of such functions. 



(Ord. 5269, 2-5-18)



2-8-5:  MEETINGS:



   The Commission shall meet at least monthly, except there will be no
regularly scheduled meetings during July and August, and the Commission shall
file a report of recommendations with the President and Board of Trustees on
or before December 31 of each year. 



(Ord. 5269, 2-5-18)



CHAPTER 9
PLAN COMMISSION



SECTION:



2-9-1:   Membership; Term; Removal; Compensation



2-9-2:   Duties



2-9-1:  MEMBERSHIP; TERM; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION:



   The membership of, term of office on, appointment to, and removal from
the Plan Commission, established by the Village's Land Development Code, and
the filling of vacancies thereon, shall be as follows:



   1.   The Plan Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members to
be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees.  Members of the Board of Trustees may submit names of candidates
to the President.



   2.   Members may be removed for cause prior to the expiration of
their term of appointment by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees.



   3.   All members shall serve terms of one (1) year.  Members may
serve more than one term.  All terms shall commence on the first Monday in
June and expire on the first Monday of the following June.



   4.   Members shall be compensated in a manner as may be authorized
by the Board of Trustees.



   5.   The President and the Board of Trustees shall appoint, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, one of the members as Chairman
and one as Vice-Chairman.  In making such appointment, the President may
consider the recommendations of the Plan Commission.  In the absence of the
Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall act as Chairman and shall have all powers
of the Chairman.



   6.   The presiding officer of any meeting of the Commission shall
administer oaths, shall be in charge of all proceedings before the
Commission, and shall take such actions as shall be necessary to preserve
order and the integrity of all proceedings before the Commission.



   7.   If any member of the Commission shall fail to attend three (3)
regular meetings of the Commission within any three-month period, without
reasonable excuse, such failure shall constitute sufficient grounds for
termination of the member's appointment.  The Chairman or the Vice-Chairman,
as the case may be, shall immediately file a notification of such
non-attendance with the Village Clerk for placement on the agenda of the
Board of Trustees, and the Board shall, after notification to the Plan
Commission member, by appropriate action, consider whether to terminate the
appointment of such person.  If the decision of the Board is to terminate
the person, the vacancy thereby created shall be filled, for the remainder of
the term, as soon as practicable.



(Ord. 2768, 8-7-95)



2-9-2:  DUTIES:



   The duties of the Plan Commission shall be as provided in the Land
Development Code.



CHAPTER 10
HEARING OFFICER



SECTION:



2-10-1:   Appointment; Term; Removal; Compensation



2-10-2:   Duties



2-10-1:  APPOINTMENT; TERM; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION:



   Appointment to and removal from the position of Hearing Officer,
established by the Village's Land Development Code, shall be as follows:



   A.   There shall be up to five (5) Hearing Officers to be appointed
by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. (Ord.
3034, 8-4-97)



   B.   Hearing Officers may be removed before the expiration of term
of their appointment for cause by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees.



   C.   Hearing Officers shall serve terms of one (1) year.  Hearing
Officers serving on the date of this Ordinance shall be considered as serving
terms, which expire on the first Monday in June 1996.  Thereafter, terms
shall commence on the first Monday in June and expire on the first Monday of
the following June.



   D.   Hearing Officers shall be compensated in a manner as may be
authorized by the Board of Trustees.



2-10-2:  DUTIES:



   The duties of Hearing Officers shall be as provided in the Land
Development Code.



CHAPTER 11
OPEN LANDS FUND COMMISSION



SECTION:



2-11-1:   Establishment; Membership:



2-11-2:   Powers And Duties:



2-11-3:   Rules:



2-11-1:  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP:



   (a)   An Open Lands Fund Commission ("Commission") is hereby created
for the Village.  The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members
appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Board of
Trustees, one (1) of whom shall be appointed by the Village President to act
as Chairperson.  The appointments will be made on the basis of areas of
interest or expertise.  Each Commission member shall be a resident of the
Village of Orland Park. 



(Ord. 3169, 9-21-98; Amd. Ord. 4144, 6-5-06; Am. Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



   (b)   Members shall be appointed for one (1) year terms beginning on
the first Monday in June of each year and expiring on the first Monday in
June of the following year.  The Village President may remove any member for
any reason whatsoever, subject to the approval of the Village Board of
Trustees.  Vacancies on the Board shall be filled as soon as possible for
the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant.



   (c)   The Chairperson of the Commission shall serve in that capacity
until his/her resignation, removal, replacement, or dissolution of the
Commission.  The Village President may at any time replace the Chairperson
with any other member of the Commission for any reason whatsoever.



   (d)   The position of any Commission member who fails to attend
three (3) consecutive Commission meetings without a valid reason, or who fail
to attend one half (1/2) of the total of all Commission meetings scheduled or
called during any one (1) year period may be declared vacant by a majority
vote of the remaining members of the Commission.



   (e)   Commission members shall serve without compensation.



(Amd. Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



2-11-2:  POWERS AND DUTIES:



   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (a)   Act as an Advisory Commission to the Board of Trustees.



   (b)   Review, evaluate, identify and advise the present and future
needs of the community to:



      (i)   preserve natural areas, including habitats for
endangered and threatened species, high quality natural communities, wetlands
and other areas with unique or unusual natural heritage qualities.



      (ii)   acquire natural areas, including habitats for
endangered and threatened species, high quality natural communities, wetlands
and other areas with unique or unusual natural heritage qualities.



   (c)   Review, evaluate and recommend to the Village Board all
sources of funding for maintaining and acquiring open lands which are
available to the Village under any federal or state programs, grants or
legislation.



   (d)   Review the possible need for professional consultant(s) to
assist in the open lands acquisition and funding review and evaluation
process and to make recommendations to the Village Board for the selection of
a consultant(s) and to describe the work which the consultant(s) will be
retained to perform.



   (e)   Perform such other duties as the Village Board may direct.



(Amd. Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



2-11-3:  RULES:



   (a)   The Commission may establish rules concerning procedure,
meetings and operation of the Commission consistent with the rules of the
Village Board and in accord with all codes, ordinances and resolutions of the
Village and applicable law.



   (b)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and
in conformance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act.



   (c)   A quorum for any meeting shall be a majority of all duly
appointed members of the Commission.



   (d)   The Commission shall meet once each month and at such other
times as it may deem necessary; special meetings may be called by the
Chairperson.



   (e)   The Commission shall keep written records of all its meetings
and proceedings in conformance with the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act.  Copies of minutes shall be filed with the Village Clerk.



(Amd. Ord. 5283, 3-19-18)



CHAPTER 12
MUSEUM DEVELOPMENT AND ADVISORY BOARD



SECTION:



2-12-1:   Establishment



2-12-2:   Membership; Term; Compensation



2-12-3:   Chairperson of Advisory Board



2-12-4:   Powers and Duties



2-12-5:   Meetings



2-12-1:     ESTABLISHMENT:



A Museum Development and Advisory Board ("Advisory Board") is hereby created
for the Village.  (Ord. 4965, 2-16-15)



2-12-2:     MEMBERSHIP; TERM; COMPENSATION:



The Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the Board of Trustees.  The appointments will be
made on the basis of areas of interest or expertise.  Each Advisory Board
member need not be a resident of the Village.



   1.   Members of the Advisory Board shall be appointed for two (2)
year terms and until their respective successors have been appointed, which
terms shall begin on the first Monday in June and expire on the first Monday
in June two (2) years thereafter.  The Mayor may remove any member for any
reason whatsoever, subject to the approval of the Village Board.  Vacancies
on the Advisory  Board shall be filled as soon as possible for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has become vacant, whether by removal or
otherwise.



   2.   If a member without a valid reason fails to attend three (3)
consecutive meetings of the Museum Board or fails to attend one-half of the
total of all Museum Board meetings scheduled or called during any twelve-
(12-)month period, and if a majority of the remaining members of the Museum
Board vote to declare the position of such member vacant, then such member
shall likewise be deemed to have resigned from the Museum Board.



   3.   Museum Board members shall serve without compensation.  (Ord.
4965, 2-16-15)



2-12-3:     CHAIRPERSON OF ADVISORY BOARD:



The Museum Board shall select from its membership a chairperson who shall
serve for a term of one (1) year and may be re elected to that position. 
(Ord. 4965, 2-16-15)



2-12-4:     POWERS AND DUTIES:



The Museum Development and Advisory Board shall have the following powers and
duties:



   1.   To act as an Advisory Board to the Board of Trustees.



   2.   To review, evaluate and identify present and future activities
to acquire, preserve and exhibit materials of historical significance to the
community, and to report annually to the Village, in writing, giving a
comprehensive and current review of Orland Park historical establishment and
preservation activities.



   3.   To review and evaluate present and future availability of real
and personal property of historical significance.



   4.   To recommend amendments to the Village Code and/or Land
Development Code so as to eliminate unnecessary impediments to the
establishment, operation and maintenance of an Orland Park Museum and the
preservation and exhibition of historical buildings and artifacts.



   5.   To conduct public information programs on museum activities and
collections and opportunities for members of the community to donate
historical property, photographs, objects and materials.



(Ord. 4965, 2-16-15)



2-12-5:     MEETINGS:



The Museum Board may establish rules concerning procedure, meeting and
operation of the Museum Board.  The rules shall be consistent with the rules
of the Village Board and shall also be in accord with all other codes,
ordinances, and resolutions of the Village and applicable law. 



   1.   All meetings of the Museum Board shall be open to the public
and in conformance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act.



   2.   A quorum for any meeting shall be a majority of all duly
appointed members of the Museum Board.



   3.   The Museum Board shall meet at the call of its Chair, but not
less frequently than once every quarter.



   4.   The Museum Board shall keep written records of all its meetings
and proceedings, in conformance with the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act.  (Ord. 4965, 2-16-15)



CHAPTER 13
TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION



SECTION:



2-13-1:   Establishment



2-13-2:   Membership; Term; Compensation



2-13-3:   Chairperson of Commission



2-13-4:   Powers and Duties



2-13-5:   Meetings



2-13-1:     ESTABLISHMENT:



A Technology Commission (“Commission”) is hereby created for the Village.



(Ord. 5271, 2-19-18)



2-13-2:  MEMBERSHIP; TERM; COMPENSATION:



The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.  The
appointments will be made on the basis of areas of interest or expertise in a
technological or scientific background.  Each Commission member must be a
resident of the Village.



   1.   Members of the Commission shall be appointed for one (1) year
terms and until their respective successors have been appointed, which terms
shall begin on the first Monday in June and expire on the first Monday in
June of the following year. The Mayor may remove any member for any reason
whatsoever, subject to the approval of the Village Board. Vacancies on the
Commission shall be filled as soon as possible for the unexpired term of the
member whose place has become vacant, whether by removal or otherwise.



   2.   If a member without a valid reason fails to attend three (3)
consecutive meetings of the Commission or fails to attend one-half of the
total of all Commission meetings scheduled or called during any twelve (12)
month period, and if a majority of the remaining members of the Commission
vote to declare the position of such member vacant, then such member shall
likewise be deemed to have resigned from the Commission.



   3.   Commission members shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 5271, 2-19-18)



2-13-3:  CHAIRPERSON OF COMMISSION:



The Commission shall select from its membership a chairperson who shall serve
for a term of one (1) year and may be re-elected to that position. 



(Ord. 5271, 2-19-18)



2-13-4:  POWERS AND DUTIES:



The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   1.   To act as an advisory commission to the Board of Trustees.



   2.   To review, evaluate and identify present and future activities
in order to develop and implement a strategic technology plan for the
Village, and to report annually to the Village, in writing, giving a
comprehensive and current review of Orland Park technology management and
implementation activities.



   3.   To review and evaluate present and future availability of real
and personal property of importance to the Village in advancing the
technological capabilities of Village staff.



   4.   To recommend amendments to the Village Code and/or Land
Development Code so as to eliminate unnecessary impediments to the
implementation of technological strategies and to improve efficiencies in
Village operations.



   5.   To conduct public information programs on advances in science
and technology which may be of interest and use to Village residents and
businesses in their daily activities. 



(Ord. 5271, 2- 19-18)



2-13-5:  MEETINGS:



The Commission may establish rules concerning procedure, meeting and
operation of the Commission.  The rules shall be consistent with the rules
of the Village Board and shall also be in accord with all other codes,
ordinances, and resolutions of the Village and applicable law.



   1.   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and
in conformance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act.



   2.   A quorum for any meeting shall be a majority of all duly
appointed members of the Commission.



   3.   The Commission shall meet at the call of its Chair, but not
less frequently than once every quarter.



   4.   The Commission shall keep written records of all its meetings
and proceedings, in conformance with the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act. 



(Ord. 5271, 2-19-18)



CHAPTER 14
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION



SECTION:



2-14-1:   Electrical Commission Established; Members



2-14-2:   Duties of Commission



2-14-1:  ELECTRICAL COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS:



   There is hereby established a commission which shall be known as the
Electrical Commission of the Village and which shall consist of five (5)
members to be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent
of the Trustees.  One of such members shall be the Chief Electrical
Inspector of the Village who shall also be Chairman of the Commission; of the
other four (4) members, one shall be a registered professional engineer, one
an electrical contractor, one a journeyman electrician and one a full-time
fire inspector employed by a Fire Protection District having territory within
the Village.  If there is no one residing in the Village who is qualified
under any one of these descriptions, the Village President may appointment
some other person to fill such position.  Members shall serve for one year
terms, which shall begin on the first Monday in June and expire on the first
Monday in June of the following year. 



(Ords. 2158, 2735, 5-15-95; Amd. Ord. 4658, 7-5-11)  (65 ILCS 5/11-37-2)



2-14-2:  DUTIES OF COMMISSION:



   It shall be the duty of said Electrical Commission to formulate and
recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment designed to meet the
necessities and conditions that prevail in the Village, to recommend
reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits by the
Electrical Inspection Department and to recommend reasonable fees to be paid
for inspections made by the Electrical Inspection Department.  The standards
and specifications, rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits
and fees so recommended, shall become effective upon the passage of an
ordinance adopting the same by the corporate authorities.  All such fees
shall be paid into the Village Treasury. 



(Ord. 331, 8-8-66)



TITLE 3 PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTIES



CHAPTER  1   PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS



CHAPTER  2   STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS



CHAPTER  3   EXCAVATIONS



CHAPTER  4   SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION



CHAPTER  5   PUBLIC LIBRARY



CHAPTER  6   TREE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



CHAPTER  7   TELECOMMUNICATIONS MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
ACT



CHAPTER  8   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY



CHAPTER  9   SPECIAL EVENTS PERMITS



CHAPTER  10   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS



SECTION:



3-1-1:   Short Title and Purpose



3-1-2:   Definitions



3-1-3:   Park Property



3-1-4:   Sanitation



3-1-5:   Recreational Activities



3-1-6:   Behavior



3-1-7:   Merchandising, Advertising and Signs



3-1-8:   Picnic Areas and Use



3-1-9:   Fund Raising Campaigns



3-1-10:   Motor Vehicles



3-1-11:   Park Operating Policy



3-1-11-1:   Hours



3-1-11-2:   Permit Requirements



3-1-12:   Exception to Regulations



3-1-1:  SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:



   This Chapter shall be known as the "Village of Orland Park Ordinance
Regulating Conduct in Public Parks"; its purpose is to regulate the conduct
of those persons utilizing the Village's parks.



3-1-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and
words shall have the meanings given herein:



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The President and Board of Trustees for the Village
of Orland Park.



   DEPARTMENT:  The Recreation and Parks Department of the Village of
Orland Park.



   DIRECTOR:  The person in charge of the Recreation and Parks Department
of the Village of Orland Park.



   PARK:   A  park, playground, recreation center or any other area in
the Village of Orland Park, owned or used by the Village, and devoted to
active or passive recreation.



   PERSON:  Any individual, firm, partnership, group, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.



   VILLAGE:  The Village of Orland Park, Illinois.



3-1-3:  PARK PROPERTY:



   Certain conduct in respect to park property and natural resources as
hereinafter set forth is prohibited.  No person in a park shall:



   1.   Deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove or
willfully mark any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving
or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal;



   2.   Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition.  No person over the age of five (5) years shall
use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.  Nor shall
any individual remain in or around any restroom or washroom longer than
reasonably necessary for personal hygiene and/or appropriate elimination;



   3.   Dig, or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants,
down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting, or other means or agency, except on special written
permit issued hereunder.



   4.   Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, including tents, or run or
string any public service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except on
special written permit issued hereunder;



   5.   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant.  Nor
shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or
plant.  A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in
any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area;



   6.   Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes;



   7.   Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree or plant;



   8.   Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall he remove or have
in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young
of any reptile, bird, or animal, except fishing shall be permitted in
designated areas;



   9.   Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any
tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances;



   10.   Bring within, have possession or control of, sell or give
away, or drink any alcoholic beverages as defined in the Illinois Liquor
Control Act of 1934 at any time in any said park except as permitted by the
Village President and Board of Trustees.



3-1-4:  SANITATION:



   No person in a park shall:



   1.   Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such
waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may
result in the pollution of said waters; or



   2.   Have brought in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse,
or other trash.  No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be
placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles
are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the
park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of
elsewhere.



3-1-5:  RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES:



   No person in a park shall:



   1.   Enter or attempt to enter ponds or waterways by walking,
diving, swimming or by any other means;



   2.   Launch any boat, raft or other watercraft of any kind from
Village property into any pond or lake, except when the launching is part of
a regularly scheduled program of the Recreation and Park Department;



   3.   Ice fish on any pond, lake or waterway which is under the
jurisdiction of the Village except on Lake Sedgewick at Centennial Park
during an established and supervised program of the Recreation and Park
Department or as may be specifically authorized from time to time by the
Village Board; (Amd. Ord. 4939, 11-3-14)



   4.   Operate a snowmobile;



   5.   Play or practice golf except when such conduct occurs during an
established and supervised program of the Recreation and Park Department;



   6.   Camp or sleep overnight, except on a special written permit
issued hereunder;



   7.   Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown
or otherwise propelled objects such as stones, arrows, javelins or model
airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation;



   8.   Rollerskate on a tennis court or in a parking lot;



   9.   Play any game other than tennis on a tennis court;



          10.   Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time.  No
person shall use, carry, or possess firearms of any description, or
air-rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wild life and dangerous to human safety, or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any kind of
trapping device.  Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is
forbidden;



          11.   Lead, ride or allow to be loose any horse, pony or
riding animal except on a special written permit issued hereunder; or



          12.   Bring or cause to be brought into the park system
upon a regular basis, weekly or daily, any play class, day camp, which may
conflict with regularly scheduled activities, except on a special written
permit issued hereunder.



3-1-6:  BEHAVIOR:



   No person in a park shall:



   1.   Gamble or participate in any game of chance for money or other
valuable thing;



   2.   Solicit alms or otherwise beg;



   3.   Use any abusive, threatening, profane, indecent or obscene
language, or use language calculated to occasion a breach of the peace, or 
commit, perform or induce another to perform any indecent or obscene act or
behavior, or exhibit, possess or transfer any indecent or obscene pictures,
writings or articles of any  kind;



   4.   Permit the running of dogs at large.  All dogs shall be
restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than five feet (5')
in length.  Any person responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic
animal shall immediately remove any animal droppings left by his animal to
the nearest refuse container.  (Ord. 3423, 9-18-00)



   5.   Fly, cause to be flown, or permit any aircraft of any kind to
be flown over the park system at any time at an elevation less than the
minimum safety requirements established by the Civil Aeronautics
Administration or other governmental authority or less than is reasonable and
proper, or so as to endanger the safety of any person or property or land,
cause to be landed, or permit any aircraft to land, except when required by
unavoidable emergency, or pursuant to the direction of the Village President
or other authorized person acting pursuant to law or ordinance relating to
emergency services and disaster operations or civil emergencies or pursuant
to the direction of the Chief of Police or his designee;



   6.   Bring, or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause
to explode or discharge or burn, any fireworks or explosives of inflammable
material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or
highway adjacent thereto.  This prohibition includes any substance,
compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or
compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. 
Exception is made for firework displays sanctioned by the Board of Trustees;



   7.   Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas as may be
designated for fires.  No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter
lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other
inflammable material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street
abutting or contiguous thereto.  The person building a fire shall care and
supervise its burning, and shall completely extinguish the fire prior to
leaving that location;



   8.   Fly, cause to be flown, or permit any model power aircraft of
any kind to be flown without a permit and then only at such places and times
as may from time to time be designated for the purpose;



   9.   Enter any area where persons are prohibited as indicated by
sign or notice, or enter or attempt to enter any building or park area which
is closed to the public, or scheduled for a specific activity unless the
person is invited to attend the activity by a Department employee or a
supervisor of the activity;



   10.   Call or hold any meeting, exhibition or entertainment
involving fifty (50) or more people except pursuant to a written permit
hereunder.



3-1-7:  MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS:



   No person in a park shall:



   1.   Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any such thing.  Exception is made for any Village-wide fair or
celebration sanctioned by the Board of Trustees.



   2.   Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to
any article or service for sale or hire.  Exception is made for any
Village-wide fair or celebration sanctioned by the Board of Trustees.



   3.   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to
be erected any sign whatever.  Exception is made for any Village-wide fair
or celebration sanctioned by the Board of Trustees.



3-1-8:  PICNIC AREAS AND USE:



No person in a park shall:



   1.   Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for the
purpose.  Park employees shall have the authority to regulate the activities
in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum
use for the comfort and convenience of all.  Visitors shall comply with any
directions given to achieve this end.



   2.   Violate the rule that use of the individual fireplaces together
with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "first come, first
served" unless the location is reserved for that person or group.



   3.   Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings
or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of
other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.



   4.   Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished
and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage
and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided.  If
no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be
carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of
elsewhere.



3-1-9:  FUND RAISING CAMPAIGNS:



   The Department shall not lend its name or endorsement to any nationally
or locally not-for-profit organization's fund raising campaign without
approval of the Board of Trustees.  There shall be no endorsement of any
for- profit organization's fund raising campaign.



   If the Board of Trustees approves the endorsement or assistance for a
not-for-profit organization, the activity shall be coordinated by the
Director who will make allowance for the allocation and use of Department
facilities, equipment and services  so not to conflict with Department
programs and services.



   The Department equipment and facilities will be used in accordance with
the following conditions:



   1.   The organization shall pay for Department's staff time used in
set-ups of equipment and facilities;



   2.   Village equipment will remain within the corporate limits of
the Village;



   3.   The application for Village approval shall be made in writing
to the Director not less than thirty (30) days prior to the proposed event;



   4.   The organization, in its application, shall agree to be
responsible for any damage to Village property which may be used;



   5.   The organization, if approved, shall provide a certificate of
insurance to the Village, and the certificate will name the Village an
additional insured in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per
event;



   6.   The approval, by the Board of Trustees, shall be given to the
organization prior to the event.



3-1-10:  MOTOR VEHICLES:



   No person in a park shall:



   1.   Fail to obey any police officers or Village employees who are
authorized and instructed to direct traffic;



   2.   Drive any vehicle, including go-carts, minibikes, or other
motorized vehicles, on any area except the paved parked roads or parking
areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as
temporary parking areas by the Director;



   3.   Change any part or make repair of any kind to any motor vehicle
except such emergency repairs as are necessary to remove a vehicle from the
park or;



   4.   Leave a motor vehicle parked therein after the closing
specified in Section 3-1-11.



(Ord. 1333, 4-9-84)



3-1-11:  PARK OPERATING POLICY:



3-1-11-1:  HOURS:



   The Village parks shall be open each day from daybreak until nine
o'clock 9:00 P.M., except parks with lights and parks wherein Departmentally
scheduled and supervised activities are occurring.  Lighted parks shall
close at ten thirty o'clock 10:30 P.M., and all ballfield lights shall be
extinguished not later than ten forty five o'clock 10:45 P.M.



   No person or his property shall remain in a park after nine o'clock
9:00 P.M. unless:



   1.   He is in a lighted park and remains no later than ten thirty
o'clock 10:30 P.M.; or



   2.   He is participating in a Departmentally scheduled and
supervised activity; or



   3.   He has been granted special written permission hereunder. 
(Ord. 1650, 3-2-87)



3-1-11-2:  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:



   When a permit is required under this Chapter, the activity shall not
take place until a permit has been issued.  The permit application will
state:



   1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;



   2.   The activity with a short description of what is proposed;



   3.   The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;



   4.   The day and hours for which the permit is desired;



   5.   The park or portion thereof for  which  such  permit  is 
desired;



   6.   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;



   7.   Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to evaluate the proposed activity's impact upon the park use so a
fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued can be made.



   The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:



   1.   That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park;



   2.   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation;



   3.   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated
to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;



   4.   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the Village;



   5.   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other
use at the day and hour required in the application.



   Within seven (7) days after receipt of an application, the Director
shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit,
and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within
seven (7) days to the Board of Trustees, which shall consider the application
under the standards set forth in subsection B hereof and sustain or overrule
the Director's decision within fourteen (14) days.



   The decision of the Village President and Board of Trustees shall be
final.



   A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said permit.



   The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for
any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the
negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been
issued.



   The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding
of a violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown.



3-1-12:  EXCEPTION TO REGULATIONS:



   The foregoing regulations shall not prohibit the performance of the
lawful employment duties by Village employees. (Ord. 1333, 4-9-84)



CHAPTER 2
STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS



SECTION:



3-2-1:   Street Names



3-2-2:   Numbering System



3-2-2-1:   Base Lines



3-2-2-2:   Posting of Numbers



3-2-3:   Signs to be Erected



3-2-4:   Encroachments



3-2-1:  STREET NAMES:



   The names of all streets shall be placed on all street corners and no
person shall injure, deface or obstruct any such street sign.



3-2-2:  NUMBERING SYSTEM:



3-2-2-1:  BASE LINES:



   All lots or houses located on the north and south streets or on streets
running in a northerly and southerly direction shall be numbered from Madison
Street (City of Chicago) as a base line, beginning with number "1" at the
south line of said Madison Street and increasing toward the south.



   All lots or houses located on the east and west streets or on streets
running in an easterly and westerly direction shall be numbered from State
Street (City of Chicago) as a base line, beginning with number "1" at the
west line of said State Street and increasing toward the west.



   There shall be assigned to each mile eight hundred (800) numbers, or
one hundred (100) numbers to each one-eighth (1/8) mile on all streets. 
Such numbers shall be changed from any one hundred (100) to the succeeding
one hundred (100) at the intersecting street nearest the said one-eighth
(1/8) mile line.



   The even numbers on north and south streets, or on streets running in a
northerly and southerly direction, shall be on the west side of said streets.



   The even numbers on east and west streets, or on streets running in an
easterly and westerly direction, shall be on the north side of said streets.



3-2-2-2:  POSTING OF ADDRESS:



   Each of the figures of every such address on any residence or apartment
building shall not be less than three inches (3") in length, and on any store
or place of business not less than six inches (6") in length.



   All numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or near the
entrance or entrances to the building to which they are to be attached.  On
all places of business where awnings are used on the street level story of
the building, such numbers shall also be displayed in a conspicuous place on
said awnings.



   It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession
of any building in the Village to number it in the manner herein provided. 
(Ord. 117, 7-28-52)



3-2-3:  SIGNS TO BE ERECTED:



   Appropriate signs shall be erected to inform the public of the
restrictions on through traffic and parking.



(Ord. 340, 1-16-67)



3-2-4:  ENCROACHMENTS:



No structure, fence, merchandise display, landscaping, driveway, parking lot,
newspaper vending machine, mailbox or other obstacle shall be permitted which
obstructs or otherwise interferes with public use of a street, sidewalk,
public waterway, detention or retention pond, right-of-way, or other public
easement, except that food service establishments and restaurants shall be
permitted to operate and maintain outdoor dining, including the service of
liquor by an establishment that holds a liquor license without amendment of
the liquor license, using a portion of a public sidewalk adjoining the food
and service establishment or restaurant with the following limitations:



   1.   Such outdoor dining use occupies no more than fifty percent
(50%) of the depth of sidewalk; and



   2.   A minimum of 44 inches of unobstructed width of the sidewalk is
maintained; and



   3.   A minimum of 36 inches of unobstructed width of the internal
aisles is maintained; and



   4.   The outdoor seating area does not exceed seventy five percent
(75%) of the frontage of the food service establishment or restaurant; and



   5.   At least 50% of the boundaries of any outdoor seating area that
will serve liquor are delineated, but not required to be fully enclosed, by a
fence, wall, landscaping or similar barrier not less than 24 inches in height
and not greater than 48 inches in height; and



   6.   A fence, wall, landscaping or similar barrier no less than 24
inches in height and no greater than 48 inches in height shall also be
provided to distinguish between neighboring outdoor seating areas, where
applicable; and



   7.   Prior to use of the sidewalk for outdoor dining in any year,
the owner or other person in control of the food service establishment or
restaurant must apply for and obtain a permit from the office of the Village
Office of Development Services for that year, which application shall be
accompanied by evidence of liability insurance, in amounts established from
time to time by the Village, naming the Village as an additional insured.



(Ord. 4241, 5-7-07; Amd. Ord. 4252, 6-18-07; Amd. Ord. 5016, 8-17-15; Amd.
Ord. 5103, 6-6-16)



CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS



SECTION:



3-3-1:   Permit Required



3-3-2:   Validation of Permits



3-3-3:   Application; Deposit and Inspection Fee



3-3-4:   Disposition of Deposit



3-3-5:   Liability Insurance Required



3-3-6:   Barricades; Warning Lights



3-3-1:  PERMIT REQUIRED:



   No person shall make an opening or excavation in any street or alley of
the Village, or tunnel thereunder, for any purpose whatsoever, without first
having applied for and received a permit so to do from the Engineering
Department.  For the purposes of this Chapter, street or alley shall include
an opening or excavation in any part of the right of way dedicated or
committed to public use, including but not limited to parkways and sidewalks,
as well as the portion of said right of way used by vehicular traffic.



3-3-2:  VALIDATION OF PERMITS:



   Such permits shall be issued only to public utility companies, to
licensed plumbers and to sewer contractors when compliance has been made with
the provisions of this Chapter as hereinafter set forth.  No permit shall be
issued by the Engineering Department until the issuance thereof has been
approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village.  (Ord. 315,
11-8-65)



3-3-3:  APPLICATION; DEPOSIT AND INSPECTION FEE:



   Those proposing to make such street openings shall make application to
do so in writing to the Village Clerk, state the location and size of the
proposed opening, the material of which the street and alley to be opened is
composed, and such other information as may be required by the Village
Clerk.  Before granting such permit, the Village Clerk shall require, except
in case of public utilities, a deposit in the form of cash or certified
check, and an inspection fee, as determined by the President and Board of
Trustees.



   In each instance, the inspection fee shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00). In the event more than one inspection shall be necessary to assure
compliance with this Chapter, each reinspection shall be at a fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00).  (Ord. 1126, 11-9-81)



   All dirt, other than sand or gravel, taken from such opening shall be
removed from the location and the opening backfilled with sand or gravel
tamped or flushed before the paving is replaced.  No opening shall be made
while the ground is frozen to a depth of twelve inches (12") or more, or
subject to such freeze before refill, within four and one-half feet of any
water pipe of the Village without the permission of the Village Engineering
Department.



   Restoration of the street or alley to its original condition, including
access driveways and grass and shrubbery, if any, shall be made as soon as
possible after said opening or tunneling is made.



   The application herein required shall also show that the applicant has
contacted all operators of gas, electrical, telephone, water, sewer or any
other public utility service in the area to receive from them information as
to the existence and location of any underground facilities so that the
proper precautions can be taken to avoid damage to the existing underground
facilities.



3-3-4:  DISPOSITION OF DEPOSIT:



   Such deposit shall be held by the Engineering Department for a period
of sixty (60) days after the restoration of said street or alley, and if
after said sixty (60) days, and after inspection by a person designated by
the President and Board of Trustees or the Street and Alley Committee, the
street or alley is in condition acceptable to the Village, the deposit, less
all inspection and reinspection fees, shall then be returned to the
depositor.  If it is deemed that further work is necessary to so restore the
street or alley, and upon refusal or failure of the depositor to make the
required corrections, the Village may do such necessary work with the costs
thereof together with all inspection and reinspection fees being deducted
from said deposit and the balance, if any, returned to the depositor; or, if
the costs of such proper restoration and inspections exceeds the deposit,
then the depositor shall pay to the Village the amount of the excess.



3-3-5:  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:



   No permit shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter
unless the applicant, except in the case of public utilities, shall have
first procured public liability insurance issued by an insurance company or
companies approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village in
an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for
injuries, including accidental death, to any one person and subject to the
same limit for each person in an amount not less than three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) on account of one accident and property damage in an
amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), and workman's
compensation insurance in the statutory limits of liability.  Certificates
evidencing said insurance coverage shall be filed with the Village
Engineering Department prior to the issuance of a permit.



3-3-6:  BARRICADES, WARNING LIGHTS:



   At all times from the commencement of the work until the completion
thereof and the restoration of the street or alley to its original condition,
the person making such opening shall erect and maintain suitable barricades
around the same so as to prevent pedestrians and other persons and vehicles
from entering the area immediately adjacent to and surrounding such opening,
or shall, if entrance to the area is allowed, cover such openings so as to
protect persons and vehicles from injury or damage, and shall at all times
during the hours of darkness maintain suitable warning lights thereon.  Such
barricades and warning lights shall be of such type and character and shall
be so located as to reasonably protect persons and property from injury or
damage as a result of the existence of such opening, and shall be placed and
maintained in a manner reasonably acceptable to the Superintendent of Public
Works.  (Ord. 315, 11-8-65)



CHAPTER 4
SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION



SECTION:



3-4-1:   Sidewalk Construction



3-4-1-1:   Permit Required; Application



3-4-1-2:   Issuance of Permits



3-4-1-3:   Construction Specifications and Requirements



3-4-1-4:   Builder's Stamp



3-4-2:   Driveway Construction



3-4-2-1:   Driveways Across Sidewalks and Parkways



3-4-2-2:   Permit Application



3-4-2-3:   Permit Issuance



3-4-2-4:   Permit Revocation



3-4-2-5:   Driveway Construction



3-4-2-6:   Construction Specifications and Requirements



3-4-3:   Concrete Regulations



3-4-3-1:   Concrete Quality



3-4-3-2:   Subgrade Preparations



3-4-3-3:   Granular Base



3-4-3-4:   Forms



3-4-3-5:   Expansion Joints



3-4-3-6:   Placing and Finishing Concrete



3-4-3-7:   Protection from Low Temperature



3-4-3-8:   Curing



3-4-3-9:   Backfill



3-4-3-10:   Disposal of Surplus Material



3-4-3-11:   Control of Materials



3-4-4:   Sidewalk Replacement, Repair and Installation



3-4-4-1:   Cost-Sharing Replacement



3-4-4-2:   Determination



3-4-4-3:   Notice, Agreement, Payment



3-4-4-4:   Timing



3-4-4-5:   Failure of Owner to Repair



3-4-4-6:   New Sidewalks



3-4-4-7:   Construction and Standards



3-4-4-8:   Extent of Program



3-4-4-9:   Emergency Sidewalk Repairs



3-4-1:    SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:



   Developers/owners of property subject to subdivision shall construct
sidewalks in accordance to the Land Development Code of the Village of Orland
Park.  All other sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with these
regulations.



3-4-1-1:  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:



   No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, any sidewalk on
any public street or way in the Village without first procuring a permit so
to do.  Application for such permit shall be in writing signed by the
applicant and shall be filed with the Building Department.  Said application
shall designate the location of the proposed sidewalk, the name and address
of the owner of the property adjoining said sidewalk and the address of the
applicant, if other than the owner.  Said application shall be accompanied
by plans and specifications for the proposed sidewalk construction. 
Application for such permit shall be made on the form prescribed by the
Building Department.  Said application shall accompany the application for a
building permit when the construction of a sidewalk is required by ordinances
of the Village, and in such instance, no building permit shall be issued
until such time as the Building Department shall issue the permit for
sidewalk construction.



3-4-1-2:  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:



   Upon receipt of an application for such permit, the Building Department
shall promptly refer said application to the Building and Zoning Committee of
the Board of Trustees for the approval of said Committee, and the Building
Department shall not issue said permit until approval of said Committee shall
have been given.  Upon such approval being given, the Building Department
shall issue such permit, provided all requisite fees have been paid.



3-4-1-3:  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:



   Width and Slopes:  All sidewalks in areas zoned for residential use
shall be five feet (5') in width (unless connecting sidewalks are wider, when
new sidewalks shall be the same width as existing and connecting walks) with
an eight foot (8') planting strip on both sides of the street.  The upper
surface of the sidewalk shall have a slope of one-fourth of an inch to the
foot toward the center of the street or way on which such sidewalk is laid.



   Surface Height:  The surface of the inside part of sidewalks, nearest
the lot line, shall, when completed, be at least six inches (6") above the
grade of the curb, if any, or if there is no curb, six inches (6") above the
established grade of the center line of the street.



   Location:  The location of sidewalks shall generally be one (1) foot
inside the right-of-way.  The location may be modified depending on factors
that include but are not limited to:  relationship to drainage ditches,
easements, Commonwealth Edison right-of-ways and towers, handicapped ramps,
existing trees and landscaping and topography.  Furthermore, any new
sidewalk may be located in another location, if necessary, to connect to
already existing sidewalks and to continue said sidewalks.



3-4-1-4:  BUILDER'S STAMP:



   All concrete sidewalks hereafter constructed in any public street,
alley, park or place in the Village, whether the same shall be laid by public
or private contract, shall be stamped in plain characters showing the date of
construction and the name of the builder thereof.  (Ord. 226, 2-15-61)



3-4-2:  DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION:



   Developer/owners of property subject to a subdivision shall construct
driveway and driveway aprons in accordance with the Land Development Code of
the Village of Orland Park.  All other driveway and driveway apron
construction shall be in accordance with these regulations.



3-4-2-1:  DRIVEWAYS ACROSS SIDEWALKS AND PARKWAYS:



   No person, firm or corporation shall construct or alter any driveway
over, across or upon any public sidewalk or parkway without first obtaining
from the Building Department a  permit to do so.  The term "driveway" is
used here as defined in the Land Development Code.  Where ingress or egress
is to be made from adjoining real estate to a public street and where the
Land Development Code of the Village requires off-street parking, such
off-street parking shall be made accessible to the public street and the
ingress and egress shall be made across the parkway and sidewalks by means of
a driveway constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Section.



3-4-2-2:  PERMIT APPLICATION:



   Application for a permit to construct a driveway shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant, and filed with the Building Department.  The
application shall designate the location of the proposed driveway, the name
and address of the owner of the property to be served thereby and the address
of the applicant, if other than the owner.  It shall be accompanied by plans
and specifications of the proposed driveway.  In those instances where a
driveway is required to comply with the requirements of the Land Development
Code of the Village, the application for permit shall accompany the
application for the issuance of a building permit authorizing the new
building construction and, in such instance, no building permit shall be
issued until such time as the Building Department shall issue the permit for
driveway construction.



3-4-2-3:  PERMIT ISSUANCE:



   Upon receipt of an application for such permit, the Building Department
shall issue said permit provided all requisite fees and ordinances shall have
been paid and complied with.



3-4-2-4:  PERMIT REVOCATION:



   All permits for driveways issued pursuant to the provisions of this
Section may be revoked at any time without the consent of the permittee by
order of the President and Board of Trustees. Upon such revocation, all
rights granted thereunder shall be revoked and the sidewalk, space, parkways
and curbs shall be restored to their former condition, at the expense of the
permittee or of the owner of the property served by the driveway at the time
of any such revocation.



3-4-2-5:  DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION:



   Concrete:  Concrete driveways shall be constructed in compliance with
applicable the provisions of the Land Development Code and shall not be less
than five inches (5") thick, plus a two inch (2") bedding for single family
residential use and eight inches (8") thick, plus a two inch (2") bedding for
multi-family, commercial and industrial property use.  Expansion joints
shall be used between the back of the curb and the driveway and between the
sidewalk and the driveway.



   Asphalt:  Single family residential driveways shall be constructed in
two (2) courses and shall not be less than eight inches (8") in thickness
after compaction.  The crushed stone base course shall be six inches (6") in
thickness and compacted until all voids are filled with finely crushed stone
or sand.  The asphalt surfaced course shall be two inches (2") in thickness
after compaction and shall be constructed of bituminous plant-mix Type B-4 or
B-5 conforming to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction as prepared by the Division of Highways, Department of Public
Works, State of Illinois, most recent edition.



   All other driveways and aprons shall be constructed in two (2) courses
and shall not be less than eleven inches (11") in thickness after
compaction.  The crushed stone base course shall be eight inches (8") in
thickness and compacted until all voids are filled with finely crushed stone
or sand.  The asphalt surfaced course shall be three inches (3") in
thickness after compaction and shall be constructed of bituminous plant- mix
Type B-4 or B-5 conforming to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction as prepared by the Division of Highways, Department of Public
Works, State of Illinois, most recent edition.



3-4-2-6:  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATION AND REQUIREMENTS:



   Maximum Number Allowed:  Single family residences shall be permitted
to have only one driveway per lot, except if a lot has a minimum lot frontage
of ninety feet (90'), then a circular driveway consisting of two (2) drives
may be allowed.  All other uses shall be allowed the number of driveways as
approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation by the Community
Development Department.



   Widths:  The maximum width for driveways for single family residences
including circle drives shall be ten feet (10') at the sidewalk line and
sixteen feet (16') at the curb; provided, that where a two-car or three-car
garage is located within thirty feet (30') of the property line, the driveway
shall not exceed twenty feet (20') at the sidewalk line or twenty six feet
(26') at the curb or thirty (30) feet at the sidewalk line and thirty-six
(36) feet at the curb, respectively.  No driveway shall encroach upon any
portion of the parkway in front of the adjoining property.  The maximum
width for driveways for all other uses shall be as approved by the Board of
Trustees upon recommendation by the Department of Engineering.



   Grades and Curbs:  Driveways shall conform to the existing sidewalk
grade.  Where it is necessary to break the existing curb for the driveway
opening, the curb and gutter shall be completely removed and a new section
constructed.  Each such driveway shall be constructed and maintained so as
to permit free and unobstructed passage or), over or across the same and in
such a manner as not to interfere with the proper drainage and safe grading
of streets.  Gradual approaches to the regular sidewalk grade shall be one
inch (1") above the gutter slab.  The slope of any driveway and the
approaches thereto shall not exceed two inches (2") to the foot in any
direction.  Each such driveway shall be so constructed and maintained that
its surface at the point of crossing any sidewalk pavement shall be flush
with the adjoining sections of such sidewalk.



   Connection to Collector or Arterial Street:  Driveways connecting to
collector or arterial streets must provide an on site turn around.  Where
lots front both a local street and an arterial or collector street, no
driveways shall be installed along the property line of the lot which fronts
the arterial or collector street.



   Driveway Aprons:  Single family residential driveway aprons shall have
a maximum width of ten (10) feet for one-car driveways, and a maximum width
of twenty (20) feet for two-car driveways, measured at the sidewalk and shall
flare to a width three (3) feet greater at the curb line.  All residential
aprons shall have a minimum concrete thickness of six (6) inches and a
granular bedding base of two (2) inches.  Multi-family development business,
office research, and industrial district driveway aprons shall be constructed
with ten (10) foot radius returns unless otherwise required by the Department
of Engineering.



   Concrete Thickness:  All residential driveways shall have a minimum
concrete thickness of five (5) inches and a granular base of two (2) inches
minimum compacted thickness or an equivalent pavement section with a minimum
structural number of 2.5.



   New Driveway Aprons Abutting Existing Biketrails, Sidewalks or Curbs: 
New driveway aprons abutting existing biketrails, sidewalks or curbs shall be
constructed to meet the grade of such sidewalks or curbs.  If necessary, the
sidewalk shall be relocated to accommodate the maximum driveway apron
slope.  The location and grade for driveway aprons, when no adjacent
sidewalks or curb and gutter exists, shall match the adjacent parkway.  The
maximum slope of the driveway apron shall be eight (8) percent, and the
minimum slope shall be two (2) percent.



3-4-3:CONCRETE REGULATION:



   All sidewalk driveway and driveway apron materials shall comply with
the following standards of quality:



Portland Cement:         ASTM C150 Type I, Norman



               ASTM C150 Type II, High-Early-Strength



Fine Aggregate:         ASTM C33, clean sand graded between #100 and
#4 sieve limits.



Coarse Aggregate:         ASTM C33, uncoated crushed stone or washed
gravel.  Slag shall not be permitted.



Water:            Potable and fit to drink.



Water-Reducing Admixture:   ASTM C494 Type (normal) or Type D (retarder).



Air Entraining Agent:      ASTM C260



Premolded Filler Strips:      ASTM D994



Curring Compound:         ASTM C309, Type 2 (white, pigmented)



Reinforcement:         ASTM A615, Grade 40.



3-4-3-1:  CONCRETE QUALITY:



   Ready-mixed concrete that complies with ASTM C94 shall be used for
sidewalks, driveways, and driveway aprons.  The concrete shall be supplied
by a ready-mixed source which is inspected yearly by the Illinois Department
of Transportation.



   Concrete mix shall be designed using the following data:



   1.   Minimum compressive strength of four thousand (4000) psi at
twenty-eight (28) days.



   2   Minimum of six (6) sacks of cement per cubic yard.



   3   Maximum size aggregate of one (1) inch.



   4   Air entrainment of six (6) percent +1%.



   5   Maximum slump of four (4) inches.



   6   Maximum water content including moisture in the aggregate of six
(6) gallons per sack of cement.



   7   All concrete shall contain a water-reducing admixture with no
reduction in cement content permitted.



3-4-3-2:  SUBGRADE PREPARATION:



   Where a fill condition exists, all topsoil and unsuitable material
shall be removed.  Subgrade shall be rolled or tamped before granular fill
is placed.  Fill shall be placed in six (6) inch layers to the proper
subgrade elevation.  Side slopes of fill material shall not exceed one (1)
foot vertical to three (3) feet horizontal.  Where a cut condition exists,
all top soil and unsuitable material shall be removed.  Subgrade shall be
removed to the property elevation to allow sufficient width to accommodate
the forms.



3-4-3-3:  GRANULAR BASE:



   A granular base of five (5) inch minimum thickness shall be placed on
the prepared subgrade.  The base shall extend the full width of the sidewalk
or driveway apron.  The granular base shall consist of CA6 aggregate
conforming to the SSR & BC.



3-4-3-4:  FORMS:



   Side forms shall be of lumber of not less than two (2) inches nominal
thickness or steel of equal rigidity.  The minimum depth of the side forms
shall be equal to the sidewalk thickness.  No two (2) inch by four (4) inch
lumber forms shall be permitted.  Forms shall be held securely in place by
stakes or braces with the top edge true to line and grade.  The forms for
sidewalk shall be set so that the slab will have a fall of one (1) inch
vertical to four (4) feet horizontal from the edge nearest the property line
toward the edge farthest from the property line, except as may be otherwise
directed by the Department of Code Enforcement.



3-4-3-5:  EXPANSION JOINTS:



   Expansion joints of the thickness specified below shall consist of a
premolded filler strip with the top strip placed one-fourth (1/4) inch below
the surface of the sidewalk or driveway apron.



   Expansion joints one-half (1/2) inches thick shall be placed between
sidewalks and all structures which extend through sidewalks, such as light
standards, traffic light standards, and traffic poles.  One-half (1/2) inch
thick expansion joints shall also be provided at the junction of the driveway
apron and the sidewalk and at the junction of the driveway apron and the curb.



3-4-3-6:  PLACING AND FINISHING CONCRETE:



   The Department of Code Enforcement shall be notified when the subgrade
has been finished.  A minimum of three (3) hours notice shall be given prior
to placing concrete.  No concrete shall be placed until the subgrade has
been inspected and approved by the Building Department.



   Materials should not be placed on ice or frozen subgrade.



   The subgrade shall be moistened just before the concrete is placed. 
The concrete shall be placed in successive batches for the entire width of
the slab, struck off from one-half (1/2) to three-fourths (3/4) inch higher
than the finished slab, tamped until all voids are removed and free mortar
appears on the surface, thoroughly spaded along the edges, struck off to the
true grade, and finished to a true and even surface with floats and
trowels.  The final troweling shall be done with a steel trowel, leaving a
smooth, even surface.  After the water sheen has disappeared, the surface
shall be given final finish by brushing with a fine-hair broom.  The broom
shall be drawn across the sidewalk or driveway apron at right-angles to the
edges of the slab, with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping, producing a
uniform, slightly roughened surface with parallel marks.



   Control Joints:  Control joints shall be constructed at right angles
to the center line of the sidewalk and shall extend one-fourth (1/4) the
depth of the sidewalk.  They shall not be less than one-eight (1/8) inch nor
more than one-fourth (1/4) inch in width, and shall be edged with an edging
tool having a one-fourth (1/4) inch radius.  All slabs shall be five (5)
feet long on any one side, unless otherwise ordered by the Village Engineer.



   Control joints shall be constructed so as to divide the driveway apron
into sections which are approximately square, with no side longer than
fifteen (15) feet.  The control joints shall be not less than one-eight
(1/8) inch nor more than one-fourth (1/4) inch in width, and shall be edged
with an edging tool having a one-fourth (1/4) inch radius.  The minimum
depth shall be one and one-fourth (1 1/4) inch.



3-4-3-7:  PROTECTION FROM LOW TEMPERATURES:



   After the first seasonal frost, concrete shall be protected from
freezing in accordance with the "Recommended Practice for Cold-Weather
Concreting" (ACI 306).  The developer/owner shall be responsible for all
concrete damaged by low temperatures, and any damaged concrete shall be
removed and replaced by the developer/owner at the developer's/owner's
expense.



3-4-3-8:  CURING:



   Sidewalks and driveway aprons shall be cured by one of the following
methods:



   1.   Burlap shall be placed on the finished surface, saturated with
water and covered with an impermeable covering.



   2.   Polyethylene sheeting shall be placed as soon as the concrete
has sufficiently hardened to prevent marring of the surface.  The surface of
the concrete shall be wet immediately before the sheeting is placed.  The
edges of the sheeting shall be weighted securely with a continuous windrow of
earth or any other means satisfactory to the Building Department to provide
an air tight cover.



   3.   Specified curing compound shall be applied with brush, roller,
or spray at the rate of one (1) gallon for every two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of surface.  Any of the above curing methods must remain in
place for not less than six (6) days.



3-4-3-9:  BACKFILL:



   After the concrete has been cured, forms shall be removed and the space
near the edges of the sidewalk or driveway apron shall be backfilled to the
required elevation with material approved by the Building Department.  The
material shall then be compacted until firm and the surface evenly graded.



3-4-3-10:  DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS MATERIAL:



   Surplus or waste material resulting from the sidewalk or driveway apron
construction shall be disposed of by the developer/owner.



3-4-3-11:  CONTROL OF MATERIALS:



   The developer/owner shall, when requested b the Village and at his
expense, have a commercial testing laboratory prepare and test samples of
delivered concrete.  One (1) set of tests shall be taken for the first
twenty-five (25) cubic yards, or fraction thereof, and one (1) set of tests
shall be taken for each additional fifty (50) cubic yards.  A set of tests
shall consist of four (4) standard cylinders (two (2) shall be broken at
seven (7) days and two (2) shall be broken at twenty-eight (28) days), one
(1) slump test and one (1) air content test.  The laboratory shall perform
tests in accordance with recognized ASTM standards and shall submit written
reports of such tests to the Village Engineer for review.



3-4-4:  SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT, REPAIR AND INSTALLATION:



3-4-4-1:  COST-SHARING REPLACEMENT:



   There is hereby established a sidewalk replacement program for the
purposes of providing for the replacement of sidewalks in need of repair and
for the payment of the cost thereof in equal portions by the Village and the
participating owner or owners of the properties which front upon such
sidewalks or are adjacent to the public right of way upon which such
sidewalks are located.



3-4-4-2:  DETERMINATION:



   The Director of Public Works or his designee shall be the final
authority in determining which sections of sidewalks or portions thereof are
in need of repair or replacement.



   A.   Sections of sidewalk which are structurally sound but found to
contain one of the following conditions will be found to be in need of repair
and eligible for replacement based upon equal payment by Village and the
participating owner or owners:



      (1)   Surface crumbling which covers in excess of 25% of the
surface area of an identified section of sidewalk; and



      (2)   Surface pitting of a 1/2" depth or more which covers in
excess of 75% of the surface area of an identified portion of sidewalk.



   B.   Sections of sidewalk which are found by the Director of Public
Works or his designee to be in need of repair and replacement because they
meet the following conditions shall be repaired solely at Village expense:



      (1)   Vertical separation which exceeds 3/4" between adjoining
pieces or sections of sidewalk; and



      (2)   Extensive misalignment or sloping of sidewalk that
creates hazardous conditions.



   Under no circumstances other than said vertical separation or extensive
misalignment may the Director of Public Works determine that sidewalks are to
be repaired or replaced solely at Village expense.



3-4-4-3:  NOTICE, AGREEMENT, PAYMENT:



   Once a section or specific section of sidewalk is determined to be in
need of repair, the Director of Public Works or his designee shall send
written notification of his finding to the owner or owners of the properties
fronting upon a section of sidewalk, or adjacent to the public right of way
whereon the sidewalk in need of repair is located.  The notice shall include
the amount of sidewalk involved, the property owner's portion of the cost of
repair or replacement and instructions on how to pay the Village before
repair or replacement work is started. 



   If a property owner or owners fail to remit to the Village their share
of the cost of repairing or replacing a section or sections of sidewalk
within twenty (20) days of the date of notification from the Village, the
Village will abandon the project. 



3-4-4-4:  TIMING:



   When sections of sidewalk are determined to be in need of repair or
replacement, and after any property owner's share of the cost has been paid,
the Village will begin repair work as soon as reasonably possible without
being charged a short load fee by the concrete carrier.



3-4-4-5:  FAILURE OF OWNER TO REPAIR:



   If a property owner fails or refuses to agree to share the cost of
replacing a sidewalk in need of repair within twenty (20) days of the date of
the notice, the Village may perform such work as is minimally necessary to
alleviate the deteriorated condition.  Further, the Director of Code
Enforcement shall maintain a list of all property owners who elect not to
participate in the program.



3-4-4-6:  NEW SIDEWALKS:



   The cost of construction of new sidewalks which have not been built and
which are required in existing developed areas may be paid for in the same
cost sharing manner as replacement sidewalks if volunteering owners so
request and if two (2) conditions are met:



   1.   There are no existing agreements to construct sidewalks; and



   2.   The owner or owners of the properties adjacent to the public
right of way upon which sidewalks would be located agree to participate in
the cost-sharing program.



3-4-4-7:  CONSTRUCTION AND STANDARDS:



   Sidewalks constructed pursuant to this Section may be constructed by
the Village or by its contractor.  Any sidewalks constructed shall conform
to the standards contained in Section 3-4-1 of this Chapter.



   When a private property owner is having other concrete work performed,
and will at the same time have sidewalk sections replaced which the Director
of Public Works has previously determined are in need of repair or
replacement under Section 3-4-4-2 this Code, the Village will reimburse the
property owner an amount equal to 85% of the Village's project cost for its
share of the repair work if performed by the Village or its contractor. 
Such reimbursement will be paid only after Village inspection and approval of
the completed work.



3-4-4-8:  EXTENT OF PROGRAM:



   The amount of money available for construction of replacement and new
sidewalks each year pursuant to this Section shall be determined by the
Village budget.



3-4-4-9:  EMERGENCY SIDEWALK REPAIRS:



   Nothing herein shall relieve the Director of Public Works of his duty
to see to the immediate reconstruction, replacement or repair of sidewalk
areas deemed hazardous or unsafe for public use, nor shall election to
participate in the sidewalk reconstruction, replacement and repair program by
any property owner or owners prevent or otherwise limit the corporate
authorities of the Village from a determination to construct, replace or
repair any sidewalk or section thereof by means within their corporate
powers.  (Ord. 2853, 3-4-96)



CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC LIBRARY



SECTION:



3-5-1:   Public Library Established



3-5-1:  PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:



   A free public library is hereby established for the use and benefit of
the residents and taxpayers of the Village, to be maintained by taxation to
be appropriated and levied, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois
Local Library Act, chapter 75, Illinois Compiled Statutes; said library to be
under the supervision and management of a board of library trustees to be
appointed according to the provisions of State Statute.



(Ord. 77, 7-14-41)



CHAPTER 6
TREE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



SECTION:



3-6-1:   Definitions



3-6-2:   Responsibilities and Duties



3-6-3:   Street Tree Species



3-6-4:   Spacing



3-6-5:   Distance From Curb and Sidewalk and Overhead Wires



3-6-6:   Distance From Street Corners and Fire Plugs



3-6-7:   Public Tree Care



3-6-8:   Tree Topping



3-6-9:   Pruning, Right of Way Clearance



3-6-10:   Dead or Diseased Tree Removal on Private Property



3-6-11:   Removal of Stumps



3-6-12:   Interference With the Village



3-6-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   PARK TREES:  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the Village, or
to which the public has free access as a park.



   PARKWAY:  A strip of land situated within the dedicated street
right-of-way and (1) located between the roadway and right-of-way line or (2)
a median located between the roadways.



   STREET TREES:  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying within the right-of-way lines on the parkway on either side of all
streets, avenues, or ways within the Village.



3-6-2:  RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES:



   The Village Recreation Advisory Board shall be responsible for making
recommendations to the Village President and Board of Trustees for the
development, maintenance and administration of the Village Tree Program.



   More specifically, it shall be the responsibility of the Board to
study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and to make
recommendations regarding a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks,
along streets and in other public areas.  The President and Board of
Trustees may request annual study from the Board.  When the President and
Board of Trustees request an annual plan, such plan will be presented to the
President and Board of Trustees and upon acceptance and approval of the
corporate authorities, shall constitute the official Comprehensive Village
Tree Plan for the Village.  The Board, when requested by the President and
Board of Trustees shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and
recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its
work.



3-6-3:  STREET TREE SPECIES:



   The "List of Recommended Plant Species" for the Village is found in the
landscaping section of the Land Development Code. No species other than those
included in this list may be planted as street trees without written
permission of the Director of Code Enforcement or his designee, or the
President and Board of Trustees.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16)



3-6-4:  SPACING:



   A minimum of one parkway tree shall be planted per forty feet (40') or
thirty feet (30') of frontage, as determined by Section 6-305 Landscape and
Tree Preservation of the Land Development Code.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16)



3-6-5:  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK AND OVERHEAD WIRES:



   Trees shall be located so as not to interfere with overhead wires or
traffic or pedestrian safety.



3-6-6:  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE PLUGS:



   No tree or bush with a mature height of more than two feet (2') shall
be planted within a distance of thirty three feet (33') of any street corner,
measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines as
extended.  No tree shall be planted closer than six feet (6') of any fire
hydrant.



3-6-7:  PUBLIC TREE CARE:



   The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the parkways of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public
grounds.  However, such parkway shall be maintained by the adjacent property
owner unless an agreement for maintenance has been reached with the Village.



   The Recreation Advisory Board may recommend to the President and Board
of Trustees the removal of any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric
power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is
affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.  This Section does
not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners,
providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with
the official street tree species list.



3-6-8:  TREE TOPPING:



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or
Village Department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property.  Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger then three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  Street,
park or trees located on public property which are severely damaged by storms
or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions
where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
Chapter at the determination of the President and Board of Trustees.



3-6-9:  PRUNING, RIGHT OF WAY CLEARANCE:



   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within
the Village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct
the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space
of eight feet (8') above the surface of the street or sidewalk.  Said owners
shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed
limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.  The Village,
in accordance with the law, shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along
the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic
control device or sign.



3-6-10:  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:



   The Village, in accordance with the law, shall have the right to cause
the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the
Village, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor
insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within
the Village.  The Village will notify in writing the owners of such trees. 
Removal is the responsibility of said owners and shall be done by the owners
at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of
notice or such other time as may be agreed upon by the Village and the
property owner.  In the event of failure of owners to comply with such
provisions, the Village shall have the authority to remove such trees and
file a lien against the property for the amount of the costs of removal.



3-6-11:  REMOVAL OF STUMPS:



   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



3-6-12:  INTERFERENCE WITH THE VILLAGE:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Village or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees,
park trees, or dead or diseased trees on private grounds.



CHAPTER 7
TELECOMMUNICATIONS MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE



SECTION:



3-7-1:   Definitions



3-7-2:   Registration of Telecommunications Providers



3-7-3:   Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee



3-7-4:   Collection, Enforcement, and Administration of Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fees



3-7-5:   Compliance With Other Laws



3-7-6:   Existing Franchises and Licenses



3-7-7:   Penalties



3-7-8:   Enforcement



3-7-9:   Severability



3-7-10:   Conflict



3-7-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:



   (A)   "Gross Charges" means the amount paid to a telecommunications
retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications within the Village, and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs,
or any other expense whatsoever.  In case credit is extended, the amount
thereof shall be included only as and when paid.  "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point
within the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel
point within the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate
inter-office channel provided within the Village.  However, "gross charges"
shall not include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a
charge made under: (i) the fee imposed by this Chapter, (ii) additional
charges added to a purchaser's bill under Chapter 9-221 or 9-222 of the
Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under Chapter 8-11-17 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act, (v) 911 surcharges, or (vi) the tax imposed by Section 4251
of the Internal Revenue Code;



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside the Village;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content.  Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under Section
9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the Village;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;



      (7)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that
is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made);



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices;  or



      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided to the Village.



   (B)   "Public Right-of-Way" means any municipal street, alley, water
or public right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes,
including utility easements wherein the Village has acquired the right and
authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with
telecommunications facilities.  "Public Right-of-Way" shall not include any
real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include Village buildings and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
public right-of-way.



   (C)   "Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State", or
any like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within
the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place
of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State
under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in this State.



   (D)   "Sale of telecommunications at retail" means the transmitting,
supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another
such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer
for their use or consumption and not for sale.



   (E)   "Service address" means the location of telecommunications
equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received.  If this is not a defined
location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems,
maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, "service address"
shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the
telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where
bills are sent.



   (F)   "Telecommunications" includes, but is not limited to, messages
or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized
mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities.  Unless
the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also
include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. 
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. 
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the end-to-end communications.  Retailer access charges, right
of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale.  "Telecommunications" shall
not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined
in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and
following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services
subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open
video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission
(47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.



   (G)   "Telecommunications provider" means (1) any telecommunications
retailer; and (2) any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that
installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way
that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any
form.



   (H)   "Telecommunications retailer" or "retailer" or "carrier" means
and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined in this Section.  The Village may,
in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee
hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within
this State, who, to the satisfaction of the Village, furnishes adequate
security to ensure collection and payment of the fee.  When so authorized,
it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the Village.



   (I)   "Wireless telecommunications" includes cellular mobile
telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C)
of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C.
332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services.



3-7-2:  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this Chapter
shall register with the Village within 30 days after the effective date of
this Section or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later,
on a form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to 3-7-4(C) of
this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
Chapter.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
Village pursuant to 3-7-2(A) has an affirmative duty to submit an amended
registration form or current return as required by 3-7-4(C), as the case may
be, to the Village within 30 days from the date of the occurrence of any
changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the
registration form or most recent return on file with the Village.



3-7-3:  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:



   (A)   A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of
all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or received
in the Village.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Chapter, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the Village by telecommunications retailers. 
Imposition of  the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this
Chapter does not, however,  serve as a limitation on the levying of any
taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Chapter shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in  3-7-4 of this Chapter.



3-7-4:   COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES:



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Manager the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent
to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however,
that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of
the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee. 



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the Village
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Manager, which shall contain such information as the Village Manager may
reasonably require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this Chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by
the telecommunications retailer to the Village.  The charge  imposed under
3-7-4(A) by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in
the same manner as the original charge for such services. 



   (E)   If  it shall appear  that an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
Chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to become due, under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the Village Manager may
request, and  telecommunications retailer shall provide, written
substantiation for such credit.  However, no claim for such credit may be
made more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless,
(1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of  underpayment made by the
Village within the applicable statutory period of limitations, and (2) the
credit derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications
retailer during the applicable statutory period of  limitations. 



   (F)   Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts as described immediately below:



      (1)   "gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act;



      (2)   "gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility
tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;



      (3)   "gross charges" for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois
Municipal Code;



      (4)   "gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross
revenue of public utilities prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public
Utilities Act.



   (G)   The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit
the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
Chapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. 
Any underpayment of the amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
due to the Village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the
Village plus five (5%) percent of  the total amount of the underpayment
determined in an audit,  plus any costs incurred by the Village in
conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five (5%) percent of the
total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.  Said sum shall be
paid to the Village within twenty-one (21) days after the date of issuance of
an invoice for same.



   (H)   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate
such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be
required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers
that are registered pursuant to  3-7-2 of this Chapter of such regulations.



3-7-5:  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:



   Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:



   (a)   Generally applicable taxes; and



   (b)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of
or repair of the public rights- of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided; and



   (c)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights- of-way; and



   (d)   Aompliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the
right-of-way.



3-7-6:  EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:



   Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between
telecommunications retailers and the Village entered into before the
effective date of this Chapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way
shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any
fees, charges  or other compensation to the extent waived.



3-7-7:  PENALTIES:



   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the
Village Municipal Code. 



3-7-8:  ENFORCEMENT:



   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.



3-7-9:  SEVERABILITY:



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.



3-7-10:  CONFLICT:



   This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters adopted prior
hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. 3100, 2-2-98)



CHAPTER 8
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



SECTION:



3-8-1:   Purpose and Scope



3-8-2:   Definitions



3-8-3:   Annual Registration Required



3-8-4:   Permit Required; Applications and Fees



3-8-5:   Action on Permit Applications



3-8-6:   Effect of Permit



3-8-7:   Revised Permit Drawings



3-8-8:   Insurance



3-8-9:   Indemnification



3-8-10:   Security



3-8-11:   Permit Suspension and Revocation



3-8-12:   Change of Ownership or Owner's Identity or Legal Status



3-8-13:   General Construction Standards:



3-8-14:   Traffic Control



3-8-15:   Location of Facilities



3-8-16:   Construction Methods and Materials



3-8-17:   Vegetation Control



3-8-18:   Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Utility Facilities



3-8-19:   Cleanup and Restoration



3-8-20:   Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance



3-8-21:   Variances



3-8-22:   Penalties



3-8-23:   Enforcement



3-8-24:   Severability



3-8-1:  PURPOSE AND SCOPE:



   A.   Purpose:  The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies
and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
Village rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.



   B.   Facilities Subject to This Chapter:  This Chapter applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the
public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village.  A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   C.   Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements:  The Village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of-way.  Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement.  In
such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions
inconsistent with this Chapter.



   D.   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements:



      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers.  In
the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      2.   Telecommunications Providers.  In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this Chapter and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   E.   Conflicts with Other Chapters: This Chapter supersedes all
Chapters or parts of Chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   F.   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws:  In the event that
applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
State laws or regulations.



   G.   Sound Engineering Judgment:  The Village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this Chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this Chapter when the
Village so determines.  Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the
ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare.



3-8-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   As used in this Chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
Section.  Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning
ascribed to it in 92 Ill.  Adm.  Code  530.30, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.



   AASHTO:  American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ALLEY:  Property dedicated by plat for public access between or behind
parcels of land and commonly used for utility purposes in which the Village
has the right and authority to regulate or permit the location of facilities
other than those of the Village.



   ANSI:  American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT:  A person applying for a permit under this Chapter.



   ASTM:  American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL:  The methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.



   BOREOR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CARFIRE PIPE:  The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING:  A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE:  The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of
the pavement available for safe use by errant vehicles.  This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area.  The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds, and on the roadside geometry.  Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.



   COATING:  Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe
for protection against external corrosion.



   CODE:  The Municipal Code of the Village of Orland Park.



   CONDUCTOR:  Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT:  A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT:  The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER:  The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY:  A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING:  The Village Director of Engineering or his
or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY:  For the purposes of this Chapter, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use.  Such work may include,
without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or
structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that
does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY:  Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT:  Provision of a protective casing,



   ENGINEER:  The Village Engineer or his or her designee.



   EQUIPMENT:  Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION:  The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE:  Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.



   FACILITY:  All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including
track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video
cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, manholes,
pedestals, above-ground enclosures and appurtenances thereto) located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this
Chapter, except those owned by the Village.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY:  A facility that is not a crossing facility or
a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, amplifier or
meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:  Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the Village Director of Engineering to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY CODE:  The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.



   HIGHWAY:  A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets.  "Highway" includes all highway
land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   IDOT:  Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ILCC:  Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING:  Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   JETTING:  Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure
to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE:  The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION:  The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY:  The presence of facilities on, over or under a
right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY:  A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way or roadway.



   PARKWAY:  Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street,
sidewalk or bicycle path.



   PAVEMENT CUT:  The removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE:  That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
Sections 3-8-4 and 3-8-5 of this Chapter.



   PRACTICABLE:  That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE:  The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PETROLEUM PRODUCT PIPELINES:  Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.



   PROMPT:  That which is done within a period of time specified by the
Village.  If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY:  A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION:  The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY:  Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the
Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the Village.  "Right-of-way"
shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include Village
buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY:  That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders,



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND:  That amount of security required pursuant to Section
3-8-10.



   SHOULDER:  A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT:  A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   STREET:  That part of a highway that includes pavement, curbs and/or
shoulders.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS:  This term includes, but is not limited to,
messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile
radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities.  Unless
the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also
include wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et
seq.  "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code,
and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. 
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the end-to-end communications.  Retailer access charges, right
of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale.  "Telecommunications" shall
not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined
in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and
following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services
subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open
video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission
(47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:  Means any person that installs, owns,
operates or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed
to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER:  Means and includes every person engaged
in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH:  A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of
an underground facility.



   UTILITY:  The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this Chapter,



   VENT:  A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   VILLAGE:  The Village of Orland Park.



      WATER LINES:  Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



WET BORING:  Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



3-8-3:  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:



   Every utility that occupies rights-of-way within the Village shall
register on or before January 1 of each year with the Director of
Engineering, providing the utility's name, address and regular business
telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who
can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the
utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for
each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section 3-8-8 of
this Chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.  A
telecommunications provider that has registered under this Section, shall be
deemed to have satisfied any other registration requirements under this
Chapter 8.



3-8-4:  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:



   A.   Permit Required:  No person shall construct (as defined in
this Chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within any Village right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the
facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined
in this Chapter), or (4)                    materially increases
the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along,
under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application
with the Village Director of Engineering and obtaining a permit from the
Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.  No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.



   B.   Permit Application:  All applications for permits pursuant to
this Chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village Manager  may
designate.  The applicant may designate those portions of its application
materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential
information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page
of such materials accordingly.



   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements:  The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      1   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy
numbers;



      2   The applicant's name and address, if different than the
utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in
the work;



      3   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put.  The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to
the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis
on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      5   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
Village:



         i.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         ii.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant.  The intended response shall include notification to the
Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this Section unless the Village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;



      6.   Drawings or plans submitted in paper and/or digital
format as requested by the Village Engineer, and specifications showing the
work proposed, location of any existing and proposed facility, pavement,
curb, and sidewalks.  The submittal shall include the certification of an
engineer that such drawings, plans and specifications comply with applicable
codes, rules and regulations;



      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in Section 3-8-8 of
this Chapter;



      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
Section 3-8-10 of this Chapter;



      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of
this Chapter (See Section 3-8-21); and



      10.   Approximate date for the start of the proposed work and
the approximate date of expected completion;



      11.   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the Village.



   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of
Utilities:  In addition to the requirements of Subsection (C) of this
Section, the permit application shall include the following items as
applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit
application:



      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications or
natural gas distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate
of Public Convenience and Necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the
applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;



      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;



      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago [or other local or state
entities with jurisdiction], have been satisfied; or



      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and
the design standard to be followed.



   E.   Applicant's Duty to Update Information:  Throughout the entire
permit application review period authorized by the permit, any amendments to
information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the
utility in writing to the Village Director of Engineering within ten (10)
days after the change necessitating the amendment.  During the construction
period the utility shall notify the Village Director of Engineering verbally
within twenty-four (24) hours, and confirmed in writing within ten (10) days,
after the change necessitating the amendment.



   F.   Application Fees:  Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $100.00.  No
application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer
that is paying the Village Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
pursuant to Chapter 7 of Title 3 of this Code or the optional state
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee pursuant to the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any
electricity utility that is paying any Village Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act.



3-8-5.  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:



   A.   Village Review of Permit Applications:  Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Village Director of Engineering within a reasonable time after filing.  If
the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Director of
Engineering shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor.  If the Village Director of Engineering is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Chapter and all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Director of
Engineering shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.



   B.   Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications
Retailers.



      1.   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220
ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it
intends to commence work governed by this Chapter for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement
of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to
the commencement of work requiting excavation.  The Village Director of
Engineering shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.



      2.   In the event that the Village Director of Engineering
fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications
retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the
Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving
excavation for new construction or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service
of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving
excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence
work without obtaining a permit under this Chapter.



      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to Section 3-8-4 of this Chapter
the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application
for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation
available regarding the facility to be constructed.  Such application shall
be subject to the requirements of Subsection (A) of this Section.



3-8-6.  EFFECT OF PERMIT:



   A.   Authority Granted: No Property Right or Other Interest
Created.  A permit from the Village  authorizes a permittee to undertake
only certain activities in accordance with this Chapter on Village
rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the
permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in
the public rights-of-way.



   B.   Compliance with All Laws Required:  The issuance of a permit
by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the Village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations.



3-8-7.  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work.  The revised drawings or
plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit.  If any
deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this
Chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with
Section 3-8-21 of this Chapter, If the Village denies the request for a
variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the
right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and
submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



3-8-8:  INSURANCE:



   A.   Required Coverages and Limits:  Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying a
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure
and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility
as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed
officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the
policies listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 below:



      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as "X," "C," and "U' coverages) and products-completed operations
coverage with limits not less than:



         i.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury
or death to each person;



         ii.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property
damage resulting from any one accident; and



         iii.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other
types of liability;



      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for
personal injury and property damage for each accident;



      3.   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and



      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.



   B.   Excess or Umbrella Policies:  The coverages required by this
Section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella
policies.  Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over
underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss
covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy,
the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this Section to the Village at the time of registration
as provided in Section 3-8-3 of this Chapter and within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.



   D.   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages:  The insurance
policies required by this Section shall contain the following endorsement:



   "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of
such intent to cancel or not to renew."



   Within ten (1O) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and
in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility
shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance
policies meeting the requirements of this Section.



   E.   Self-Insurance:  A utility may self-insure all or a portion of
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by Subsection (A) of
this Section.  A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of
such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under Subsection (A), or the requirements of Subsections
( B), (C) and (D) of this Section.  A utility that elects to self-insure
shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial
ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required
under Subsection (A) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a
"private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act.



   F.   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility's Liability:
The legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of
the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self- insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.



3-8-9:  INDEMNIFICATION:



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the
utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Chapter by the
Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



3-8-10.  SECURITY:



   A.   Purpose:  The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this Section.  The Security Fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee's
sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit.  The Security Fund shall serve as security for:



      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this Chapter;



      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village
occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued
pursuant to this Chapter; and



      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this Chapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this Chapter to perform that the Village
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
Village from the permittee pursuant to this Chapter or any other applicable
law.



   B.   Form:  The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the
Village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the Village.  Any surety bond or letter of credit
provided pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:



      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice
to the Village and the permittee;



      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and



      3.   Provide a location convenient to the Village and within
the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.



   C.   Amount:  The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Director of
Engineering, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the
Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform
such restoration.  Where the construction of facilities proposed under the
permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a
related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not
be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Village Director of Engineering may, in the exercise of
reasonable discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of
security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under
the permit.  The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall
be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this Subsection (C) for any single phase.



   D.   Withdrawals:  The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance
written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an amount from the
Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for
such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period.  Withdrawals may be
made if the permittee:



      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the Facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      3.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or



      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that
the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount from
the Security Fund.



      5.   Fails to comply with any other obligation of permittee
created by issuance of the permit which the Village determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of an amount from the Security Fund.



   E.   Replenishment:  Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of
written notice from the Village that an amount has been withdrawn from the
Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount
specified in Subsection (C) of this Section.



   F.   Interest:  The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by
the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village,
provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the
minimum balance required in Subsection (C) of this Section.



   G.   Closing and Return of Security Fund:  Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this Chapter or other applicable law.  In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a
result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs,
loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



   H.   Rights Not Limited:  The rights herein reserved to the Village
with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the
Village, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund
shall affect any other right the Village may have.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a  monetary recovery with
respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated in
excess of the Village's actual costs, loss or damage.



3-8-11:  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:



   A.   Village Right to Revoke Permit:  The Village may revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for one or more of the
following reasons:



      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      2.   Non-compliance with this Chapter;



      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way presents a direct and imminent threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare; or



      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit, approved plans and/or any
applicable laws, regulations, codes or ordinances.



   B.   Notice of Revocation or Suspension:  The Village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 3-8-11.



   C.   Permittee  Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation
or Suspension:  Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension
from the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:



      1.   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no
cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village,
the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of
such correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of
the written notice of suspension revocation; or



      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing
written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation.



   The Village, by its Director of Engineering,  may, in its discretion,
for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this Subsection.



   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within
Subsection A) of this Section.



   E.   Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply:  If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of Subsection (C) of this
Section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: (1)
correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to
the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not
less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the
non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village.  The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of
removal.



3-8-12:  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:



   A.   Notification of Change:  A utility shall notify the Village no
less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility
in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility.  The new owner of
the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges
enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this Chapter, with respect
to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   B.   Amended Permit:  A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership.  If the new owner fails to have
a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed
to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
Village's right-of-way.



   C.   Insurance and Bonding:   All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



3-8-13:  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:



   A.   Standards and Principles:  All construction in the
right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control
and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where
applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDIOT
publications:



      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      3.   Highway Design Manual;



      4.   Highway Standards Manual;



      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      6.   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill.  Adm.  Code ?545);



      7.   Flagger's Handbook; and



      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   B.   Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles:  If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this Chapter, the Village Director of Engineering shall
determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles
apply and such decision shall be final.  If requested, the Village Director
of Engineering shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.



3-8-14:  TRAFFIC CONTROL:



   A.   Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDIOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and this Code.



   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers:  The utility
is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and
local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers
when performing any work on the public rights-of-way.



   C.   Interference with Traffic:  All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic,



   D.   Notice When Access is Blocked:  At least forty-eight (48)
hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access
to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to Section 3-8-20 of this Chapter, the utility shall provide
such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.



   E.   Compliance:  The utility shall take immediate action to
correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought
to the utility's attention by the Village.



3-8-15:  LOCATION OF FACILITIES:



   A.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:



      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities.  An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right- of-way lines of a highway only if:



         i.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         ii.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance two feet (0.6 m) behind the
back of the curb to the face of the pole, where available;



         iii.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear
zone;



         iv.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         v.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities.  An underground
parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway
only if:



         i.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and
parallel to the right-of-way line;



         ii.   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         iii.   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the
right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



         iv.   The Village may require the utility to provide a
marker indicating the location of the utility within the right-of-way at
designated intervals.



   B.   Facilities Crossing Highways:



      1.   No Future Disruption.  The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
Village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement, additional cover or boring) to avoid settlement or
future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such
crossing facilities.



      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. 
Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or
drainage facilities.



      3.   90 Degree Crossing Required.  Crossing facilities shall
cross at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as
practicable.



      4.   Overhead Power or Communication Facility.  An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         i.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ILCC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm.  Code 305);



         ii.   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone;



         iii.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided; and



         iv.   Existing facilities are located on either side of
the highway.



      5.   Underground Power or Communication Facility.  An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         i.   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         ii.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      6.   Markers.  The Village may require the utility to provide
a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway.  Each marker shall
identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. 



   C.   Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way:  The
Village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   D.   Freestanding Facilities:



      1.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      2.   The Village may require any freestanding facility located
within a right-of-way to be screened (including fencing and/or landscaping as
approved by the Village Community Development Department) from view.



   E.   Appearance Standards:



      1.   The Village  may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands
being traversed.



   F.   Above Ground Installation:  Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:



      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible;
and



      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and
will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection
of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely
affecting safety.  Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable.



   G.   Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures:



      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable.  Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure.  Facilities transmitting commodities that
are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing.  Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         i.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         ii.   The type, length, value, and relative importance
of the highway structure in the transportation system;



         iii.   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         iv.   The proposed method of attachment;



         v.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         vi.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         vii.   The effect on the visual quality of the
structure; and



         viii.   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



3-8-16:  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:



   A.   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction
Methods:



      1.   Boring or Jacking.



         i.   Pits and Shoring.  Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Village Director of Engineering from the edge of the
pavement.  Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48
hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48
hours after boring or jacking operations are completed.  While pits are
open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades.  Shoring
shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will
safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it
during the boring or jacking operation.



         ii.   Wet Boring or Jetting.  Wet boring or jetting
shall not be permitted under the roadway.



         iii.   Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. 
Borings over six inches (0, 15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).



         iv.   Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less.  Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         v.   Tree Preservation.  Any facility located within
the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved shall be
bored under or around the root system.



      2.   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDIOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction" or the then current standards of the Village Engineering
Department if more restrictive.



         i.   Length.  The length of open trench shall be kept
to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line
testing.  Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any
time unless special permission is obtained from the Village Director of
Engineering.



         ii.   Open Trench and Excavated Material.  Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.  Where
practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway
and the trench as added protection, Excavated material shall not be allowed
to remain on the paved portion of the roadway.  Where right-of-way width
does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         iii.   The utility shall not trench within the drip line
of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.



      3.   Backfilling.



         i.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDIOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" or the then current
standards of the Village Engineering Department if more restrictive.  When
excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable
granular backfill shall be used.



         ii.   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility.  If so ordered by the Director of Engineering, the utility,
at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of
the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Director of Engineering,



      4.   Pavement Cuts.  Pavement cuts shall not be permitted for
new facility installations.  Pavement cuts for facility repair shall be
permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to
vehicular traffic.



   If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph 4) is
permitted under Section 3-8-21, the following requirements shall apply:



         i.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Engineering.



         ii.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately.  Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
Village.



         iii.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         iv.   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or
resurfaced in the last seven (7) years, permits shall not be issued unless
such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      5.   Encasement.



         i.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load
of the highway and any other superimposed loads.  The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the Village.



         ii.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot (0.3m) of the right-of-way line.  No above-ground
vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.



         iii.   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
Village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway.  Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
Village.  Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         iv.   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         v.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;



         vi.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of- way.



      6.   Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities.  Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 

TYPE OF FACILITY
 
MINIMUM COVER


Power or Communication Line (In General)
 

30 Inches  (0.8 m)



Communication Line installed by the Plowed Method
 
24 Inches  (0.6 m)


Gas or Petroleum Products
 
30 Inches (0.8 m)


Water Line
 
6.0 Feet (1.8m)


Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line
 
4.0 Feet (1.2m)



 



   B.   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.:



      1.   Electric Power or Communication Lines.



         i.   Code Compliance.  Electric power or communications
facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill.  Adm.  Code 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the
National Electrical Safety Code.



         ii.   Overhead Facilities.  Overhead power or
communication facilities shall usesingle pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed.  Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         iii.   Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be
installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is
given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances
and side roads. (2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking,
encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.  Encasement may
be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles,"
"whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the
opening for cable installation or (b) the installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall
be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.



      2.   Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or
Communication Lines.  Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         i.   the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         ii.   jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         iii.   open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         iv.   tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service.  Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated
in a Village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192
- Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDIOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.



      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines.  Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer
Lines or Drainage Lines.  Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois" and the Village's Land Development Code.



      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances.  Ground mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions.  The
vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Director of
Engineering.  With the approval of the Director of Engineering, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. 
The housing for ground- mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral
color to blend with the surroundings.



   C.   Materials:



      1.   General Standards.  The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDIOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      2.   Material Storage on Right-of-Way.  All pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public, damage to the right-of-way and other property and to avoid
being an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance.  If material is to be stored
on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the Village.



      3.   Hazardous Materials.  The plans submitted by the utility
to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   D.   Operational Restrictions:



      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the
discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare.  Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of
Engineering when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.



      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in Chapter 4 of Title 6 of this Code.



   E.   Location of Existing Facilities:  Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the Village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.  The
Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities.  When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and
physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)



3-8-17:  VEGETATION CONTROL:



   A.   Tree Trimming Permit Required:  Tree trimming shall not be
considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required
under this Chapter.



      1.   Application for Tree Trimming Permit.  Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices.  Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



      2.   Damage to Trees.  Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages.  The
Village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization.  The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees.  The
Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or
radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



   B.   Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance:  The Village
may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance.  The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   C.   Chemical Use:  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Director of Engineering that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.



3-8-18:  REMOVAL,  RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:



   A.   Notice:  Within ninety (90) days following written notice from
the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities
within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined
that such removal, relocation change or alteration, is reasonably necessary
for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village
improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the
rights-of-way.



   B.   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities:  Within thirty (30) days
following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls,
or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the
public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way.  A facility
is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:



      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license
or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this Chapter; or



      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.



   C.   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities:  The Village
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency.  If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to
notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and
shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   D.   Abandonment of Facilities:  Upon abandonment of a facility
within any public right-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the
Village within ninety (90) days, Following receipt of such notice the Village
may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
Village Director of Engineering determines that such removal will be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.  In the event that
the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove
it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village the abandoning utility
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by another utility or person.



3-8-19:  CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:



   Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the
utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in
a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the Village.  This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads.  Restoration of roadway surfaces
shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village Director of
Engineering.  Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project.



3-8-20:  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:



   A.   General.  Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.



   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures:  Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers.  If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency
is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided.  Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility is available.



      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible
but at least within 24 hours, notify the Village Director of Engineering or
his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to
what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what
will be required to make the necessary repairs.  If the nature of the
emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the
Village police shall be notified immediately.



      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   A.   Emergency Repairs:  The utility must file with the Village a
written description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48
hours after an emergency repair.



3-8-21:  VARIANCES:



   A.   Request for Variance:  A utility requesting a variance from
one or more of the provisions of this Chapter  must do so in writing to the
Village Director of Engineering as a part of the permit application.  The
request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a variance
is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   B.   Authority to Grant Variances:  The Village Director of
Director of Engineering shall decide whether a variance is authorized for
each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on an
individual basis.



   C.   Conditions for Granting of Variance:  The Village Director of
Engineering may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:



      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   D.   Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance:  As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Director of Engineering may
require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Chapter but
which carry out the purposes of this Chapter.



3-8-22:  PENALTIES:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this
Code.  There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs,
including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform
its duties under its permit and this Chapter.  Unless the utility shows that
another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is
appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its
costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the
facility that is the subject of the permit.  No other administrative agency
or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of
the Village.  Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility which does not pay the
costs apportioned to it. 



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16)



3-8-23:  ENFORCEMENT:



   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the Village  may have for enforcement of this
Chapter.



3-8-24:  SEVERABILITY:



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.



CHAPTER 9
SPECIAL EVENTS PERMITS



SECTION:



3-9-1:   Permit Required



3-9-2:   Special Events Defined



3-9-3:   Application for Permit



3-9-4:   Time of Application



3-9-5:   Issuance of Permits



3-9-6:   Receiving More Than One Application at Same Time



3-9-7:   Multiple Permits



3-9-8:   Times Parades, Other Special Events May Be Held



3-9-9:   Numbers Limited in Parades, Other Special Events



3-9-10:   Fees



3-9-1:  PERMIT REQUIRED:



   Any special events on public ways or public property controlled by the
Village shall be allowed by permit only.



3-9-2:  SPECIAL EVENTS DEFINED:



   "Special events" as used in this chapter shall mean group events or
events to which the general public is invited as either a participant or a
spectator and shall include, but not be limited to parades, special occasion
photography on village property, picnics of more than 20 persons on public
property, block parties which involve use of sidewalks or street rights of
way, festivals, Orland Days, open air meetings, athletic competitions or
events and other similar events or activities which involve a gathering of
more than 20 people.



(Amd. Ord. 5220, 9-5-17)



3-9-3:  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:



   Permits for special events shall be obtained from the Development
Services Department, or his/her media/special events coordinator. 
Application for said permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Development Services Department for the purpose and shall include, at a
minimum, the following information:



   (A)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking
to conduct the parade or special event.



   (B)   If the special event is proposed to be conducted for, on
behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of
the headquarters of the organization.



   (C)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will
be the chairperson of the special event.



   (D)   The date when the special event is to be conducted, as well as
the beginning and ending times.



   (E)   If a special event other than a parade, the type of event,
location of the event and the approximate number of persons expected to
attend or participate.



   (F)   If a parade or other event which will follow a fixed route:



      1.   The route to be traveled, the starting point, the
termination point, and the location of speakers' platforms, if any.



      2.   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and
vehicles which, will constitute the event, type of animals, and description
of the vehicles.



      3.   The hours when the event will start and terminate.



      4.   A statement as to whether the event will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.



      5.   The location by streets of any assembly areas for the
event.



      6.   The time at which units of the event will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas.



(Amd. Ord. 5220, 9-5-17)



3-9-4:  TIME OF APPLICATION:



   An application to conduct a special event shall be made in writing to
the Development Services Department at least thirty (30) days prior to the
event, by a representative of the group seeking the permit. Additional fees
will be charged for special event applications received within twenty nine
(29) days of the event.



(Amd. Ord. 5220, 9-5-17)



3-9-5:  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:



   Following receipt of an application or reapplication the Development
Services Department shall either issue a permit for the holding of the
special event or reject the application.  Permits may be rejected on the
basis of improper or incomplete application and, reasons for rejection shall
be made known to applicant, in writing, at the time of rejection.  The
applicant shall be allowed to correct or complete the improper application
and resubmit it to the Development Services Department, the required advance
notification time being still valid if a corrected application is resubmitted
at least 30 days prior to the time of the event.



(Amd. Ord. 5220, 9-5-17)



3-9-6:  RECEIVING MORE THAN ONE APPLICATION AT SAME TIME:



   If the Development Services Department shall receive more than one
application for a special event to take place at the same time and the same
place, the application filed first in time shall take precedence.  An
application shall be considered to be "at the same time" if the event is
scheduled to commence within two hours before or after the holding of another
event.  An application shall be considered to be "at the same place" if the
requested parade route comes at any point within six blocks or any equivalent
distance from the route of another parade or if the special event is to be
conducted within 1/2 mile of another special event.  If the Development
Services Department receives an application for more than one parade or
special event in a single day, he may set a time for the duration of each
parade or special event which time shall not, without the consent of the
group seeking the permit, be less than three hours.



(Amd. Ord. 5220, 9-5-17)



3-9-7:  MULTIPLE PERMITS:



   The Development Services Department may issue permits for more than a
single special event during one day in accordance with the requirements
above, provided, however, that he may not issue multiple permits beyond the
point at which the issuance of an additional permit would require the
continuing diversion of so great a number of police officers or other
municipal personnel so as to prevent normal police protection or other
services to the municipality.



(Amd. Ord. 5220, 9-5-17)



3-9-8:  TIMES PARADES, OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS MAY BE HELD:



   All parades shall be held during daylight hours at times other than
peak traffic periods (7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.) and (4:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.)
Monday through Saturday, and not before noon on Sundays.  All other special
events shall conclude by midnight and shall not be held before noon on
Sunday. 



3-9-9:  NUMBERS LIMITED IN PARADES, OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS:



   Parades and special events shall be limited to such numbers as will not
obstruct traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, in a manner determined by
the Village Manager to be unreasonable. 



(Ord. 3244, 4-19-99)



3-9-10: FEES:



   ALL EVENT APPLICATIONS ARE DUE 30 DAYS PRIOR TO THE EVENT. SEE BELOW
FOR ADDITIONAL FEES WHEN TURNING IN THE APPLICATION WITHIN 29 DAYS OF EVENT.



 

Special event categories
 
Base
 
Base fee notes
 
Examples of this type of event




Walk/run
 
$300
 
 
 
5K


Outdoor pictures/filming (without road closures or causing any obstructions)
 
$60
 
$30 for resident
 
Wedding, graduation


Small event - events not using, or using pre-built/existing accessory
structure such as a stage or platform. Can have a tent
 
$100
 
 
 
Mall events (pictures)
Vehicle exhibit


Small event not requiring an inspection (no structures)
 
$60
 
 
 
Corporate picnics, church events, fishing derbies, car washes


Recurring small event not requiring an inspection (no structures)
 
$100
 
Up to four
 
Car shows, movies


Food event
 
$100
 
 
 
Food sampling, demonstrations


Large event - events erecting a stage or platform or accessory structure.
Usually requires a tent and food served. May need a road closure
 
$290
 
 
 
Concerts, public events, televised events


Carnivals/circuses
 
$150
 
Fee is per day
 
 


Outside store sales
 
 
 
 
 
Temporary outside sales


Tent/sidewalk sale
 
$100
 
 
 
 


Garden center
 
$90
 
Fee is per month
 
 


Additional fees
 
 
 
 
 
 


Electric
 
$90
 
 
 
 


Temporary sign
 
$40
 
 
 
 


Food service one to five vendors
 
$90
 
DO not count VOP businesses
 
 


Food service more than five vendors
 
$180
 
Do not count VOP businesses
 
 


Inspections outside of business hours
 
$300
 
 
 
 


Permit application submitted 29-15 days prior to event
 
$200
 
In addition to normal fees
 
 


Permit application submitted 14-7 days prior to event
 
$500
 
In addition to normal fees
 
 




 



(Ord. 5220, 9-5-17)



CHAPTER 10
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



SECTION:



3-10-1:   Purpose



3-10-2:   Interaction with Other Code Provisions and Laws



3-10-3:   Definitions



3-10-4:   Zoning



3-10-5:   Permits; Application Process



3-10-6:   Construction



3-10-7:   Permit Duration



3-10-8:   Height Limitations



3-10-9:   General Requirements



3-10-10:   Stealth, Concealment and Design Standards



3-10-11:   Reservation of Village Utility Pole Space



3-10-12:   Applicability of Existing Agreements



3-10-13:   Collocation on Village Owned Infrastructure



3-10-14:   Notice of Sale or Transfer



3-10-15:   Abandonment



3-10-16:   Dispute Resolution



3-10-17:   Indemnification



3-10-18:   Insurance



3-10-19:   Maintenance of Small Wireless Facilities



3-10-20:   Revocation of Permit



3-10-21:   Exceptions to Applicability



3-10-1:  PURPOSE:



Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act (Public Act 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased demand
for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the Act
both within the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the Village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the Village to
adopt the code amendments set forth in this Chapter in order to establish
generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location,
construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and
removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public
rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the Village
so as to, among other things:



   A.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within
public rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the
Village;



   B.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small
wireless facilities are installed;



   C.   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities
and prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are
installed;



   D.   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to small wireless facilities;



   E.   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated
historic landmarks or districts within the Village; and



   F.   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not
negatively impact public safety and the Village's public safety technology. 
(Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-2:  INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS:



   A.   Other Code Provisions.  The provisions of this Chapter are
intended to supplement general requirements and standards relative to the
siting of telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements
for construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this
Code, including but not limited to the regulations set forth in Title 3,
Chapter 8 (Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way) of
the Orland Park Municipal Code, and Section 7-102 (Construction of Utility
Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way) of the Land Development Code.  In
the event of a conflict, however, the provisions of this Chapter shall
control in all matters involving small wireless facilities, as defined below.



   B.   State and Federal Laws.  In the event that applicable federal
or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter,
a wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating such federal or State laws or
regulations.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-3:  DEFINITIONS:



As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:



   "Act" means the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act
100-585).



   "Antenna" means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.



   "Applicable codes" means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing,
or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.



   "Applicant" means any person who submits an application and is a
wireless provider.



   "Application" means a request submitted by an applicant to the Village
for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well
as any applicable fee for the review of such application.



   "Authority" means the Village or other unit of local government that
has jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by
the Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has
zoning or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.



   "Collocate" or "collocation" means to install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole, whether existing or new.



   "Communications service" means cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.



   "Communications service provider" means a cable operator, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in
47 U.S.C.153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.



   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.



   "Fee" means a one-time charge.



   "Historic district" or "historic landmark" means a building, property,
or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i)
listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined
eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual
who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties
and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with
Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that
meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of
the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office
is pending.



   "Law" means a federal or State statute, common law, code, rule,
regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.



   "Micro wireless facility" means a small wireless facility that is not
larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15)
inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that has an exterior
antenna, if any, no longer than eleven (11) inches.



   "Permit" means a written authorization required by the Village or other
permitting authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete
a project.



   "Person" means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including
an authority.



   "Public safety agency" means the functional division of the federal
government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.



   "Public Utility" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section
3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/3-105.



   "Rate" means a recurring charge.



   "Right-of-way" means the area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for
compatible use.  "Right-of-way" does not include authority-owned aerial
lines.



   "Small wireless facility" means a wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna
that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could
fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and
(ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-five (25)
cubic feet in volume.  The following types of associated ancillary equipment
are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and
vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.



   "Structural Engineer" means a person licensed under the laws of the
State of Illinois to practice structural engineering.



   "Utility pole" means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole
or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.



   "Village" means the Village of Orland Park, Cook County, Illinois.



   "Village utility pole" means a utility pole owned or operated by the
Village in public rights-of-way.



   "Wireless facility" means equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration.  "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. 
"Wireless facility" does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on,
under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.



   "Wireless infrastructure provider" means any person authorized to
provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless
support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services
provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services
provider for the application submitted to the Village.



   "Wireless provider" means a wireless infrastructure provider and/or a
wireless services provider.  This does not include, and expressly excludes,
any person who is providing service to or for a private niche market.



   "Wireless services" means any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.



   "Wireless services provider" means a person who provides wireless
services.



   "Wireless support structure" means a freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities.  "Wireless support structure" does not include a
utility pole.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-4:  ZONING:



Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and shall not
be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or outside rights-of-way in the following zoning districts:



   BIZ General Business Zoning District;



   MFG Manufacturing Zoning District; and



   ORI Mixed Use Office, Research and Industrial Zoning District.



In all other zoning districts, the Village's normal zoning approvals,
processes and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval, processes or
restrictions are required by the Village's zoning ordinance.  (Ord. 5314,
7-16-18)



3-10-5:  PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS:



Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this Chapter, a permit to collocate
a small wireless facility within the Village is required in all cases. 
Permits are subject to the following:



   A.   Permit Applications:  Permit applications for the collocation
of small wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the Village
for such purpose.  In addition to any generally applicable information
required of other communications service providers or for other installations
in the public right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate
small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure,
provide the following information:



      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village
utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that
term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989;



      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility
or utility pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location
and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location
where utility poles or structures would be installed.  The photographs shall
include a digital photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before
and after" views demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small
wireless facilities on the surrounding environment;



      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural
engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering
Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by
the application as it is proposed to be installed;



      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and
all other equipment associated with the small wireless facility;



      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion
of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;



      6.   Certification that, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge, the collocation complies with the written design standards
established by the Village, and with the various other requirements set forth
in this Chapter and Code;



      7.   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by
or from the Village (i.e. zoning approval, where required), other agencies
and units of government with jurisdiction over the design, construction,
location and operation of said small wireless facility.  The applicant shall
maintain such licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and
provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and



      8.   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to
be attached to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned
by an entity other than the Village, legally competent evidence of the
consent of the owner of such pole or wireless support structure to the
proposed collocation.



   B.   Means of Submission:  Permit applications, along with all
supporting information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities
shall be submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the
Village.



   C.   Multiple Applications for Same Location:  Multiple
applications for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support
structure shall be processed based on a first fully complete application,
first-served basis.



   D.   Permit Application Fees:  All applications for collocation of
small wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in the following amounts:



 

Request to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation
of a new utility pole
 
$1,000.00


Request to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility
pole or wireless support structure
 
$650.00


Request to collocate multiple small wireless facilities on existing utility
poles or wireless support structures addressed in a single application
 
$350.00 per small wireless facility



 



   E.   Permit review timelines:



      1.   Completeness of Application:  Requests for the
collocation of small wireless facilities shall be reviewed for conformance
with the requirements of the Act, this Chapter, and other applicable
provisions of this Code.  Within thirty (30) days after receiving an
application, the Village must determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant.  If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information.  Processing deadlines are
tolled from the time the Village sends a notice of incompleteness to the time
the applicant provides the missing information.



         An application shall be deemed complete if the Village
fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the
date when all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the
Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
Village.



      2.   Existing Pole or Wireless Support Structure:  Requests
for the collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis
and either approved or denied within ninety (90) days of submission of a
completed application.  A permit application shall be deemed approved if the
Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days,
subject to the following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than seventy-five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application.  The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the
ninetieth (90th) day after submission of the completed application, or the
tenth (10th) day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the
Village.  Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not
preclude the Village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.



      3.   New Utility Pole:  Requests for the collocation of small
wireless facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall
be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied
within one hundred and twenty (120) days of submission of a completed
application.  A permit application shall be deemed approved if the Village
fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120)
days, subject to the following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.  The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the one
hundred twentieth (120th) day after submission of the completed application,
or the tenth (10th) day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the
Village.  Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not
preclude the Village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.



   F.   Tolling:  The time limitations for approval or denial of
applications shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application
is incomplete as set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by
a local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that
causes a delay.



   G.   Pole Replacement:  Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the
applicant's sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter or Code relative to the
siting of small wireless facilities, or other applicable codes and
regulations that concern public safety.



   H.   Denial:  The Village shall deny an application that does not
meet the requirements of this Chapter.  The reasons for any denial of a
permit shall be provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant,
and shall include the specific code provisions or application conditions on
which the denial is based.



   I.   Resubmittal After Denial:  In the case of a permit denial, an
applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and
resubmit a revised application once within thirty (30) days after the notice
of denial is sent without payment of an additional application fee.  The
Village shall have thirty (30) days to approve or deny the resubmitted
application or it is deemed approved, if the applicant has notified the
Village of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, which notification may be submitted with the resubmitted
application.  Review of a resubmitted application is limited to the
deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial.  This subsection does
not apply if a revised application is not resubmitted within thirty (30)
days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires review
of a new location, new or different structure for collocation, new antennas,
or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.  In
such cases, a new application and application fee are required.



   J.   Consolidated Applications:  Consolidated applications for
small wireless facilities for the collocation of up to twenty-five (25) small
wireless facilities shall be allowed if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the
same type of structure.  Each consolidated application shall provide all the
information required by this Chapter for each small wireless facility at each
location.  If such an application includes incomplete information for one
(1) or more small wireless facility collocations, or includes requests for
small wireless facilities that do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or
that are otherwise denied, the Village may remove such collocation requests
from the application and treat them as separate requests.  Separate permits
may be issued for each collocation approved in a consolidated application.



   K.   Alternate Locations:  If an applicant is seeking to install a
new utility pole as part of its application, the Village may propose that the
small wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed
collocation.  The applicant shall accept the proposed alternate location so
long as it has the right to use the location on reasonable terms and
conditions, unless the alternate location imposes technical limits or
additional material costs as determined by the applicant.  If the applicant
refuses an alternate location based on the foregoing, the applicant shall
provide legally competent evidence in the form of a written certification,
under oath, describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost
reasons that prevent the alternate location from being utilized.



   L.   Exemptions:  No application, permit approval or fee shall be
required from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the
right-of-way when the work in question is for:



      1.   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless
facilities if the wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least
forty-eight (48) hours prior to the planned maintenance;



      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless
facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the
wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least ten (10) days
prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications,
including (i) equipment type and model numbers, for the replacement of
equipment consistent with the equipment specifications information required
on a permit application for original installation; and (ii) information
sufficient to establish that the replacement is substantially similar.  The
wireless provider shall provide all information necessary and requested by
the Village to establish that the replacement is substantially similar.  The
Village has the sole right and responsibility to determine if a proposed
small wireless facility is substantially similar to the existing small
wireless facility; or



      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that
are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable
safety codes.



   The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers from
Village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or lane
closures are required.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-6:  CONSTRUCTION:



   Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within
one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the permit, unless the Village
agrees to extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a
Village utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul
availability at the site, provided the applicant has made a timely request
within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power
or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does
not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. 
Permits that are not completed within applicable timelines shall be void
absent an extension granted in writing by the Village.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-7:  PERMIT DURATION:



   Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this Chapter
shall be for a period of five (5) years.  Permits are subject to renewal at
the end of the five (5) year permit period for a successive five (5) year
term so long as the installation complies with the applicable code provisions
in force at the time of renewal.  A finding by the Village at the time of a
request for renewal that an installation does not comply with the applicable
code provisions in force at the time of the renewal request shall be in
writing.  If the Act is repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, all permits granted by the Village under this Chapter
shall terminate at the end of their current term.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-8:  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:



   A.   Antenna Installations:  The maximum permitted height of a
small wireless facility is ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless
support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.



   B.   New Poles:  The maximum permitted height of new or replacement
utility pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility
is collocated is the higher of:



      1.   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing
utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities,
that is in place on the date the application is submitted, and that is
located within three hundred (300) feet of the new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way
within the Village.  The Village may designate which intersecting
right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed utility pole or
wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or



      2.   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.



   C.   Waiver Process:  A wireless provider may receive a waiver from
the development services director or his or her designee from the maximum
permitted height of a new pole set forth in this Section, if the wireless
provider can establish that:



      1.   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular
hardship or practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has
not been created by the wireless provider; and



      2.   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or
a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by
this Section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary
to function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and



      3.   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless
support structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for
a new pole allowed by this Section, is not technically feasible.  (Ord.
5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-9:  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:



   A.   Public Safety Technology:  A wireless provider's operation of
a small wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a
public safety agency for public safety communications.  A wireless provider
must install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will
not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's
communications equipment.  Unacceptable interference is determined by and
measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations
addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other
spectrum licenses by a public safety agency.  If a small wireless facility
causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written
notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless
provider, at its own expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to
correct and eliminate the interference, including, but not limited to,
powering down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small
wireless facility for intermittent testing, if necessary.  The Village may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference
if the wireless provider is not making a good faith effort to remedy the
problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures
for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47
CFR 90.675.  The burden to establish the good faith effort shall be on the
wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the Village all information
necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the interference consistent
with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited above.  Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance
and the small wireless facility may be abated through the procedures for
abatement of such nuisances set forth in this Code.



   B.   A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any small
wireless facility that:



      1.   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public
safety on a right-of-way;



      2.   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;



      3.   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;



      4.   Violates or conflicts with Title 3, Chapter 8
(Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way) of this
Code, Section 7-102 (Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public
Rights-of-Way) of the Land Development Code, or other applicable regulations
set forth in this Code or otherwise adopted by the Village, except to the
extent such chapters, sections or regulations may be modified by the
provisions of this Chapter; or



      5.   Violates the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.)



   C.   Contractual Requirements:  Wireless providers shall comply
with all requirements imposed by a contract between the Village and any
private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the
right-of-way.



   D.   Ground-Mounted Equipment:  Wireless providers shall comply
with the ground mounted equipment spacing requirements, if any, within
rights-of-way as set forth in Title 3, Chapter 8 (Construction of Utility
Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way) of the Orland Park Municipal Code,
and Section 7-102 (Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public
Rights-of-Way) of the Land Development Code.



   E.   Undergrounding:



      1.   The wireless provider shall comply with Village code
provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, if any,
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles or equipment in the right-of-way.



       2.   A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
development services director or his or her designee to allow small wireless
facilities to be located above ground in an area where Village ordinances or
regulations prohibit or restrict above ground facilities if the wireless
provider can establish that all of the following standards have been met:



         a.   Underground equipment is not technically feasible
and there is no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically
favorable to adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of
the right-of-way; and



         b.   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage
in a specified area; and



         c.   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or
constitute a safety hazard; and



         d.   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies;
and



         e.   Space exists within the public right-of-way to
accommodate the above ground small wireless facility at the proposed
location; and



         f.   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location will not create a safety hazard; and



         g.   The above ground small wireless facility is located
and designed in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent
properties; and



         h.   In any historical area, that the above ground small
wireless facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the
area; and



         i.   All other reasonable alternatives for placement of
the wireless facility have been exhausted.



         j.   Screening for Ground Mounted Facilities.  Where a
ground-mounted facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around
the perimeter in accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional
landscape engineer.  Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous
and coniferous planting materials.  The owner or wireless provider shall be
responsible for maintenance of all landscaping as provided in the approved
landscape plan.



      3.   [Reserved.]



      4.   Future Undergrounding:  The Village may, from time to
time, make a decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular
type generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant
portion of the Village.  In the event that such a utility pole has a
collocated small wireless facility in place at the time of such a decision,
the Village shall either:



         a.   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install
and maintain a reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the
collocation of the small wireless facility; or



         b.   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless
provider at a reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its
own utility pole so it can maintain service from that location.



   F.   Collocation Limits:  Wireless providers shall not collocate
small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an
electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker
safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.



      However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility
pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the
wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top
of the pole.



      For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications
space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have
the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as
published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.



   G.   Code Compliance:  Wireless providers shall comply with
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-10:  STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:



Every small wireless facility installation shall comply with the following
standards:



   A.   General Standards:  Every small wireless facility collocation
within the Village shall comply with the following standards.



      1.   Small wireless facilities:



         a.   Antennas shall be mounted no less than twelve (12)
feet above ground level.



         b.   Antennas shall, to the extent technically feasible,
be designed and installed to appear hidden within the utility pole or to
appear like an original part of the utility pole or wireless support
structure.



         c.   Each antenna not hidden within a utility pole shall
be located entirely within a shroud enclosure not more than six (6) cubic
feet in volume that is capable of accepting paint to match the approved color
of the small wireless facility.



         d.   Top-mounted antennas and their enclosures shall not
extend the diameter of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the
level of the antenna attachment.



         e.   Side-mounted small wireless facility antennas
within a shroud enclosure and side-mounted small wireless facility equipment
enclosures shall be, if possible, flush mounted to the utility pole or
wireless support structure at the level of the attachment.  Metal flaps or
"wings" shall extend from the enclosure to the utility pole or wireless
support structure to conceal any gap between the between the small wireless
facility and the utility pole or wireless support structure.  The design of
the flaps shall be integrated with the design of the small wireless facility.



         f.   Small wireless facilities located on street light
poles or traffic control structures shall not block light emanating from the
street light fixture or otherwise interfere with the purpose of the street
light fixture or traffic control structure.



         g.   Small wireless facilities shall be attached to the
utility pole or wireless support structure using rigid steel clamping mounts
or stainless steel banding to the exterior of any metal pole.  All mounts
and banding shall be of the same color as the utility pole or wireless
support structure, except as otherwise approved by the public works
director.  Care should be taken to integrate the mounting elements into the
small wireless facility design.  Through-bolting or use of lag bolts on
Village-owned utility poles is prohibited.



         h.   For attachments to existing utility poles, wires
serving the small wireless facility shall be concealed within the hollow
interior of the utility pole, or if concealment is not technically feasible,
flush mounted to an existing utility pole in an enclosed wire chase on which
the facilities are collocated.  All wires and wire chases must match the
color of the utility pole.  For new utility poles or wireless support
structures, wires serving the small wireless facility shall be concealed
within the hollow interior of the utility pole or wireless support structure.



         i.   All small wireless facilities shall be installed in
accordance with all applicable Village codes.  No wiring or cabling shall
interfere with any existing wiring or cabling installed by the Village, a
utility or a wireless services provider.



         j.   No guy or other support wires will be used in
connection with a small wireless facility unless the small wireless facility
is to be attached to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure
that incorporates guy wires prior to the date the applicant has applied for a
permit.



         k.   The small wireless facility, including the antenna,
and all related equipment when attached to an existing or new utility pole or
wireless support structure, must be designed to withstand a wind force and
ice loads in accordance with the applicable standards established in Chapter
25 of the National Electric Safety Code for utility poles, Rule 250-B and
250-C standards governing wind, ice, and loading forces on utility poles, in
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in TIA/EIA Section 222-G
established by the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and the
Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel wireless support structures
and the applicable industry standard for other existing structures.  For any
small wireless facility attached to a Village-owned utility pole or, in the
discretion of the Village, to a non Village-owned utility pole or wireless
support structure, the operator of the small wireless facility must provide
the Village with a structural evaluation of each specific location containing
a recommendation that the proposed installation passes the standards
described above.  The evaluation must be prepared by a professional
structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.



         l.   The Village will not authorize any attachments of
small wireless facilities to a Village-owned utility pole that negatively
impacts the structural integrity of the pole.  The Village may condition
approval of the collocation on replacement or modification of the
Village-owned utility pole if necessary to meet Village standards.



         m.   Small wireless facilities shall be located in a
manner that meets the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and does not
obstruct, impede or hinder the usual pedestrian or vehicular path of travel.



         n.   Small wireless facilities collocated on
Village-owned utility poles may not use the same power or communication
source providing power and/or communication for the existing
infrastructure.  The wireless provider shall coordinate, establish, maintain
and pay for all power and communication connections with private utilities.



         o.   A four (4) inch by six (6) inch plate with the
wireless provider's name, location identifying information, and emergency
telephone number shall be permanently fixed to the small wireless facility
equipment enclosure or shroud.



         p.   All wireless providers must submit drawings and
renderings, along with structure plans, of all utility poles that will be
impacted and/or replaced.  The drawings and renderings must include the
location of equipment on poles, dimensions to scale, location of all proposed
ground-mounted equipment, and any other information deemed necessary by the
Village in order for the Village to complete an appearance review.



      2.   Replacement of Existing Street Light Poles:  The
following standards apply when replacing an existing street light pole with a
combination small wireless facility and street light pole.  Such
replacements should only be located where an existing street light pole can
be removed and replaced, or at a new location where it has been identified
that a street light is necessary.  All such replacements shall meet the
following standards:



         a.   All replacement street light poles shall be a
similar design, material, and color as the replaced existing street light
pole and other poles within the immediate area.



         b.   All replacement street light poles and pole
foundations shall conform to the Village's standards and specifications for
street light design and construction.



         c.   Replacement street light poles shall be an equal
distance from other street light poles based upon the average distance
between existing street light poles within the designated area.



         d.   Street light poles shall be designed and engineered
to support a luminaire and mast arm of length equal to that of the existing
pole to be replaced or of a length approved by the public works director
based upon the location of the replacement street light pole.



         e.   All luminaires and mast arms shall match the arc
and style of the original luminaire and mast arm, unless otherwise approved
by the public works director.



         f.   The replacement luminaire and mast arm shall be at
the same height above the ground as the existing luminaire and mast arm.



         g.   All replacement street light poles shall have new
light emitting diode (LED) light fixtures of the same manufacturer, model and
light output as the removed fixture and nearby light fixtures, or as
otherwise approved by the public works director.



         h.   Replacement street light poles shall have a five
(5) year manufacturer's replacement warranty.



         i.   Replacement street light poles shall meet American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials structural
guidelines for roadway applications and the American National Standards
Institute requirements for vibrations.



         j.   Street light pole height shall be measured from the
ground to the top of the street light pole.



         k.   All replacement street light pole heights shall be
consistent with those of existing street lights.



         l.   The small wireless facility components shall be
sized appropriately to the scale of the street light pole.



         m.   A decorative transition shall be installed over the
equipment enclosure upper bolts, or a decorative base cover shall be
installed to match the equipment enclosure size.  All hardware connections
shall be hidden from view.  Each street light pole component shall be
architecturally compatible to create a cohesive aesthetic.



         n.   Replacement street light poles shall continue to be
owned by the Village.



      3.   Installation of new wireless support structures, where
allowed:



         a.   A new wireless support structure shall be designed
to minimize the visual and aesthetic impact of the new vertical element and
associated small wireless facilities upon the surrounding area and shall
blend in with the surrounding streetscape with minimal visual impact.  The
Village may require a new wireless support structure to be constructed of a
specific material that will enhance the stealth and concealment of the
structure.



         b.   New wireless support structures shall match the
design, type, material and color of existing utility poles, including street
light poles, within the immediate area, except as otherwise approved by the
public works director.



         c.   Within residentially zoned areas, new wireless
support structure installations shall be located where the shared property
line between two (2) residential parcels intersect the right-of-way whenever
possible, unless an unsafe condition, cluttered appearance, or other
violation of these standards will result.  No ground-mounted equipment shall
be located in the front yard setback.



         d.   New wireless support structures shall be equal
distance from other utility poles based upon the average distance between
existing utility poles within the designated area.  If a new wireless
support structure cannot be located the average distance from other utility
poles, a new wireless support structure may be approved if such wireless
support structure is designed as a stealth pole.



         e.   The centerline of a new wireless support structure
shall be in alignment with existing utility poles where present, or with
street or parkway trees along the same side of the right-of-way.



         f.   New wireless support structures shall be located a
minimum of twelve (12) feet from driveway aprons.



         g.   New wireless support structures shall be sited
outside the critical root zone of existing trees having a six (6) inch
diameter at breast height located in the immediate vicinity.



         h.   The outside diameter of any new wireless support
structure shall not exceed the diameter of existing utility poles located
within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the new wireless support
structure.



         i.   New wireless support structures shall not exceed
the heights as authorized by Section 3-10-8.



         j.   New wireless support structures shall be round in
shape with a smooth pole shaft.



         k.   New wireless support structures incorporating
pole-mounted small wireless facilities shall be taped in diameter from the
base to the top, with a maximum diameter of twelve (12) inches at the base
and a maximum diameter of eight (8) inches at the top.



         l.   New wireless support structures incorporating small
wireless facilities in an equipment enclosure within a base may utilize poles
tapered in diameter or poles having a consistent outside diameter.



         m.   All new wireless support structures must be
supported with a reinforced concrete foundation designed, stamped, sealed and
signed by a professional engineer licensed and registered in the State of
Illinois, and subject to the approval of the public works director.



         n.   All anchor bolts must be concealed from public
view, with an appropriate pole boot or cover powder-coated to match the
wireless support structure color.



         o.   If multiple requests are received to install two
(2) or more wireless support structures in approximately the same location,
in a manner that would violate these requirements or other Village
requirements, the Village shall resolve such conflict through whatever
reasonable and nondiscriminatory manner it deems appropriate.



   B.   Stealth, Concealment and Design Standards:  In addition to the
requirements set forth in A. above, small wireless facility installations
shall comply with the stealth, concealment and design standards that are
generally applicable to utility installations in the public right-of-way, as
set forth in Title 3, Chapter 8 (Construction of Utility Facilities in the
Public Rights-of-Way) of this Code and Section 7-102 (Construction of Utility
Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way) of the Land Development Code, the
requirements and standards set forth in Section 6-311 (Wireless Communication
Facilities and Satellite Dishes) of the Land Development Code, as well as any
written design standards for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by the
Village in an ordinance or this Code, written policy adopted by the Village
Board of Trustees, in the Village's comprehensive plan, or in another written
design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including
in a historic district.  In addition:



      1.   The use of stealth technology in the location and
construction of small wireless facilities is required whenever and wherever
possible.  Stealth technology means using the least visually and physically
intrusive design and equipment that is not technologically or commercially
impractible under the facts and circumstances, to employ methods that blend
into surroundings and not be visible; and to minimize adverse aesthetic and
visual impacts on the right-of-way, property, building and/or other
facilities adjacent to, surrounding and in generally the same area as the
requested location of such small wireless facilities.



      2.   Small wireless facilities, including but not limited to
antennas, equipment enclosures, mounting brackets and hardware, mounting
posts, cables, and shrouds, shall be of a color that is identical to the
utility pole or of a neutral color compatible with the color of the utility
pole and any surrounding elements so as to camouflage or conceal their
appearance, create consistency among right-of-way infrastructure, and to make
such small wireless facilities as unobtrusive as possible.



      3.   Mechanical equipment and devices shall be concealed
underground, mounted within a concealment box designed as a decorative pole
base or within unobtrusive equipment enclosures or other devices mounted
directly to the pole a minimum of eight (8) feet above ground level and
screened by means of Village-approved banners or other approved concealment
methods.  Small wireless facilities shall not interfere with or block any
existing signage or other Village installations (banners, holiday décor,
etc.) located on a utility pole.



      4.   Small wireless facilities must be located and oriented in
such a way as to minimize view blockage.



      5.   The wireless provider shall use the smallest suitable
wireless facilities then in industry use, regardless of location, for the
particular application.



      6.   Additional landscaping and fencing shall be required to
help mitigate the effects of the installation of any ground-mounted equipment.



      7.   Small wireless facilities shall not be artificially
lighted or marked, except as required by law.



      8.   Small wireless facilities, other than top-mounted
antennas, shall be mounted on the side of the utility pole or wireless
support structure opposite the direction of vehicular traffic along the same
side of the right-of-way.



      9.   Alternative measures for concealment may be proposed by
the wireless provider and approved by the public works director, if the
public works director determines that the optional measures will be at least
as effective in concealing the small wireless facilities as the measures
required above.



   C.   Historic Districts and Landmarks:  For areas designated as
historic districts, including but not limited to the Old Orland Historic
District, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or
contributing structures within a designated historic district pursuant to
Section 6-209 (Old Orland Historic District) of the Land Development Code, in
addition to the stealth, concealment and design requirements referenced
above, the following additional restrictions/conditions apply to the
installation of small wireless facilities:



      1.   Small wireless facilities shall not be mounted upon:



         a.   Village-owned ornamental street lights within
rights-of-way in the Old Orland Historic District;



         b.   Ornamental street lights within rights-of-way in
any other designated historic district;



         c.   Locations outside of the right-of-way in the Old
Orland Historic District; or



         d.   On any designated historic landmark within the
Village or on contributing structures within the Old Orland Historic District
or any other designated historic district.



      2.   Small wireless facilities located within the right-of-way
in the Old Orland Historic District or within the right-of-way in any other
designated historic district shall utilize stealth technology and be designed
in such a manner so as to preserve the character of district, ensure
consistency with the surrounding elements, blend architecturally with any
buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or located within a
designated historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the
surrounding historical landmarks and/or district in design and color.



   D.   Historic District Limitations:



      1.   Any stealth, concealment and design standards, including
restrictions on a specific category of utility poles, may not have the effect
of prohibiting any provider's technology.  Such stealth, concealment and
design measures shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility
for purposes of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility.



      2.   This subsection shall not be construed to limit the
Village's enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the
requirements adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources
Preservation Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C.
Section 300101 et seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those
laws.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-11:  RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE:



   The Village may reserve space on Village-owned utility poles for future
public safety uses or for Village electric utility uses.  Such reservation
may preclude collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village
reasonably determines that the Village's utility pole cannot accommodate both
uses.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-12:  APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS:



   A.   Existing Installations:  Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.



   B.   Applications Received Between June 1, 2018 and June 1, 2020: 
Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement
is in place between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1,
2018, such agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted
after June 1, 2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt
by the Village from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to
accept the rates, fees and terms of this Chapter and the Act received after
June 1, 2020, whichever is later.



   C.   Applications Received After June 1, 2020:  Subject to any
applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place
between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of
small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June
1, 2020, until receipt by the Village of a notice from the wireless provider
that it is accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-13: COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE:



   A.   Fee:  The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on
a Village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:



      1.   Two hundred dollars ($200)/year per small wireless
facility; or



      2.   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the
wireless providers use of space on the pole.



   B.   Exception:  Small wireless facilities collocated on
Village-owned utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not
subject to the rate limitations in this Section.



   C.   Attachment Agreement:  An attachment agreement in a form
approved by the Village is required for any collocation upon any Village
owned utility pole or wireless support structure.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-14:  NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER:



   A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership
or control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of
the Village, provide written notice to the Village of such sale or transfer
of control.  Such notice shall include the name and contact information of
the new wireless provider.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-15:  ABANDONMENT:



   A.   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of
the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days
after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying it of the
abandonment.  The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at its last known
address.  If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90)
days after receipt of such notice, such wireless facility shall be deemed to
be a nuisance and the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant to the terms of
its pole attachment or other agreement for Village utility poles or through
the procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in this Code.



   B.   In the event the Village suspects that the wireless provider is
no longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it
may send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless
provider to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the
small wireless facility is operational and still being used within thirty
(30) days, and informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or
to remove the small wireless facility will result in the Village removing the
small wireless facility at the wireless provider's cost.  (Ord. 5314,
7-16-18)



3-10-16:  DISPUTE RESOLUTION:



   The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Act.  Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Village
utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the
collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than
two hundred dollars ($200) per year per pole, with rates to be determined
upon final resolution of the dispute.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-17:  INDEMNIFICATION:



   Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the Village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider
shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability
or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out
of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village infrastructure
or improvements, or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or
contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this
Chapter and the Act.  A wireless provider proceeding under this Chapter
waives any claims it may have against the Village with respect to
consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-18:  INSURANCE:



   At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's
facilities are located on Village infrastructure, improvements or in
right-of-way, the wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense,
carry the following insurance coverages:



   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against
all risks;



   B.   Workers' Compensation insurance within statutory limits as
required by law; and



   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way,
including coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not
less than:



      1.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000,000) for bodily injury
or death to each person;



      2.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000,000) for property damage
resulting from any one (1) accident; and



      3.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000,000) for all other types
of liability.



      The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide
certificates of insurance and proof of inclusion of the Village in a
commercial general liability policy to the Village prior to the collocation
of any small wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof
of inclusion on file with the Village at all times that the provider
maintains small wireless facilities within the Village.



   D.   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limits required by the Village.  A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to
comply with the requirement that the Village be named an additional
insured.  A wireless provider that self-insures shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance limits required by the Village.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-19:  MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:



   A.   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless
facilities installed within the Village in a condition that maintains the
safety, integrity and aesthetics of such facilities.  Small wireless
facilities shall not appear to be unkempt.  In the event of a failure to
properly maintain such facilities, the Village shall notify the wireless
provider, in writing, who shall have thirty (30) days to correct the
identified maintenance violation.  If not corrected within such period, the
Village reserves the right to take such action as it deems necessary,
including revocation of the permit.  Maintenance and replacement of small
wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless provider at the
wireless provider's sole cost and expense.



   B.   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to
life or property, the Village may take corrective action to eliminate such
emergency at the wireless provider's expense.  (Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-20:  REVOCATION OF PERMIT:



   A.   A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked
for one (1) or more of the following reasons:



      1.   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud
or made a misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit
application, or any required documentation or submittal.



      2.   The wireless provider failed to construct the small
wireless facility in accordance with the approved plans.



      3.   The wireless provider failed to comply within any
material condition of a permit issued.



      4.   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered
the use or the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was
requested in the permit application or approved, without the approval of the
Village.



      5.   The wireless provider failed to notify the Village of the
replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this Chapter.



      6.   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the
wireless provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the
small wireless facility is located.



      7.   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or
pedestrian use of the public right-of-way.



      8.   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and
timely restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located.



      9.   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the
small wireless facility as required by this Chapter.



      10.   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference
with public safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement
and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum
established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47
CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.



      11.   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the
wireless provider has failed to remove the small wireless facility as
provided in this Chapter.



   B.   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation.  The wireless provider shall,
within fourteen (14) days of the notice of revocation, file a written
response with the development services director or his or her designee
setting forth the reasons why the permit should not be revoked along with
such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the wireless provider
determines necessary.  Failure to file a response with the development
services director or his or her designee shall be deemed an admission of the
facts set forth in the notification of written notification and shall result
in automatic revocation of the permit.  The development services director or
his or her designee shall render findings and a decision within twenty-one
(21) days of the date of receipt of the wireless provider's response, if any.



   C.   If the development services director or his or her designee
revokes the permit, the wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal
with the Village Clerk within twenty-one (21) days of notification of the
permit revocation.  Such notice shall contain a response to the decision of
the development services director or his or her designee.  The Village Board
shall hear the revocation appeal and render a decision on such appeal. 
(Ord. 5314, 7-16-18)



3-10-21:  EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:



   A.   Nothing in this Chapter authorizes the collocation of small
wireless facilities on:



      1.   Property owned by a private party without the written
consent of the property owner;



      2.   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local
government that is not located within rights-of-way without the written
consent of the unit of local government (local governments are, however,
required to authorize the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility
poles owned or controlled by the local government or located within
rights-of-way to the same extent the local government permits access to
utility poles for other commercial projects or uses);



      3.   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support
structure, without the consent of the property owner;



      4.   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district,
forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park,
recreation or conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected
district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in
an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a
different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code
(605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.); or



      5.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section
18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18c-7201), Metra Commuter
Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as
defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102),
without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or
electric utility.



   B.   The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to:



      1.   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such
utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and
maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section
16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act; and



      2.   Small wireless facilities owned by the Village.  (Ord.
5314, 7-16-18)



TITLE 4 WATER AND SEWER



CHAPTER  1   COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM



CHAPTER  2   METERS



CHAPTER  3   CHARGES AND RATES



CHAPTER  4   CONNECTIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER  5   CONNECTIONS; HOUSE CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM



CHAPTER  6   CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS; SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM



CHAPTER  7   DISCHARGES; STORM AND SANITARY SEWERS



CHAPTER  8   WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER  9   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM GROWTH POLICY



CHAPTER 10   RETENTION AND DETENTION PONDS



CHAPTER 11   WATER SUPPLY CROSS CONNECTIONS



CHAPTER 12   VILLAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE



CHAPTER 1
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM



SECTION:



4-1-1:   Declaration of Necessity



4-1-2:   Properties of System



4-1-3:   Operation of Combined Utility



4-1-4:   No Service in Unincorporated Area



4-1-5:   Exception, Conditions



4-1-6:   Additional Conditions



4-1-7:   Compliance with the MWRD Industrial Waste Pretreatment Program



4-1-1:  DECLARATION OF NECESSITY:



   It is hereby found, determined and declared necessary for the best
interests of the Village that the existing waterworks system of the Village
and the existing sanitary sewerage system of the Village be combined into a
single utility to be known and designated as the combined waterworks and
sewerage system of the Village.



4-1-2:  PROPERTIES OF SYSTEM:



   All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising the now existing
waterworks system and existing sanitary sewerage system of the Village
consisting of:



   1.   A complete waterworks transmission and distribution system
consisting of water mains, valves, meters, meter boxes, and all necessary
appurtenances and appliances for the transmission, distribution and storage
of water; and



   2.   A sanitary sewerage system consisting of a network of trunk
line and collector sewer mains; is hereby found, determined and declared to
constitute the properties of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of
the Village.  (Ord. 194, 11-9-59)



   All of those assets enumerated in that certain Installment Agreement
for Purchase of Utility Company Assets between the Star Utility Company and
the Village of Orland Park upon conveyance, assignment and delivery to the
Village by Star Utility Company pursuant to the terms of said Agreement,
shall be and become a part of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of
the Village.  (Ord. 719, 11-22-76)



4-1-3:  OPERATION AS COMBINED UTILITY:



   From and after the effective date hereof, said existing waterworks
system and said existing sanitary sewerage system shall be owned and operated
by the Village as a combined utility, known as the combined waterworks and
sewerage system of the Village, and all improvements and extensions to said
waterworks or sewerage system, either or both, shall be considered as
improvements and extensions to said combined utility; and all the properties,
assets, obligations and liabilities, of all kinds, of said waterworks system
and of said sanitary sewerage system, existing, outstanding and accruing or
to accrue, shall be held, used, confessed and acknowledged as the properties,
assets, obligations and liabilities of said combined utility.  (Ord. 194,
11-9-59)



4-1-4:  NO SERVICE IN UNINCORPORATED AREAS:



   No water and/or sanitary sewer service will be furnished or supplied by
the Village to unincorporated areas.



4-1-5:  EXCEPTION, CONDITIONS:



   A variance to the prohibition in Section 4-1-4  may be granted upon a
4/5 affirmative vote of the corporate authorities then holding office if at
least one (1) of the following conditions are met, and all of the conditions
in 4-1-6, below, are met:



   (a)   The water and/or sanitary sewer main(s) which would serve the
property in question immediately abuts this property and no extension of
publicly maintained water and/or sewer mains is required;



   (b)   A contract existing on or before the effective date of
adoption of this Code section requires the Village to provide water and/or
sanitary sewer service to the property in question;



   (c)   The proposed water and/or sanitary sewer connection is
necessary and in the best interests of the Village in order to obtain a grant
of easement or right-of-way in favor of the Village of Orland Park;



   (d)   The proposed water and/or sanitary sewer connection assists
the Village in looping or otherwise improving the reliability of the existing
municipal water and/or sanitary sewer system; or



   (e)   The owner of the property in question and the Village have
executed a pre-annexation agreement providing for the annexation of the said
property to the Village upon it becoming contiguous to the Village
boundaries, anticipated to occur within one (1) year of the date of such
pre-annexation agreement.



4-1-6:  ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS:



   In addition to meeting at least one of the conditions in Section 4-1-5,
above, any proposed request for connection to the Village's water and/or
sanitary sewer system must comply with the conditions listed below, unless a
contract existing on or before the effective date of adoption of this Code
section specifically provides differently:



   (a)   The parcel(s) do not require a storm water management system,
which would include rear yard or street storm sewers under which a
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago (MWRD) permit is
required;



   (b)   No other utility service is available as determined by the
Village Engineer;



   (c)   The proposed development meets the Village's Comprehensive
Plan and all of the Village's other planning requirements, such as density,
tree preservation, park or open space donation;



   (d)   The owner/developer has executed an agreement with the Village
to pay school and transportation exaction fees as required by the Village
Land Development Code;



   (e)   No other governmental jurisdiction, including surrounding
communities, townships or the county, has an objection to the development
plan;



   (f)   For an area north of 131st Street, the location must meet the
criteria established in Village of Orland Park Resolution #9620;



   (g)   The owner/developer must agree to "loop" the water system
within the development and/or to existing facilities;



   (h)   The Village must review and approve all connection locations,
construction plans, studies and drawings necessary for the connection to
Village maintained facilities;



   (i)   The owner/developer shall provide a study to the Village
showing anticipated water usage for the entire development once fully
complete.  This will be reviewed by the Village to determine if sufficient
water capacity and storage is available;



   (j)   The owner/developer must submit a Letter of Credit to assure
completion of any public improvements in a form and amount, and with a
financial institution, acceptable to the Village;



   (k)   The owner/developer shall construct and install booster pumps
as required for proper pressure to the water customers;



   (l)   The owner/developer will agree in writing to defend and hold
harmless the Village and its officers and employees with respect to any and
all claims and liabilities in connection with the delivery of water service
and sanitary sewer service without limitation;



   (m)   The owner/developer will pay to the Village the connection fee
at the then current rate ($2,500 for a single family detached unit, as of the
date of adoption of this Code amendment), and the owner/developer will
reimburse the Village for its cost of the water meter supplied by the Village;



   (n)   The owner/developer shall be in good standing (i.e., no
history of default in agreements with the Village) with the Village of Orland
Park;



   (o)   The owner/developer and all present and future property owners
must pay to the Village the unincorporated water charges as established by
the Village from time to time; and



   (p)   The geographic limits for the service area are as follows:
123rd Street on the north between Wolf Road and LaGrange Road; 139th Street
on the north, between Will-Cook Road and Wolf Road; 135th Street on the north
between LaGrange Road and Harlem Avenue; and I-80 on the south.  (Ord. 3698,
10-7-02)



4-1-7: COMPLIANCE WITH THE MWRD INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT PROGRAM:



   The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago ("MWRD")
Sewage and Waste Control Ordinance ("SWCO"), effective November 18, 2010, as
the same may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference by the Village, as authority for administration and enforcement
of the industrial waste pretreatment program within areas of the Village that
are subject to the agreement for sewerage services between the MWRD and the
Village and the amendments thereto.



   The requirements of the SWCO are applicable to all industrial waste
discharges within the service areas of the Village in addition to all local
ordinances relating to industrial waste discharges to the Village's sewerage
system. Where provisions of the SWCO are in conflict with the provisions of
any local ordinances, the more stringent provisions will apply.



(Ord. 4728, 5-7-12)



CHAPTER 2
METERS



SECTION:



4-2-1:   Type and Design



4-2-1a   Definition



4-2-2:   Meter Restrictions



4-2-3:   Responsibility of Owners



4-2-4:   Vacate Premises, Turn Off Supply



4-2-5:   Computation of Charges When Meter Fails



4-2-1:  TYPE AND DESIGN:



   For all purposes that Village water may be used, or may be applied for,
meters shall be installed only of a make, type or design approved by the
Village Board of Trustees.  (Ord. 3582, 12-17-01)



4-2-1a:  Definition:



   For purposes of this Chapter, and elsewhere in this Code where
reasonable, “meter” shall mean any registering device, to measure or
otherwise indicate water consumption or usage, which device is approved by
the Village Board of Trustees for installation upon premises served by
Village water.  (Ord. 3582, 12-17-01)



4-2-2:  METER RESTRICTIONS:



   No person shall alter, change, remove, reset, or in any manner
interfere with the action or visibility of any meter which has been installed
upon any premises where such meter has been installed to register the
consumption of water furnished by the Village upon said premises.  (Ord.
3582, 12-17-01)



   No person shall use, set, attach or fix any device, attachment, pipe or
hose, or use any means whatsoever calculated to circumvent the flow of water
from service connections from a meter which has been installed upon any
premises for the purpose of registering the flow of water used in and upon
the premises to the pipe leading from such meter into the distributor upon
said premises.



   No person shall use, take or cause to be taken water direct from any
hydrant within the Village unless authority to do so shall first be received
and had from the Municipal authorities of the Village.



   No person shall take water from a faucet that passes through the meter
installed on the premises of another person without first having obtained
written permission from the Village Board.



4-2-3:  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS:



   Where water is supplied to a building which has been rented, and the
water is consumed by tenant or tenants, the landlord is held responsible for
water so consumed, and shall pay the amount of money due therefore, as
provided by this Title.



4-2-4:  VACATE PREMISES, TURN OFF SUPPLY:



   Whenever it can be determined that premises will become or remain
vacant for more than thirty (30) days, it shall be the duty of the owner, or
person in charge thereof to cause the water supply thereof to be shut off
until such time as said premises shall again be occupied.  A fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the Finance Department for the
shutting off or turning on of the water, by virtue of this Section.



4-2-5:  COMPUTATION OF CHARGES WHEN METER FAILS:



   In the event that the reading on the inside meter and the outside
register differ, the inside meter is the meter of record. Where a discrepancy
occurs between these two registering devices, the resident shall be billed
according to the read on the inside meter.  Whenever any meter, by reason of
its being out of repair, or for any cause, fails to properly register the
water passing through the same, the consumer shall be charged at the rate
shown for a corresponding time of a previous year under like conditions.  If
no record of a previous year exists, then it shall be the duty of the
Director of Finance to estimate or determine so far as he can, the amount of
water consumed during the time such meter fails to operate, and the consumer
shall pay the amount estimated by the Director of Finance.  (Ord. 4078,
9-19-05)



CHAPTER 3
CHARGES AND RATES



SECTION:



4-3-1-1:   Water and Sewer and Stormwater Service Charges Within Corporate
Limits



4-3-1-2:   Water and Sewer Service Charges Outside of Corporate Limits



4-3-1-3:   Billing Errors



4-3-1-4:   Unit Defined; One Meter Serving Several Units, Calculating
Charges



4-3-1-5:   Adjustment of Rates



4-3-2:   Liability for Payment of Charges



4-3-3:   Rendition of Bills



4-3-4:   Delinquent Payments



4-3-5:   All Service Metered



4-3-6:   Disposition of Moneys



4-3-7:   Books and Accounts



4-3-1-1:  WATER AND SEWER AND STORMWATER SERVICE CHARGES WITHIN CORPORATE
LIMITS



There shall be and are hereby established charges and rates for the use of
and for the service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system
of the Village where the premises to which such service and use is furnished
are located within the corporate limits of the Village.  Use and service for
water shall be metered and the bimonthly charges for water, sewer and
stormwater service shall be as set forth below.  Rates are shown for the
fiscal year to which they apply.  Bills may be paid by VISA, MASTERCARD and
DISCOVER as well as check or cash.  A 10% penalty shall be added to all
bills not paid by the due date on the bill.  (Ord. 4336, 2-4-08; Amd. Ord.
4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd. Ord.
5071, 3-14-16)



      A.     Water Charges and Rates



 

Bimonthly service charge per billing unit (except as otherwise determined by
the Village for residential lawn-sprinkler only accounts)


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Service Charge
 

$9.00

 

$9.49

 

$9.97

 

$10.46

 

$10.99




 



(Ord. 4332, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4700, 2-6-12; Amd. Ord. 4783, 1-21-13; Amd.
Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd.
Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



 

Bimonthly usage charge per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of water supplied


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Tier 1: 0 - 7,000
 

$5.66

 

$6.02

 

$6.32

 

$6.63

 

$6.96



Tier 2: 7,000 - 12,000
 

$7.07

 

$7.52

 

$7.90

 

$8.29

 

$8.70



Tier 3: 12,000 - 22,000
 

$8.49

 

$9.02

 

$9.47

 

$9.95

 

$10.45



Tier 4: Over 22,000
 

$9.90

 

$10.53

 

$11.05

 

$11.61

 

$12.19




 



(Ord. 4332, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4700, 2-6-12; Amd. Ord. 4783, 1-21-13; Amd.
Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd.
Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



      B.   Sewer Charges and Rates



 

Bimonthly volume charge per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of water supplied


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Sewer Rates - Incorporated
 

$1.01

 

$1.06

 

$1.11

 

$1.17

 

$1.23




 



 

Residential Sewer Bill Cap


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Sewer Cap
 

$33.26

 

$34.93

 

$36.67

 

$38.51

 

$40.43




 



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



      C.   Sewer Charges and Rates (Will County Areas)



         1.   All property within the Village located a) in
Frankfort Township and west of Wolf Road, Will County, and b) in New Lenox
Township, Will County, is subject to a wastewater or sewer treatment charge
(also known as waste water reclamation) for treatment and disposal of
sewerage wastes.



         2.   The computed sewer treatment charges are in
addition to the charges set forth in subsection B. above.



         3.   The amount of the wastewater treatment charges
provided under this section shall be presented separately on the quarterly
utility bill from any other charges contained therein.



         4.   Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Chicago
Service Area.



            (a)   For those portions of the Village which lie
within Frankfort Township, west of Wolf Road, Will County, and within New
Lenox Township, Will County, and also within the wastewater service area
under an agreement between the Village and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago (hereinafter “MWRD”), an amount shall be
charged for wastewater treatment services and computed as follows:



               (i)   The most currently available equalized
assessed valuation for the property at the time the quarterly bill is being
prepared shall be multiplied by the most recent available real estate tax
rate of the MWRD for property within its district boundaries (primarily in
Cook County) and the result thereof shall be multiplied by 140% to obtain the
annual wastewater treatment charge for such property.



               (ii)   One quarter of this amount shall be
added to each subsequent quarterly utility bill rendered.



               (iii)   Each year, as a new equalized
assessed valuation becomes available for the subject property and/or a new
tax rate becomes available for the MWRD, the amount of such user charge shall
be recomputed utilizing such new equalized assessed valuation and/or tax rate
and shall apply to the subsequent quarterly utility bills rendered.



            (b)   This sewer treatment charge is applicable to
all properties which lie within the corporate limits of the Village in
Frankfort Township, west of Wolfe Road, Will County, and within New Lenox
Township, Will County, and also within the designated wastewater service area
under an agreement between the Village and the MWRD regardless of whether the
property is vacant land or otherwise developed.



            (c)   From time to time, a property owner may have
had cause to appeal the valuation of property for property tax purposes, or
have an error corrected that affects the property valuation, which may have
resulted in the recalculation of the related annual property tax bill. Should
a property valuation (equalized assessed valuation) for a given tax year be
reduced, the Village utility customer may be eligible for a reduction in the
related sewer treatment charge which is based on the equalized assessed
valuation.



               (i)   The recalculation of an annual sewer
treatment charge under this section due to a subsequent adjustment to
equalized assessed valuation will not occur automatically as the Village is
not notified of such changes as they occur. It is the property owner’s
responsibility to notify the Village of such changes in order to initiate the
recalculation of the annual sewer treatment charges.



               (ii)   The property owner must provide the
Village Finance Director, or such other person that may be designated by the
Finance Director, with valid and legible documentation of the revised or
adjusted equalized assessed valuation. Upon verification and validation of
the information provided, the calculation of the annual sewer treatment
charges based on that tax year’s equalized assessed valuation can be
recalculated and adjusted.



               (iii)   Any such adjustment to the sewer
treatment charge will be provided as a credit against the current and future
sewer treatment charges.  (Amd. Ord. 5049, 12- 7-15; Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



      D.   Stormwater Service: 



 

Bimonthly volume charge per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of water supplied
shall be


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Storm Water  Incorporated
 

$1.76

 

$1.85

 

$1.92

 

$1.98

 

$2.04




 



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



      E.   Residential lawn-sprinkler-only accounts shall not be
required to pay sewer or stormwater charges.  (Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd.
Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14- 16)



4-3-1-2:  WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES OUTSIDE OF CORPORATE LIMITS



There shall be and are hereby established charges and rates for the use of
and for the service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system
of the Village, where the premises to which such service and use is furnished
are located outside the corporate limits of the Village.  Use and service
for water shall be metered and the bimonthly charge for water, sewer and
stormwater service shall be as set forth below. Rates are shown for the
fiscal year to which they apply. Bills may be paid by VISA, MASTERCARD or
DISCOVER, as well as by check or cash.  A 10% penalty shall be added to all
bills not paid by the due date on the bill. (Ord. 4336. 2-4-08; Amd. Ord.
4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd. Ord.
5071, 3-14-16)



      A.   Water Charges and Rates



 

Bimonthly service charge per billing unit


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Service Charge
 

$9.00

 

$9.49

 

$9.97

 

$10.46

 

$10.99




 



(Ord. 4332, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4700, 2-6-12; Amd. Ord. 4783, 1-21-13; Amd.
Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd.
Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



 

Bimonthly usage charge per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of water supplied


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Tier 1: 0 - 7,000
 

$8.21

 

$8.72

 

$9.16

 

$9.62

 

$10.10



Tier 2: 7,000 - 12,000
 

$10.26

 

$10.90

 

$11.45

 

$12.02

 

$12.62



Tier 3: 12,000 - 22,000
 

$12.31

 

$13.08

 

$13.74

 

$14.42

 

$15.15



Tier 4: Over 22,000
 

$14.36

 

$15.26

 

$16.03

 

$16.83

 

$17.67




 



(Ord. 4332, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4700, 2-6-12; Amd. Ord. 4783, 1-21-13; Amd.
Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd.
Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



      B.   Bulk Water Rates for Citizens Utility Service to Alpine
Heights



 

Bimonthly service charge per billing unit


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Service Charge
 

$9.00

 

$9.49

 

$9.97

 

$10.46

 

$10.99




 



(Ord. 4332, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4700, 2-6-12; Amd. Ord. 4783, 1-21-13; Amd.
Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd.
Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



 

Bimonthly usage charge per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of water supplied


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Current Utilities Bulk Water Rate
 

$6.86

 

$7.20

 

$7.56

 

$7.94

 

$8.34




 



(Ord. 4332, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4700, 2-6-12; Amd. Ord. 4783, 1-21-13; Amd.
Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd.
Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



      C.   Sewer Charges and Rates (except Alpine Heights)



 

Bimonthly volume charge per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of water supplied


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Sewer Rates - Unincorporated
 

$2.29

 

$2.41

 

$2.53

 

$2.65

 

$2.79




 



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



      D.   Stormwater Service (except Alpine Heights)



 

Bimonthly charge per 1,000 gallons or part thereof of water supplied


 
 

FY 2016

 

FY 2017

 

FY 2018

 

FY 2019

 

FY 2020



Storm Water - Unincorporated
 

$1.32

 

$1.39

 

$1.44

 

$1.48

 

$1.53




 



(Ord. 3587, 1-21-02; Amd. Ord. 3974, 1-17-05; Amd. Ord. 4295, 10-15-07; Amd.
Ord. 4332, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd.
Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-1-3:  BILLING ERRORS:



An error in water and/or sewer charge billing shall not constitute waiver of
claim for adjustment.



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-1-4:  UNIT DEFINED; ONE METER SERVING SEVERAL UNITS, CALCULATING CHARGES:



A unit, for the purposes of this Section, shall be a residential dwelling
unit, an industrial or business establishment, public building, fraternal,
eleemosynary or religious institution. 



(Ord. 3232, 3-16-99; Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd.
Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-1-5:  ADJUSTMENT OF RATES:



   The water and sewer charges and rates herein in this Section set forth
shall be adjusted from time to time as follows:



   Any increase or decrease in the charges made by the City of Chicago,
Illinois and/or by the Village of Oak Lawn, Illinois for water supplied shall
be directly factored into the rates effective on the first day of the month
following such changes.



   Any increase or decrease in the charges made for electrical energy
other than the adjustment for summer and winter usage shall be directly
factored into the rates effective on the first day of the month following
such change in electrical energy charges.



   Personal services, contractual services, (excluding purchased water and
electricity) commodities and departmental cost transfers shall be factored
into said rates on January 1 of each year, based on the annual budget for the
fiscal year commencing on said date, passed by the Board of Trustees of the
Village.



(Ord. 1402, 12-27-84; eff. 2-1-85; Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955,
12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-2:  LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES:



The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises
and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service
are jointly and severally liable therefore to the Village.



(Ord. 1129, 11-16-81; Amd. Ord. 4874, 12- 16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14;
Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15; Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-3:  RENDITION OF BILLS:



It is hereby made the duty of the Director of Finance to render bills for
service and all other charges in connection therewith and to collect all
moneys due thereon.  All bills for service shall be rendered indicating a
due date not less than fifteen (15) days after the date reflected on the
bill.  A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills paid after
the due date so indicated.  A bill shall not be considered past due unless
the payment is received by the Village after the due date printed on the
bill.  VISA, MASTERCARD and DISCOVER may be used for payment bills.



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-4:  DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:



In the event the charges for service are not paid by the due date, such
charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent. In the
event the charges for such service become delinquent as defined above, the
Village Finance Director or his or her designee is hereby authorized and
directed to notification to be given in writing to the give notification in
writing to the account holder that a delinquency exists and that payment must
be made is due immediately. The first notice, entitled “Notice of
Delinquency” shall be mailed or delivered after the due date.



A lien for delinquent charges is created upon the real estate upon or for
which water and/or sewer service is supplied when the Village mails or
delivers to the owner(s) of record of the real estate as identified by the
Permanent Index Number a written notice which includes:



   1.   A copy of each delinquency notice sent to the person who is
delinquent in paying the charges or rates, or other notice sufficient to
inform said owner(s) of record that the charges or rates have become
delinquent;



   2.   A statement that the unpaid charges or rates may create a lien
on the real estate; and



   3.   A sworn statement setting out:



      a.   A description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof;



      b.   The amount of money due for the water and/or sewer
service; and



      c.   The date when such amount became delinquent.



A copy of the lien notice shall be mailed or delivered to the owner(s) of
record of said real estate.  Delivery under this Section may be accomplished
by personal delivery or by placement with a recognized commercial delivery or
courier service such as Federal Express (FedEx) or United Parcel Service
(UPS).



In the event payment is not made after the Village has mailed or delivered
the Notice of Delinquency as set forth above, the Village Finance Director or
his or her designee shall cause to be mailed or delivered to the customer a
written final notice informing the customer not only of the possibility of
termination/disconnection of service if the delinquent bill is not paid
immediately but also of the procedures for disputing the bill in the manner
hereinafter set forth in this Section.



The Village shall not disconnect service at the meter subsequent to two
o'clock (2:00) P.M. unless the Village shall be prepared to reconnect the
same day at the standard reconnection charge, if any.  No service shall be
disconnected on a holiday or weekend day unless the Village is prepared to
reconnect on the holiday or weekend day.



The service shall not be disconnected and shall be restored if disconnected
for the reason which is the subject of a dispute or complaint during the
pendency of procedures relating to said dispute or complaint.  The Finance
Director's designee shall hear all matters relating to disputes or complaints
relating to the operation and charges for the services of the Combined
Waterworks and Sewerage System of the Village.  The Village shall consider
the complainant’s allegations and shall explain the user’s account and
the contention of the Village in connection therewith.  The said Finance
Director's designee shall be authorized to act on behalf of the Village in
resolving the complaint.  Said designee shall be available during all
business hours for the hearing of said complaints.  In the event said
designee shall be unavailable during said business hours, the Finance
Director shall conduct said hearing.



Where any dispute between the Village and a customer cannot be resolved
between the parties, the Finance Director's designee shall inform the
customer, if the customer expresses nonacceptance of the decision of the said
designee, that the customer has the right to have the problem considered and
acted upon by supervisory personnel of the Village.  The supervisory
personnel shall be the Finance Director if the decision as made by said
designee or the Village Manager if the decision was made by the Finance
Director.



When a user disputes a particular bill, the Village shall not disconnect
service for nonpayment so long as the user:



   1.   Pays the undisputed portion of the bill or an amount equal to
last year’s bill at the location for the same period; and



   2.   Pays all future periodic bills by the due date; and



   3.   Enters into bona fide discussions with the Village to settle
the dispute with dispatch.



Disconnection of service to residential customers is prohibited for up to
sixty (60) days when discontinuance of service will aggravate an existing
serious illness of any person who is a permanent resident of the premises
where service is rendered if the user complies with the following
requirements regarding such illness.



The illness must be certified to the Village by a registered physician or
local Board of Health.  The certification shall be in writing and shall
include the name of the ill person, a statement that he/she is a resident of
the premises in question, the name, business address and telephone number of
the certifying party, the nature of the illness and the period of time during
which termination will aggravate the illness.



Initial certification by the certifying party may be by telephone if written
certification is forwarded to the Village within five (5) days.



Initial certification shall prohibit disconnection of service for thirty (30)
days.  Certification may be renewed by the user for an additional thirty
(30) days by providing another certificate to the Village.  Failure to so
renew the certificate shall entitle the Village to initiate disconnection
procedures.



The user must enter into an agreement for the retirement of the unpaid
balance of the account within the first thirty (30) days and keep the current
account paid during the period that the unpaid balance is to be retired.



In the event service is terminated within fourteen (14) days prior to
certification of illness by or for a qualifying resident service shall be
restored to that residence if a proper certification is thereafter made in
accordance with the foregoing provisions.



Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent disconnection of
service for reasons of safety, health, or cooperation with other civil
authorities.



Residential users who are indebted to the Village for past due service shall
have the opportunity to make arrangements with the Village to retire the debt
by periodic payments referred to hereinafter as deferred payment agreement
unless said user has failed to make payment under such a plan during the past
twelve (12) months.  Nonresidential users who are indebted to a utility for
past due service may have the opportunity, at the discretion of the Village,
to make arrangements with the Village to retire the debt by periodic payments
referred to hereinafter as a deferred payment agreement.



The terms and conditions of a deferred payment agreement may be determined by
the Village after consideration of the following:



   1.   Size of the past due account; and



   2.   User’s ability to pay; and



   3.   User’s payment history; and



   4.   Reasons for the outstanding indebtedness; and



   5.   Any other relevant factors relating to the circumstances of the
user’s service.



Late payment  charges  may  be  assessed  against  the  amount  owing
which is the subject of a deferred payment agreement.



Deferred payment agreement shall be in writing, with a copy provided to the
user, and shall conform to the following requirements:



   1.   The user shall be required to pay all future bills for utility
service by the due date; and



   2.   User shall retire his/her debt according to the terms of the
deferred payment agreement.



If a user shall default upon any payment due under the deferred payment
agreement, the Village shall have the right to discontinue service as herein
provided.  (Ord. 1129, 11-16-81)



In the event service shall be disconnected, a fee of Seventy-Five Dollars
($75.00) shall be charged and paid for the first shutoff for any account
before said service shall be reconnected. The second disconnection for the
same account will require a payment of a One Hundred Dollar ($100.00) fee and
a One Hundred Dollar ($100.00) deposit.  The third disconnection and any
succeeding disconnections for the same account will require payment of a One
Hundred and Fifty Dollar ($150.00) fee.  The disconnection/reconnection fee
is due upon notice of disconnection whether or not the actual disconnection
has been done. The One Hundred Dollar ($100.00) deposit shall be returned
after one year of on-time payment is recorded for the account. (Ord. 2877,
5-6-96)



Failure to pay after service has been disconnected shall constitute a lien
upon the real estate for which such service is supplied. The Village Finance
Director or his or her designee is hereby authorized to file sworn detailed
statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
or the office of the Registrar of Title, Cook or Will County, Illinois. The
notice of lien shall be sent to the taxpayer shown on the tax bill of the
property involved as the owner of record if the user is not the owner of the
parcel involved. The Village may also, at its election, institute a civil
action to recover such delinquent charges. The notice of lien shall be in
substantially the form designated on file in the office of the Village Clerk.



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-5:  ALL SERVICES METERED:



No free service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Village
shall be furnished to any person, firm, organization or corporation, public
or private.  Every user of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of
the Village shall have a metered water connection to said system and every
such water meter shall be sealed.



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-6:  DISPOSITION OF MONEYS:



All revenue and moneys derived from the operation of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system shall be held by the Director of Finance separate and
apart from all other funds of the Village, and all of said sum, without any
deductions whatsoever, shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer not more
than five (5) days after receipt of the same, or any such more frequent
intervals as may from time to time be directed by the President and Board of
Trustees.



The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenue from the combined
waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in a separate fund designated as the “Waterworks and Sewerage Fund of
the Village of Orland Park”, and said Treasurer shall administer such Fund
in every respect in the manner provided for by law.



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



4-3-7:  BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS:



The Director of Finance shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an
audit by a certified public accountant of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.



(Amd. Ord. 4874, 12-16-13; Amd. Ord. 4955, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5049, 12-7-15;
Amd. Ord. 5071, 3-14-16)



CHAPTER 4
CONNECTIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS



SECTION:



4-4-1:   Connections



4-4-1-1:   Connection Permit; Application; Plans



4-4-1-2:   Connection Charge; Payment



4-4-1-3:   Meter Charge



4-4-2:   Rules and Regulations of the Village



4-4-3:   Right of Access for Inspection



4-4-1:  CONNECTIONS:



4-4-1-1:  CONNECTION PERMIT; APPLICATION; PLANS:



   No connection shall be made to the combined waterworks and sewerage
system of the Village within the corporate limits without a permit having
been issued by the Director of the Building Department.  For areas outside
the corporate limits, an agreement or contract is required before connection
is permitted.  A written application for connection to the water facilities
of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Village shall be made
to the Director of the Building Department.  The application shall state the
name of the applicant, the permit desired, the location of the real estate
including the dimensions thereof and the location of the connection.  Such
application shall be accompanied by engineering plans indicating the
construction to be used.



   All water connections to the Village water facilities shall be made or
caused to be made by authorized personnel in the employment of the Village or
by a plumber approved by the Village.  Each such connection service shall
consist of the supply and insertion of a corporation cock only on the open
main at the service location designated by approved engineering plans.  All
water connections to the Village water system not made by authorized
personnel in the employment of the Village, shall be made by a licensed
plumber acting under the approval and direction of the Director of the
Building Department.  No plumber shall make or cause any such water
connection to be made unless he shall have first met all the requirements for
the lawful conduct of such trade in the Village.



   Service pipes shall serve one building only.  All service pipes shall
be laid at least five feet (5') below the final surface grade level.  The
water service shall be constructed of copper pipe for sizes two inches (2")
and smaller and of ductile iron for sizes in excess of two inches (2").



   Each residential water service customer shall have a separate metered
water service as an end unit user.  The service shall be tapped into the
water main and extend into the unit without passing through another user
unit.  Common area water service outlets such as yard areas shall be metered
independently.



   An exception may be allowed only for certain multi-floor buildings by
written approval from the Village Director of the Building Department based
upon good plumbing standards and practices.  If an exception is made, the
building will be supplied by one adequately sized service into a meter
room.  Inside the meter room, the service shall be manifolded to accept a
meter for each unit served.  The manifold shall be constructed similarly to
single meter settings with valving and padlock locking devices as approved by
the Village Plumbing Inspector.



   The meter room shall be accessible from a public area and constructed
solely for water meter housing.  A separate conduit shall be installed by
the electrical contractor from each meter to a common point area on the
building exterior.  Location and placement of the wiring shall be determined
by the Village Plumbing Inspector.



   Each commercial or industrial water service customer shall have the
option of determining a single service connection or multiple service
connection for each building.  Each service connection shall be tapped into
the water main and extended into the building it serves.  Each building
service connection shall have its own meter setting.  The service size,
construction, location and connection charge shall be approved by the
Director of the Building Department.  When the domestic water usage of a
building is determined by the Director of the Building Department to exceed
the maximum flow of a one-inch water service and one-inch water meter, each
service connection shall be tapped into the water main and extended into the
building it serves with a minimum of a two-inch water service and water
meter.  (Ord.  3341, 3-6-00)



   The Director of the Building Department shall calculate the appropriate
water service size for proper water flow to each building.  Where a
commercial or industrial customer prefers to use individual water services
and the total connection fee amount for the building exceeds the cost of a
larger combined single service connection for that building, as calculated by
the Director of the Building Department, the lesser of the two fees shall
apply.



   A single service meter serving two or more units of a building shall be
accessible from a public area readily open to the Village of Orland Park
personnel.



   The public water supply shall be protected by backflow prevention
device as required by this Code for all connections.



   A connection shall be considered to be made when, pursuant to a permit,
the meter is installed and water is available to the end unit user.  All
connection charges shall be paid to the Director of the Building Department.



(Ord. 2032, 8-20-90)



4-4-1-2:  CONNECTION CHARGE; PAYMENT:



   The applicant for a water connection permit shall, as a prerequisite to
the issuance of the permit for connection to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system of the Village, pay a connection charge which will be
deposited in the Village Water fund, which charge shall be a combination of
the applicable tap size and meter size as follows:



  CONNECTION FEE TABLE



 



Tap Size
 
Fire Demand Factors*
 
Tap Fee
 
Meter Size
 
Meter Demand  Factors**
 
Meter Fee
Per Meter


3/4"
 
1.6
 
$              363
 
3/4"
 
1.0
 
$          3,537


1"
 
2.6
 
$              590
 
1"
 
2.5
 
$          5,109


1 1/2”
 
2.9
 
$              658
 
1 1/2”
 
5.0
 
$        10,218


2"
 
6.19
 
$          1,406
 
2"
 
8.0
 
$        16,348


3"
 
17.98
 
$          4,083
 
3"
 
16.0
 
$        32,697


4"
 
38.32
 
$          8,701
 
4"
 
25.0
 
$        51,089


6"
 
111.31
 
$        25,274
 
 


8" or over
 
237.21
 
$        53,861


*Fire Demand Factors – AWWA Manual M1 Table 30-5 page 224


**Meter Demand Factors – AWWA Manual M1 Table 28-2 page 202




 



   For meter sizes over 4", the meter connection charge shall be
negotiated with the Director of Public Works and agreed upon between the
applicant and the Board of Trustees.  The Director of Public Works shall
base his or her recommendation to the Board of Trustees on an estimate of
water usage.  The applicant shall furnish the necessary information for the
Director of Public Works to make said estimate.



   Where there is a currently existing, effective annexation agreement,
subdivision agreement, or other agreement between the Village and developer
or homeowners group with respect to water connection fees, the fees charged
may differ until said agreement expires.



   If a larger meter set is added after the initial permit is issued, the
difference between the smaller and larger meter shall be due upon
installation of the larger meter.



   Payment:  The time of payment of the connection charges herein
provided may be modified by the Village and an applicant or future applicant
by the terms of an annexation agreement executed pursuant to the provisions
of Division 15.1 of Article 11 of Act 5 of the Illinois Municipal Code, or by
the terms of a development agreement between the Village and applicant.



   However, where there is currently existing an annexation agreement,
subdivision agreement, or other agreement between the Village and developer
or homeowners group with respect to water connection fees, the fees charged
shall be in accord with Ordinance 1308 until said agreement expires.



   If a larger meter set is added after the initial permit is issued, the
difference between the smaller and larger meter shall be due upon
installation of the larger meter.



   For a tap size over six inches (6"), the connection charge shall be
negotiated and agreed upon between the applicant and the Board of Trustees
but it shall not be less than the minimum charge for a six inch (6") tap and
one inch (1") meter set.  The Village Engineer shall make a recommendation
to the Board of Trustees of the amount of the fee based on an estimate of
water usage.  The applicant shall furnish the necessary information for the
Village Engineer to make said estimate.



   Payment:  The time of payment of the connection charges herein
provided may be modified by the Village and an applicant or future applicant
by the terms of an annexation agreement executed pursuant to the provisions
of Division 15.1 of Article 11 of Act 5 of the Illinois Municipal Code, or by
the terms of a development agreement between the Village and applicant.



(Ord. 4378, 8-4-08)



4-4-1-3:  METER CHARGE:



   In addition to the connection charge required by Subsection 4-4-1-2,
above, a new water service shall be required to pay a charge for a meter as
established by the Department of Public Works.  Such charge shall include
the cost to the Department of the meter, a reasonable charge for set up and
handling of the meter and an installation fee based on personnel and
equipment used for installation of remote meter-reading equipment, and
installation of the meter itself, if such installation is performed by the
Village.  (Ord. 3072, 11- 3-97)



4-4-2:  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE VILLAGE:



   The President and Board of Trustees are hereby authorized to make such
rules and regulations consistent with this Title for the connection to the
waterworks and sewerage system, specifying the types and sizes of pipes and
all the other appurtenances and extensions thereto, and amend the same system
shall comply with the said specifications and rules.  Any person not
complying with the specifications and rules for connections to the waterworks
from time to time as may be deemed necessary.  All service pipes and
connections to the combined waterworks and sewerage and sewerage system shall
be subject to a penalty as hereinafter provided.



4-4-3:  RIGHT OF ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:



   Employees of the waterworks and sewerage system shall have the right at
all times of access to any person's premises, for the purpose of ascertaining
the number and type of water and sewer connections to the combined system. 
Any person refusing the right to permit the said employees of the waterworks
and sewerage system the above described right of access to his premises shall
be subject to a penalty as hereinafter provided.  (Ord. 233, 3-13-61)



CHAPTER 5
CONNECTIONS; HOUSE CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM



SECTION:



4-5-1:   Definitions



4-5-2:   Authority for Making and Repairing House Connections



4-5-3:   Responsibility for Installation, Cost, Maintenance and Repair



4-5-3-1:   Materials



4-5-3-2:   Size and Slope of House Connection



4-5-3-3:   Trenching and Backfilling



4-5-3-4:   One House Connection Per Building



4-5-4:   Inspection and Approval of House Connections



4-5-5:   Defective House Connections



4-5-6:   Septic Tanks and Cesspools



4-5-7:   Liability Insurance



4-5-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   PERSON:  Any individual, firm, association, company, corporation,
society, group, governmental body or partnership.



   SANITARY SEWER MAINS AND LATERALS:  The sanitary sewer interceptors,
mains and laterals either owned or proposed to be constructed by the Village.



   SEWER CONNECTIONS:  A sanitary sewer service line or pipe extending
from a sanitary sewer main or lateral of the Village to the approximate
property line of the premises to be served.



   HOUSE CONNECTION:  The sewer line or pipe extending from that part of
the sewer connection located at the approximate property line of the premises
to be served, to the house or building to be served.



   APPLICANT:  An owner (or owners) of premises who has made written
application to the Village for a permit to install or repair a house
connection.



   VILLAGE ENGINEER:  The official appointed by the President and Board
of Trustees who is in responsible charge of the operation, maintenance,
repair and inspection of the sanitary sewerage system owned by the Village.



4-5-2:  AUTHORITY FOR MAKING AND REPAIRING HOUSE CONNECTIONS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, install, repair, alter,
disturb, uncover, open or break into any house connection to the sanitary
sewerage system of the Village without first obtaining, on application filed
with the Village, a written permit therefore issued by the Village.



4-5-3:  RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION, COST, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:



   The applicant shall pay all costs and expenses for the installation of
his house connection, including all costs of labor and materials.  The owner
or person in control of premises shall pay all costs and expenses of
maintenance and repair of his house connection, including all costs of labor
and materials.



4-5-3-1:  MATERIALS:



   The house connections shall be of cast iron soil pipe (ASTM
Specification A74-42) or vitrified clay sewer pipe with precast joints (ASTM
Specification C13-44T).  Joints shall be made gas-tight and waterproof.  If
installed in filled or unstable ground, the house connection shall be of cast
iron soil pipe.



4-5-3-2:  SIZE AND SLOPE OF HOUSE CONNECTION:



   The house connection shall be at least six inches (6") in internal
diameter.  The slope or grade shall be at least one-eighth inch to one foot
(1/8" to 1').



4-5-3-3:  TRENCHING AND BACKFILLING:



   All excavations shall be open trench work unless otherwise authorized
by the Superintendent or his representative.  The foundation in the trench
shall be formed to prevent any subsequent settling of the pipes.  If the
foundation is of firm earth, the earth shall be pared or molded to give a
full support to the lower quadrant of each pipe.  Bell holes shall be dug to
provide ample space for pouring of joints.  Care must be exercised in
backfilling below the center line of the pipe in order to give it proper
support.  Backfilling shall be placed in layers and solidly tamped one foot
(1') above the pipe.



4-5-3-4:  ONE HOUSE CONNECTION PER BUILDING:



   A separate and independent house connection shall be provided for every
residence, commercial building or public building.  However, where one such
building stands in the rear of another such building located on an interior
lot, the house connection from the front building may be extended to the rear
building upon issuance of a written permit by the President and Board of
Trustees.



4-5-4:  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF HOUSE CONNECTIONS:



   The applicant for a house connection permit shall notify the Village
Engineer when the house connection installation or repair is ready for
inspection and connection to the sanitary sewerage system of the Village. 
The connection shall be made only under the supervision of the Village
Engineer or his representative. lt shall be unlawful for a house connection
to be covered or backfilled without prior inspection and approval by the
Village Engineer or his representative.  The Village Engineer or his
representative shall have access at all reasonable times to all premises in
the Village for the, purpose of inspecting or examining house connections.



4-5-5:  DEFECTIVE HOUSE CONNECTIONS:



   Whenever a house connection is obstructed, or if found to be broken or
defective so that sewage escapes therefrom into surrounding soil or adjacent
premises, repair or replacement may be ordered by the Village Engineer or his
representative.  Such repairs shall be at the expense of the owner or person
in control of such property.  When a part of a house connection is found to
be broken or broken into, such break or leak shall be properly repaired by
replacing the broken part with a corresponding new part.  Patching of such
break or leak is prohibited.



4-5-6:  SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS:



   It shall be unlawful for any septic tank or cesspool to be connected to
any portion of a house connection, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or
person in control of premises to install, construct, maintain or use a septic
system or cesspool on premises from the time such premises commenced to use
the sanitary sewerage system of the Village.  (Ord. 234, 3-13-61)



4-5-7:  LIABILITY INSURANCE:



   No permit to install or repair a house connection shall be issued to an
applicant unless the applicant or his contractor or his plumber shall have
first procured public liability insurance by an insurance company or
companies approved by the Village Manager in an amount not less than one
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for injuries, including
accidental death, to any one person and subject to the same limit for each
person in an amount not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) on account of one accident, and property damage insurance in an
amount not less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). The
Village shall be named as a party insured in said policy, and said policy or
a certificate and memorandum thereof shall be filed with the Village Clerk. 
In the event that an applicant proposes to personally install or repair his
own house connection, no permit to install or repair such house connection
shall be issued to him unless he has first procured a public liability
insurance policy in the amounts aforesaid issued by an insurance company or
companies approved by the Village Manager, in which policy the Village shall
be named as a party insured.  Said policy or a certificate and memorandum
thereof shall be filed with the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 255, 2-26-62)



CHAPTER 6
CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS; SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM



SECTION:



4-6-1:   Definitions



4-6-2:   Authority for Making Sewer Connections and House Connections



4-6-3:   Application for Connections



4-6-4:   Extensions and Sewer Connections and House Connections to
Extensions



4-6-5:   Changes in Ownership of Premises



4-6-6:   All Sewer Connections Property of Village



4-6-7:   Performance Bond



4-6-8:   Insurance



4-6-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   SANITARY SEWER MAINS AND LATERALS:  The sanitary sewer interceptors,
mains and laterals either owned or proposed to be constructed by the Village.



   SEWER CONNECTION:  A sanitary sewer service line or pipe extending
from a sanitary sewer main or lateral of the Village to approximately the
property line of the premises to be served.



   HOUSE CONNECTION: The sewer line or pipe extending from that part of
the sewer connection located at approximately the property line of the
premises to be served to the house or building to be served.



   EXTENSION:  A sanitary sewer main or lateral installed by a private
person for the purpose of extending the original sanitary sewer mains or
laterals of the Village or the sewer mains or laterals of the Village which
have been extended from time to time.



   APPLICANT:  An owner of premises who has made written application to
the President and Board of Trustees for permission to have a sewer
connection, a house connection or extension installed.



4-6-2:  AUTHORITY FOR MAKING SEWER CONNECTIONS AND HOUSE CONNECTIONS:



   No person shall make any sewer connection or house connection to the
sanitary sewer main or laterals of the Village except on written application
filed with the President and Board of Trustees of the Village and written
acceptance thereof by the Board.    (Ord. 235, 3-13-61)



4-6-3:  APPLICATION FOR CONNECTIONS:



   Applicants for sewer connections and/or house connections shall pay all
costs of labor and materials for installing the sewer connections, except in
those instances where the sewer connection has been installed by the Village
prior to June 1, 1965, and shall in all cases pay all costs of labor and
materials for installing the house connection, and installation may be made
only after issuance by the President and Board of Trustees of a permit
authorizing the sewer connection and house connection and specifying the
size, grade and materials thereof.  Such application for sewer connection
and/or house connections shall impose liability for a periodic sewer charge
to be billed the owner not later than ninety (90) days after service is
available to the owner's premises, whether or not said owner makes physical
connection to said sanitary sewerage system.



   Whenever after June 1, 1965, the Village shall install a sewer
connection, the cost of installation of such connection shall be paid to the
Village by the applicant at the time that application is made for connection
to the sanitary sewer system.  The Village Treasurer shall keep a record of
the cost of each such sewer connection.  (Ord. 305, 6-14-65)



4-6-4:  EXTENSIONS AND SEWER CONNECTIONS AND HOUSE CONNECTIONS TO EXTENSIONS:



   Owners of premises abutting on the sewer mains or laterals of the
Village shall make application and the sewer connections and house
connections shall be installed as hereinbefore set forth.  Applicants who
are owners of premises not abutting on the sewer mains or laterals of the
Village who desire sewer service from the Village shall install at their
expense sewer main or lateral extensions so as to provide sewer facilities
for their premises.



   No person shall make any extension to a sanitary sewer main or lateral
of the Village except as provided in this Section.



   All extensions to the sewer mains or laterals of the Village shall be
made only after written application filed with the President and Board of
Trustees, approval as to size, grade and materials by the Engineering
Department of the Village, and issuance by the Village of a permit
authorizing the same to be constructed and attached to the existing sewer
mains or laterals of the Village and thereupon said extensions shall become
part thereof.  There shall be no permit fee for the construction of an
extension to the Village sewer main or laterals.



   After completion and acceptance of a sewer main or lateral extension,
title to it shall be transferred and conveyed to the Village by the owner
free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances, without cost to the
Village, and thereafter the Village shall assume all costs of operation and
maintenance of such extension.



   Applicants making sewer connections and/or house connections to sewer
main or lateral extensions under the provisions of this Section shall pay all
costs of labor and materials for installing the same.



   Such application for a sewer connection and/or house connection
originating from an extension shall impose liability for a periodic sewer
charge to be initially billed the owner not later than ninety (90) days after
service is available to the owner's premises whether or not said owner makes
physical connection to said sanitary sewer system.



4-6-5:  CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP OF PREMISES:



   Irrespective of any change in ownership of premises, each parcel of
real estate for which application for sewer connection and/or house
connection has been filed and accepted by the Village, shall be liable for
the payment of the periodic sewer charge hereinbefore provided.



4-6-6:  ALL SEWER CONNECTIONS PROPERTY OF VILLAGE:



   All sewer connections after installation thereof shall be the property
of the Village and the Village shall assume all costs of maintenance and
repairs thereof.  (Ord. 235, 3-13-61)



4-6-7:  PERFORMANCE BOND:



   No permit for a sewer connection or a sewer extension shall be issued
by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village unless the person
applying therefore or the contractor shall have filed in the office of the
Village Treasurer or Director of Finance a performance bond with corporate
surety thereon in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a service
connection; and for a sewer extension, a sum equal to one and one-half (1%)
times the estimated cost of the work to be done.  Such performance bond
shall be approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village and
shall be conditioned upon the applicant or the contractor indemnifying and
saving harmless the Village for any and all damage to underground utilities
or to the water and sewer mains and laterals of the Village and from and
failure to restore any road, ditch, pavement or portion thereof damaged
during the construction of the sewer connection or the sewer extension to the
condition at the commencement of construction.



4-6-8:  INSURANCE:



   No permit for a sewer connection or sewer extension shall be issued by
the President and Board of Trustees of the Village unless the applicant or
the contractor shall have first procured public liability insurance in an
amount not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) (or one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) with a one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) umbrella
policy) for injuries, including accidental death, and property damage
insurance.  The Village shall be named as an additional party insured in
said policy or policies.  Said policy or policies or a certificate and
memorandum thereof shall be filed with the Village Clerk.  (Ord. 256,
2-26-62)



CHAPTER 7
DISCHARGES; STORM AND SANITARY SEWERS



SECTION:



4-7-1:   Purpose



4-7-2:   Prohibited Discharges



4-7-2-1:   Ground, Surface or Storm Waters and Other Extraneous Flows



4-7-2-2:   Specific Materials, Wastes



4-7-2-3:   Discharges into Storm Sewer System;



4-7-3:   Drains and Connections, Restrictions



4-7-3-1:   Illegal Connections



4-7-3-2:   Prohibition



4-7-4:   Maintenance of Services



4-7-5:   Responsibilities of Plumbers, Contractors



4-7-6:   Enforcement



4-7-7:   Tests and Inspections



4-7-8:   Penalty



4-7-1:  PURPOSE:



   It is the purpose of this Chapter to prohibit and discontinue the entry
of extraneous flows into the sanitary sewer system.  Extraneous flows are
defined as those flows, other than domestic sewage or industrial waste,
consisting of ground waters, surface waters, storm waters, roof drainage,
footing tile drainage, groundwater sump pump drainage and other drainage or
clear waters.



4-7-2:  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:



4-7-2-1:  GROUND, SURFACE OR STORM WATERS AND OTHER EXTRANEOUS FLOWS:



   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged, directly
or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the Village any ground
waters, surface waters, storm waters or any other extraneous flows.



4-7-2-2:  SPECIFIC MATERIALS, WASTES:



   No person, agent or legal representative shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:



   1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty degrees (150°) F.



   2.   Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred
(100) parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.



   3.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.



   4.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded to such degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch
(1/2") in any dimension.



   5.   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.



   6.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and
five-tenths (5.5) or higher than nine (9.0) or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works.  "pH" shall mean the logarithm of the
reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.



   7.   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance
in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.



   8.   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.



   9.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating
a public nuisance.



(Ord. 279, 9-23-63)



4-7-2-3:  Discharges Into Storm Sewer System:



   Unless otherwise specifically indicated, the meaning of the terms used
in this section shall be as follows:



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES:  The solids, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting
from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.



   SEWAGE:  The combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutional and industrial establishments, together
with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   STORM SEWER:  Any pipe or conduit which carries storm, surface water
and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.



   No person, firm, association, corporation or other entity shall
discharge any sewage or industrial wastes into any storm sewer in or under
the jurisdiction of the Village.



4-7-3:  DRAINS AND CONNECTIONS, RESTRICTIONS:



   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged, directly
or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the Village any extraneous
flows.



   It shall be unlawful to make, maintain or operate a connection to the
sanitary sewer system of the Village, which contributes, directly or
indirectly, any ground waters, surface waters, storm waters or any other
extraneous flows into the sewer system.  This Chapter shall also apply to
existing connections into the Village sanitary sewer system.



   All drains or connections designed or intended to receive and discharge
ground waters, surface waters, storm waters and other drainage, are illegal
connections if a discharge, directly or indirectly, is thereby made into the
sanitary sewer system.  Such illegal connections include, but are not
limited to, roof drains, downspouts, footing drains, areaway drains, drain
tiles (and sump pumps used to collect and discharge same), yard drains, catch
basins and inlets.



4-7-3-1:  ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS:



   All illegal connections, as defined above, existing on April 8, 1997
shall be disconnected on or before October 1, 1997.



4-7-3-2:  PROHIBITION:



   No person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged in the sewer and/or
plumbing business whether or not licensed by the Village of Orland Park, or
in any other business relating to the construction of buildings, roads or any
other type construction shall hereafter make a connection between any
sanitary sewer main of the sanitary sewerage collection system of the Village
of Orland Park and any roof drain, footing drain, or any other storm water
drain or make any such connection to any interceptor of the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District.  Any such person, firm, partnership or
corporation violating any provision of this Chapter shall, in addition to all
other penalties provided for in this Chapter, be subject to the revocation of
any business license or building permit issued to it to conduct business or
engage in construction in the Village of Orland Park.



4-7-4:  MAINTENANCE OF SERVICES:



   The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer, house
connection or sanitary sewer line up to the point of connection to the
Village sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
premises served by the sanitary sewer system.  Maintenance means keeping the
sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines or other sewer facilities or
structures in satisfactory working condition and good state of repair
(including, but not limited to, preventing any obstruction therein,
preventing extraneous materials or flows from entering the facilities,
protecting the facilities from any damage and keeping the facilities free
from defects or malfunctions), and taking all necessary action to assure that
the sewer facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing
the services and adequately discharging the functions and producing the final
results and purposes said facilities are intended to perform, discharge or
produce.



   Downspouts or roof drains shall not discharge into any sanitary sewer
system.  Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps and discharge shall
be made into storm sewers, drainage ditches or drainage system.  Sump pumps
installed to receive and discharge ground waters or other storm water shall
be connected to the storm sewer or discharge into a drainage ditch or
drainage system.  Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain
flow, laundry tubs or other sanitary sewage shall be connected to the
sanitary sewers.  A sump pump shall be used for one function only, either
the discharge of storm waters, or the discharge of sanitary sewage.



4-7-5:  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PLUMBERS, CONTRACTORS:



   No person engaged in the sewer and/or plumbing business and licensed by
the Village, or in any other business relating to the construction of
buildings, roads or any other type construction shall hereafter make a
connection between any sanitary sewer main of the sanitary sewerage
collection system of the Village and any roof drain, footing drain, or any
other storm water drain or make any such connection to any interceptor of the
Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago.  Any such person
violating any provision of this Section shall, in addition to all other
penalties provided for herein, be subject to the revocation of any business
license or building permit issued to it to conduct business or engage in
construction in the Village.



4-7-6:  ENFORCEMENT:



   It shall be the duty of the Village Plumbing Inspector (hereinafter
referred to as the Enforcement Officer) to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter.  The Enforcement Officer shall issue all necessary notices to
inspect, test and abate all illegal connections into the sanitary sewer of
the Village.



   Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that there is a violation
of this Chapter or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation does
exist, he shall give notice to the owner or to the person responsible
therefor in the following manner: such notice shall be in writing, shall
describe the real estate and contain a statement for the reason or reasons
why it is being issued and, where applicable, include a correction order
allowing for a period not to exceed forty five (45) days for the repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter.  Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner if a copy is delivered to him personally, or
by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone
in the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the
contents thereof, or by certified or registered mail, addressed to the owner
at the last known address with return receipt requested.



   Within forty five (45) days after notice to the property owner by the
Village of the presence of illegal sanitary sewer connections, the property
owner shall, at his or its expense, disconnect all illegal sanitary sewer
connections and shall take all necessary action to discontinue all discharges
of direct or indirect extraneous flows into the sanitary sewer system.



   In the event the Village shall advance for the benefit of the property
owner any sums to be used by the property owner in the abatement of any
illegal sanitary sewer connection then, and in that event, all sums so
advanced shall become a lien upon the property owner's real estate until
repaid as directed by the Board of Trustees of the Village.  The Village may
file a notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds and the notice
filed shall set forth (1) a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof, and (2) the amount of money advanced on the part of
the property owner and the balance then unpaid.  Upon payment of the sums
due the Village, the lien shall be released by the Village.  The lien may be
enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanics'
liens.



4-7-7:  TESTS AND INSPECTIONS:



   In addition to visual inspections on the outside or the inside of the
premises as indicated in Section 4-7-6 above, the Village may make other
tests and inspections of the sanitary sewer systems as it deems necessary in
order to locate such illegal connections and sources of extraneous flows as
may exist.  The provisions of this Chapter are in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any other legal remedy available to the Village, including the right
to institute legal proceedings to discover and order the disconnection of any
illegal connections that are found to exist.



4-7-8:  PENALTY



   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation failing to allow the
Village an inspection as provided in 4-7-6 of this Chapter, shall be in
violation of this Chapter and shall be according to the fine schedule located
in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be convicted. 
Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.



   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation found to be in violation
of the prohibitions of this Chapter and who has not disconnected said illegal
connection by the October 1, 1997, date provided in 4-7-8 shall be fined
$1,000.00.  Said fine shall be in addition to any other fines imposed by the
terms of this Chapter.  Each day such violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.



   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any other
provision of this Chapter shall be fined according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. 



(Ord. 2994, 4-8-97; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 8
WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM GENERAL PROVISIONS



SECTION:



4-8-1:   Use of Property Not Served by Sewer and Water Facilities



4-8-1-1:   Conform to Standards



4-8-1-2:   Lot Requirements



4-8-2:   Ownership of Water Mains Defined



4-8-3:   Lawn Sprinkling and Other Outdoor Water Use



4-8-4:   Uses of Water From Fire Hydrants



4-8-5:   Water Wells, Use Restricted



4-8-6:   Wells, Septic Tanks and Seepage System Specifications



4-8-7:   Sewer System Requirements and Restrictions



4-8-7-1:   Use of Public Sewers Required



4-8-7-2:   Competing Sewer Systems



4-8-7-3:   Protection From Damage



4-8-8:   Supply of Water and Sanitary Sewer Service in Unincorporated Areas



4-8-1:  USE OF PROPERTY NOT SERVED BY SEWER AND WATER FACILITIES:



4-8-1-1:  CONFORM TO STANDARDS:



   In all that territory in the Village which is not served by the water
and sewerage system of the Village or in which said water and sewerage system
is not available, every residence, business, trade or industry hereafter
established and requiring water supply and sewage disposal facilities shall
provide such facilities conforming to standards of design and location
approved by the State Department of Public Heath and any new water supply and
sewage disposal facilities hereafter provided for existing uses shall conform
to such standards.



4-8-1-2:  LOT REQUIREMENTS:



   1.   No residence, apartment, commercial or business building shall
be built nor shall any addition be constructed to any building which has been
previously erected on any lot or plot of ground which has water facilities
but does not have sewage disposal facilities unless said lot or plot of
ground is not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area and the
Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for the erection of any
residence, apartment, commercial or business building unless the requirements
of this subsection are met.



   2.   No residence, apartment, commercial or business building shall
be built nor shall any addition be constructed to any building which has been
previously erected on any lot or plot of ground which



   does not have water and sewer disposal facilities unless said lot or
plot of ground is not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area
and the Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for the erection of
any residence, apartment, commercial or business building unless the
requirements of this subsection are met.  (Ord. 120, 1-26-53)



4-8-2:  OWNERSHIP OF WATER MAINS DEFINED:



   The following water mains were dedicated to or constructed by and are
owned by the Village:



   All water mains that are constructed of a pipe size of four inches (4")
or over within the Village.



   All water mains owned, operated and maintained by the Village shall be
in a dedicated right-of-way or utility easement.



   All water mains within the Village other than those specifically set
forth above are not owned by the Village nor is the Village responsible for
the maintenance or upkeep thereon nor liable for any damages resulting from
construction or maintenance or lack thereof.  (Ord. 119, 1-26-53)



4-8-3:  LAWN SPRINKLING AND OTHER OUTDOOR WATER USE:



   1.   At all times of the year lawn sprinkling, whether performed by
manual hose and sprinkler placement or by automatic systems, is permitted
only between the hours of either 7 - 11 a.m. or  7 - 11 p.m.  Other outdoor
water use is unregulated from September 16 of any year to May 14 of the
following year.



   2.   Between May 15 and September 15, inclusive, of every year, all
outdoor water use is permitted only on an odd/even basis (on odd numbered
calendar days if the last digit in the street address is odd and on even
numbered calendar days if the last digit in the street address is even), and
only during the hours of either 7 - 11 a.m. or 7 - 11 p.m. on the permitted
days. Additionally, no person, firm or corporation residing at an odd
numbered street address may use Lake Michigan water on both the 31st day of
May, July and/or August and on the 1st day of the next month for outdoor
watering; the intent being to prohibit the use of Lake Michigan water for all
outdoor water use on consecutive days.



   3.   Outdoor water use as regulated above shall include, but not be
limited to, all lawn and garden sprinkling by hose fed sprinklers or
underground irrigation systems for residential and commercial property, all
non commercial car washing, residential pool maintenance, and other similar
uses, but shall not include water used for golf course irrigation,
construction or building renovation purposes, commercial car wash operations,
or the filling of residential or other swimming pools.  (Ord. 4048, 7-18-05)



   4.   Notwithstanding the above regulations, newly sodded lawns (less
than three (3) months old) may be watered more frequently than otherwise
permitted upon application for and receipt of a special permit from the
Public Works Department.



   5.   The Village reserves the right to further limit or suspend all
outdoor water use when the President and Board of Trustees determine that
public exigencies or emergencies require such action.  If public exigencies
or emergencies so require, due to the possibility that the water supply will
not meet demand, the President may unilaterally declare and take such action
prior to the next regularly scheduled or specially scheduled meeting of the
President and Board of Trustees.  At the next meeting of the President and
Board of Trustees after the Village President's action, the emergency
conservation action shall be abated, continued, or made more stringent by the
President and Board of Trustees.



   6.   In addition to the above restrictions, lawn sprinkling systems
shall comply with the Orland Park Plumbing Code by being equipped with an
approved rain detection device at installation.  In order to assist existing
lawn sprinkling systems without such devices to be retrofitted with rain
detection devices, the Village has established a cost sharing program that
will reimburse 50% of the cost of installation of an approved rain detection
device, up to a maximum reimbursement of $70.00.  The Building Department
administers this program and will issue a no charge permit for the
installation of an approved rain detection device on an existing lawn
sprinkling system that does not have such a device.  (Ord. 3704, 11-4-02) In
addition, new/replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a
WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and shall be in compliance with
Section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law [225 ILCS 320].



   7.   Any person, corporation or organization of any kind violating
the provisions of this Section, or of any special permit obtained under this
Section, shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B
for each offense of which such person shall be convicted.  Each day of
violation and each violating location shall be considered a separate offense
under this Section.



   8.   Any person, corporation or organization of any kind violating
the provisions of any special emergency order issued by the Village President
and eventually approved by the Village Board shall be fined as in the above
paragraph, provided that said person, corporation or organization has first
been given notice of the special emergency order by telephone, facsimile,
U.S. mail or personal service.  After notice is given, each day of violation
and each violating location shall be considered a separate offense under this
Section.  (Ord. 3297, 10-4-99)



   9.   Upon proper application to the Village and in accordance with
rules and regulations established from time to time by the Village Director
of Public Works, an outdoor watering system utilizing a private well or,
privately owned retention pond may be installed by the person, firm or
corporation owning the well or the single family/multi family homeowner's
association served by the pond so long as such outdoor watering system has
been fully inspected and approved by the Village Building Department/Code
Enforcement Officer(s), is at all times in compliance with all applicable
Village Codes and Ordinances, is installed so as to prevent any cross
connection with the Village potable water system, includes automatic shutoff
during rainfall, and the Village is fully indemnified and held harmless from
any liability resulting from the installation and operation of such outdoor
watering system.  Publicly (Village) owned retention ponds shall not be used
for outdoor water irrigation.  The Village Director of Public Works shall
provide an appropriate application form for the installation and operation of
an outdoor watering system utilizing a private well or privately owned
retention pond.  An approved application shall result in a permit for such
installation.  The permit may be conditioned as the Director of Public Works
finds necessary or appropriate to meet the requirements of this sub section.
(Ord. 4048, 7-18-05;  Amd. Ord. 4147, 6-19-06)



   10.   Upon proper application to the Village and in accordance with
rules and regulations established from time to time by the Village Director
of Public Works, an aerator for a publicly (Village) owned retention pond may
be installed by a single family/multi family homeowner's association served
by the pond so long as the aerator system has been fully inspected and
approved by the Village Building Department/Code Enforcement Officer(s), is
at all times in compliance with all applicable Village Codes and Ordinances,
and the Village is fully indemnified and held harmless by the homeowner's
association installing and operating the aerator from any liability resulting
from the installation and operation of such aerator.  The Village Director
of Public Works shall provide an appropriate application form for the
installation and operation of the retention pond aerator.  (Ord. 4048,
7-18-05)



   11.   Outdoor watering systems permitted pursuant to sub section 9,
above, shall be exempt from the restrictions and requirements of sub sections
1, 2, 5 and 6 of this Section 4-8-3.



(Ord. 4147, 6-19-06; Amd. Ord. 5005, 7-20-15; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-4-17)



4-8-4:  USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS:



   No person shall take water from or cause water to flow from any public
or private fire hydrant within the Village, except for the purpose of
extinguish fire, unless such person shall have first obtained a permit to so
do from the Village Manager or unless such person is an employee or officer
of the Village and is acting in the discharge of his duties as such.  Such
permit shall be issued upon application being made to the Village Manager or
Designee and upon payment of the required fees.



   Such application for permit shall state the particular fire hydrant or
hydrants from which water is to be taken or permitted to flow, the time at
which such use of water will commence and cease, the estimated period that
said hydrant will be open and water flowing therefrom, the size of pipe or
hose, if any, which will be connected to said fire hydrant or hydrants, the
capacity of any tank into which water shall be poured and an estimate of the
number of gallons of water that will be permitted to flow from said fire
hydrant during the permit period.



   The Village Manager shall fix the fee for the issuance of such permit,
which fee shall be based on the estimated amount of water that will be
permitted to flow from said fire hydrant or hydrants based on the rates
provided for water service; provided however, that in the event said water is
to be permitted to flow from said fire hydrant or hydrants to flush or test a
water main or any extension thereof, the fee may be waived by the Village
Manager.  Village approved metering and/or backflow protection equipment
must be installed by the permittee.



   Said permit shall provide when said fire hydrant or hydrants may be
opened and water taken or permitted to flow therefrom; provided however, that
no such permit shall provide for the use of flowing water from any fire
hydrant for the purpose of flushing a water main or any extension thereof
without the approval and presence of the Village Utility Inspector.



   No person to whom such permit is issued shall consent to the use of
water permitted to flow from said fire hydrant by any other person, and any
person to whom such permit is issued shall at all times use precaution to
prevent any waste of water or damage, and upon completion of the purpose for
which said water use was authorized or upon the expiration of the time
specified in said permit, he shall be required to completely close said fire
hydrant.  (Ord. 283, 12-9-63)



4-8-5:  WATER WELLS, USE RESTRICTED:



   Except as provided in this Section, no person shall drill, or make use
of a water well for any purpose on any lot or tract of real estate within the
Village containing an area of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
and no permit for such water well shall issue hereafter.



   Water wells may be drilled and used on any tract of land exceeding
fifteen thousand (15,000) feet within the Village exclusively for the limited
purposes of outdoor agricultural and horticultural irrigation, subject to the
following conditions:



   1.   The Municipal water system on the premises shall be protected
by proper backflow and water expansion devices as specified by applicable
State, County and Federal law.



   2.   Water conservation devices shall be installed within the
private plumbing system conveying Municipal potable water in conformity with
requirements of the Illinois Department of National Resources (IDNR).



   3.   No piping connections whatsoever may exist between the
Municipal water supply and the well water supply.



   4.   All persons operating a private well or applying for permits to
install and operate a private well shall comply fully with the rules and
regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health (IDPH) regarding
private wells; as well as with all other State, local and Federal laws
governing same.



   5.   All persons operating an existing private well on a lot or
tract of real estate exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area
shall, within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Ordinance, notify
the Village of the existence and operation of such well, or of the intent to
operate such existing well.  Such notice is to be given in addition to
application for required permits, and no permits shall issue unless such
notice is given in the manner specified herein.  The Village may, at any
time and upon reasonable notice thereof, inspect the said well, to confirm
that no cross-connections exist or will exist between the well and the
Municipal water system.



   6.   All persons intending to install a new private well on a lot or
tract of real estate in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
shall, thirty (30) days prior to commencing installation thereof, notify the
Village that such a well is to be installed.  The Village may, at any time
and upon reasonable notice, inspect the site of the proposed well while
installation is in progress, and after completion thereof, to confirm that no
cross-connections exist or will exist between the well and the Municipal
water system.  Such notice is to be given in addition to application for a
permit to install the well, and no permit shall issue unless such notice is
given in the manner specified herein.  Such notice shall be in writing and
delivered to the Village Department of Code Enforcement in person or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested.



   7.   Backflow protection devices shall be inspected and tested in
compliance with Village Ordinance 1519.



   8.   Private wells shall only be used for irrigation purposes at the
times and dates as allowed above.  Maintaining a consistent time period for
lawn and garden irrigation will make water conservation consistent and
effectively enforced.



   9.   All persons intending to install a new private well or operate
a new or existing well shall comply with all other regulations as proposed by
the Illinois Department of Public Health, Illinois Department of Mines and
Minerals, IEPA and IDNR as well as the requirements stated by this Ordinance
and other Village ordinances herein referenced.



   Except as provided in this Section, all existing water wells serving
uses on any lot or tract of real estate containing less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet shall be discontinued and the use thereof shall cease,
and the said water well shall be abandoned in accordance with the standards
established pursuant to applicable laws of the State.  (Ord. 2123, 5-20-91)



4-8-6:  WELLS, SEPTIC TANKS AND SEEPAGE SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS:



   All septic tanks and seepage systems shall be located, constructed,
installed and maintained in accordance with the Private Sewer Disposal
Licensing Act and Code as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public
Health, as amended from time to time.



   All wells shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
rules and regulations adopted by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, as amended from time to time.



   The Code, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health
pursuant to 225 ILCS 225/7 and the Rules and Regulations adopted by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, are adopted by reference, excepting
any penalties therein.  Not less than three copies of such Code and
Regulations have been on file in the office of the Village Clerk for more
than 30 days prior to the adoption thereof and made available for inspection
by the public.  The general penalty provided in this Code shall be
applicable to violations of the Code and Regulations so adopted.



4-8-7:  SEWER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:



4-8-7-1:  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village, any sanitary
sewage, commercial or industrial wastes or other polluted solids and liquids
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this Section.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   The owner of all houses, building or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the
Village and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is
now located or may be in  the future be located a public  sanitary sewer of
the Village, is  hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Section, within ninety
(90) after the date of official notice by the President or Board of Trustees
to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within one hundred feet (100')
of the property line.



4-8-7-2:  COMPETING SEWER SYSTEMS:



   In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village, no other system of sanitary sewers may be
constructed or operated within the boundaries of the Village.  A sanitary
sewer system is hereby defined as a system serving two (2) or more individual
users.



4-8-7-3:  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:



No person shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or equipment which is part
of the Village’s public sanitary sewerage system or water supply system,
including any radio and/or communication equipment or antennas affixed
thereto.  In addition, no person other than a Village employee shall have
access to any Village elevated water storage (water tower) facility, water
treatment facility or water pumping station unless:



   (a)   He or she shall have successfully passed a background check
conducted by the Village Police Department;



   (b)   He or she is accompanied by a designated employee of the
Village’s Police Department or Public Works Department and after having
presented proper personal identification; and



   (c)   Access is requested between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday.  If an emergency requires access at any other
time, such access must be arranged with the Village’s Police Department
after providing as much advance notice as may be practical under the
circumstances.



   (d)   He or she agrees to reimburse the Village for the cost
incurred by the Village in performing the background check and in furnishing
the Village’s employee to accompany him or her based upon the employee’s
hourly rate of pay.  (Ord. 4851, 11-4-13)



4-8-8:  Supply of Water and Sanitary Sewer Service in Unincorporated Areas:



   No water and/or sanitary sewer service will be furnished or supplied by
the Village to unincorporated areas unless each of the following criteria are
met:



   (a)   The parcel(s) do not require a storm water management system,
which would include rear yard  or street storm sewers under which a
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago (MWRD) permit is
required;



   (b)   No other utility service is available as determined by the
Village Engineer;



   (c)   The proposed development meets the Village's Comprehensive
Plan and all of the Village's other planning requirements, such as density,
tree preservation, park or open space donation;



   (d)   The developer has executed an agreement with the Village to
pay school and transportation exaction fees as required by the Village Land
Development Code;



   (e)   No other governmental jurisdiction, including surrounding
communities, townships or the county, has an objection to the development
plan;



   (f)   For an area north of 131st Street, the location must meet the
criteria established in Village of Orland Park Resolution #9620;



   (g)   Developer must agree to "loop" the water system within the
development and/or to existing facilities;



   (h)   The Village must review and approve all connection locations,
construction plans, studies and drawings necessary for the connection to
Village maintained facilities;



   (i)   Developer must submit a Letter of Credit to assure completion
of any public improvements in a form and amount, and with a financial
institution, acceptable to the Village;



   (j)   Developer shall provide a study to the Village showing
anticipated water usage for the entire development once fully complete. 
This will be reviewed by the Village to determine if sufficient water
capacity and storage is available;



   (k)   Developer shall construct and install booster pumps as
required for proper pressure to the water  customers;



   (l)   Developer or property owner will agree in writing to defend
and hold harmless the Village and its officers and employees with respect to
any and all claims and liabilities in connection with the delivery of water
service and sanitary sewer service without limitation;



   (m)   The developer or property owner will pay to the Village the
connection fee per residential unit at the then current rate (currently
$1,800), and the developer or property owner will reimburse the    Village
for its cost of the water meter supplied by the Village;



   (n)   Water main tap size shall not exceed 1 inch for lots under 1
acre and 2 inches for lots 1 acre or larger;



   (o)   Developer shall be in good standing (i.e., no history of
default in agreements with the Village) with the Village of Orland Park;



   (p)   Developer and all present and future property owners must pay
to the Village the unincorporated  water charges as established by the
Village from time to time; and



   (q)   The geographic limits for the service area are as follows:
123rd Street on the north between Wolf Road and LaGrange Road; 139th Street
on the north, between Will Cook Road and Wolf Road; 135th Street on the north
between LaGrange Road and Harlem Avenue; and I-80 on the south.    (Ord.
3422, 9-18-00)



CHAPTER 9
WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM GROWTH POLICY



SECTION:



4-9-1:   Connection Fee



4-9-2:   Approval of Final Plat



4-9-3:   Payment Schedule



4-9-4:   Annexation Requirements



4-9-1:  CONNECTION FEE:



   Whenever any lands included in zoning districts pursuant to the Land
Development Code of the Village and being the subject matter of a plat of
subdivision or plat of resubdivision or a plat of a planned unit development
or plat of commercial or industrial development are to be served by the
Village combined waterworks and sewerage system, a connection fee thereto
shall be paid to the Village by a developer, determined as follows:



   Attached Single-Family Residential Construction and Townhomes:  A
connection fee of $1,350.00 per dwelling unit contained in an attached
single-family residence and townhome construction shall be payable to the
Village in the manner prescribed herein.  The number of dwelling units shall
be determined by those delineated on the plat.



   Detached Single-Family Residential Construction:  A connection fee of
eighteen hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per single-family residence to be
constructed shall be payable to the Village in that manner prescribed herein.



   Multi-Family Residential Construction:  A connection fee of nine
hundred fifty dollars ($900.00) per dwelling unit contained in a multi-family
development shall be payable to the Village in the manner prescribed
herein.  The number of dwelling units shall be determined by those units
delineated on the plat.



   In determining the number of acres for purposes of calculating  the
total number of units that acreage used for a water retention or detention
basin to serve the multi-family units, shall not be included.



   Commercial and Industrial Development:  For commercial and industrial
developers, a connection fee shall be charged to the development in accord
with the following formula:



   One dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per the average number of gallons of
water used daily during the first year of full occupancy of the development.
Such connection fee shall be payable to the Village.



   In calculating that portion of the connection fee based on average
daily gallons of usage of water, the following procedure shall be used: An
estimated connection fee shall be calculated based on estimated average daily
gallon usage of water.  The estimate of average daily gallon usage shall be
made by the Water and Sewerage Department in accord with those figures set
forth in the following table.  Seventy five percent (75%) of the estimated
connection fee shall be the amount to be paid.  After the commercial or
industrial development has been fully occupied for a year, the actual average
daily gallon usage of water will be determined and the actual fee
determined.  If the actual fee exceeds seventy five percent (75%) of the
estimated connection fee, said difference shall be paid to the Village.  If
the seventy five percent (75%) of the estimated connection fees  exceed the
actual fee, the difference shall be refunded to, the developer.



 

Estimate Average Gallons
 


Zoning District
 
Used Per day Per Acre



BIZ

 

1,250  gallons




MFG

 

2,500  gallons




 



   Average number of gallons for a development shall be determined by
multiplying the number of acres by the above estimated average gallons used
per day per acre.



4-9-2:  APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:



   No plat of development of lands included in zoning districts pursuant
to the zoning ordinance of the Village shall be approved by the President and
Board of Trustees as valid and entitled to be recorded unless and until the
provisions of this Chapter have been complied with.



4-9-3:  PAYMENT SCHEDULE:



   Said connection fees shall be payable in the following manner:



   Sixty percent (60%) shall be paid at the time of approval of the final
plat of subdivision, resubdivision, planned unit development, commercial or
industrial development



   The balance may be paid in equal installments on issuance of the
building permits for each residential, commercial or industrial unit;
provided, however, that in the event said lands are the subject matter of an
annexation agreement, said sums shall be paid at the times and in the manner
provided in said annexation agreement.



   In the case of a commercial or industrial development, after the
development has been fully occupied for a year, any difference owed to the
Village as a result of the actual average daily gallon usage of water
exceeding seventy five percent (75%) of the estimated daily gallon usage of
water shall be paid within sixty (60) days of the determination of the
difference.  If the seventy five percent (75%) of the estimated daily gallon
usage of water exceeds the actual average daily gallon usage of water, any
difference in resulting fees shall be paid to the developer within sixty (60)
days of the determination of the difference.



4-9-4:  ANNEXATION REQUIREMENTS:



   The connection fees required in this Chapter shall also be required as
a condition to the annexation of any land to the Village.  (Ord. 997,
10-8-79)



CHAPTER 10
RETENTION AND DETENTION PONDS



SECTION:



4-10-1:   Warning Signs



4-10-2:   Swimming Prohibited



4-10-3:   Boating Prohibited



4-10-4:   Prohibited Encroachments



4-10-1:  WARNING SIGNS:



   Appropriate signs shall be placed as necessary at the various detention
or retention ponds to apprise the public of the restrictions established in
this Chapter.



4-10-2:  SWIMMING PROHIBITED:



   No person shall knowingly wade, swim or otherwise immerse all or any
part of his or her body in the waters of any detention or retention ponds
located within the Village.



4-10-3:  BOATING PROHIBITED:



   No person shall knowingly use, ride in or upon any boat or device or
material that will float on water in the waters of any detention or retention
pond located within the Village. 



(Ord. 1098,6-15-81)



4-10-4: PROHIBITED ENCROACHMENTS:



   No unapproved structure, fence, landscaping or obstacle of any kind
shall be located on or within any publicly owned property, including
retention or detention ponds, wetland areas, streams, waterways or any
contributing drainage structure.



(Ord. 5103, 6-6-16)



CHAPTER 11
WATER SUPPLY CROSS CONNECTIONS



SECTION:



4-11-1:   Installation of Backflow Prevention Device



4-11-2:   Private Water Supply Connection Approval



4-11-3:   Contamination From Cross Connections Prohibited



4-11-4:   Surveys and Investigations for Hazardous Conditions



4-11-5:   Right of Entry



4-11-6:   Discontinue Water Service for Noncompliance



4-11-7:   Water Supply Clean-Up Required



4-11-8:   Disconnection of Private Water Supply



4-11-9:   Identification of Secondary Water Source



4-11-10:   Private Water Storage Tanks



4-11-11:   Water Well Usage



4-11-12:   Time Limit for Compliance



4-11-13:   Failure to Correct Violation



4-11-14:   Compliance With Chapter Required



4-11-1:  INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE:



   If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code (or in accordance
with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency), an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Director of Public Services or his designee will give notice to
the water customer to install such an approved device immediately.  The
water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at
a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and
all applicable local regulations, and shall permit inspections and tests made
of such approved devices as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code and local
regulations.  Exhibit A, which is attached to Ordinance 1519 and made a part
hereof, contains the local regulations, and contains the definitions for the
terms and words used in this Chapter and used in these regulations.



4-11-2:  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY CONNECTION APPROVAL:



   No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
Village may enter the supply or distribution system of the Municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Director of
Public Services or his designee and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency in accordance with local and State regulations.



4-11-3:  CONTAMINATION FROM CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:



   When a person applies for a building permit, the applicant shall submit
drawings or written information regarding what proposed action the applicant
will take prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy to correct,
avoid or prevent contamination of the potable water supply during and
subsequent to the building process.



   If a person is required to apply for a building permit, said person
shall submit the drawings and information relating to the correction,
avoidance or prevention of contamination from cross connections.



4-11-4:  SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS FOR HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS:



   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Services or his designee
to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other
properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply may exist.  Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated
as often as the Director of Public Services or his designee shall deem
necessary.  Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for
review for a period of at least five (5) years.



4-11-5:  RIGHT OF ENTRY:



   The Village Plumbing Inspector shall have the right, as permitted by
law, to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose
of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and the Director
of Public Services or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of verifying
information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection
control inspection.  On demand, the owner, lessee or occupants of any
property so served shah furnish to the Director of Public Services or his
designee any information which he may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property.  The refusal to supply such
information when demanded shall create a presumption that an improper
connection exists, as defined or described in this Chapter.



4-11-6:  DISCONTINUE WATER SERVICE FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:



   The Director of Public Services or his designee of the Village is
hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice in
accordance with law to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
Chapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as
are reasonably necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply distribution mains.  Water service to such property
shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected
in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and until a reconnection
inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is paid to the Village.



4-11-7:  WATER SUPPLY CLEAN-UP REQUIRED:



   The customer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply system.



4-11-8:  DISCONNECTION OF PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY:



   Any user of water shall obtain written approval from the Director of
Public Services or his designee prior to taking any proposed corrective
action or installing any protective device.  The total time allowed for
completion of the necessary corrections shall be contingent upon the degree
of hazard involved and include the time required to obtain and install
equipment and will be specified in the approval.  If the cross connection
has not been removed within the time as hereinafter specified, the Village
shall, in accordance with the law, physically separate the Orland Park water
supply from the on-site piping system in such manner that the two (2) systems
cannot be connected by any unauthorized person.  Such disconnection shall be
by disconnection of the public water supply from the private supply.



4-11-9:  IDENTIFICATION OF SECONDARY WATER SOURCES:



   When a secondary water source is used in addition to the Orland Park
water supply, the piping for the exposed Orland Park water and the piping for
secondary water source shall be clearly identified by distinguishing colors
or tags, and the colors or tags shall be so maintained so that each pipe may
be traced readily in its entirety.  The Orland Park water supply shall be
protected at the service connection in a manner conforming to the Water
Department, Federal and State drinking water regulations, and with any other
relevant regulations of the public health authority having local jurisdiction.



4-11-10:  PRIVATE WATER STORAGE TANKS:



   A private water storage tank which is supplied by the Orland Park water
system shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless the tank is designed
and approved for potable water usage in compliance with Federal and State
drinking water regulations, to all regulations of the public health authority
having local jurisdiction and in accordance with local ordinance.



4-11-11:  WATER WELL USAGE:



   This Chapter shall not be construed or interpreted to directly or
indirectly amend or repeal any Section of this Code regarding the usage of
wells.



4-11-12:  TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE:



   Not later than three (3) years from the effective date of this Chapter
or during reconstruction, whichever is sooner, all existing cross connections
to the Orland Park water supply systems shall be eliminated or controlled in
accordance with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code or Environmental
Protection Agency.  The expenses of such elimination shall be that of the
owner of the property on which property such cross connection exists.



4-11-13:  FAILURE TO CORRECT VIOLATION:



   The Director of Public Services or his designee shall notify the owner
or authorized agent of the owner of the building or premises in which a
violation of this Chapter is found.  The Director shall set a reasonable
time, based on the level of hazard to health, for the owner to have the
violation removed or corrected.  Upon failure of the owner to have the
defect corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the Director may,
if in his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service
to the building or premises to be terminated, and/or be authorized to take
any legal action necessary to correct the hazard.



4-11-14:  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED:



   It shall be unlawful to construct, install, modify or maintain a water
connection in violation of the requirements of this Chapter.  (Ord. 1519,
3-31-86)



CHAPTER 12
VILLAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE



SECTION:



4-12-1:   Residential Garbage and Refuse Collection



4-12-2:   Establishment of Charges for Collection



4-12-3:   Billing and Collection of Charges



4-12-4:   Allocation of Partial Payments



4-12-5:   Appeal Process



4-12-1:  RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION:



   Garbage and refuse from residential dwelling units in the Village shall
be collected only as provided by the Village by contract with a garbage and
refuse collection and disposal contractor.  A charge for garbage and refuse
collection and disposal shall be added to residential water bills as provided
below.



4-12-2:  ESTABLISHMENT OF CHARGES FOR COLLECTION:



   The Village Board shall annually by November 1 of each year determine
the garbage and refuse collection and disposal charge to be paid by each
dwelling unit in the Village for the coming year and fix by ordinance a
monthly charge to be paid per dwelling unit.



   The charge shall be set for the garbage and refuse collection and
disposal contract in effect or expected to be in effect for the fiscal year
then in progress.  If a contract change occurs during the year, a new
monthly charge may be established by ordinance.



   Late payment charges shall be as charged for water and sewer usage. 
(Ord. 3801, 9-15- 03)



4-12-3:  BILLING AND COLLECTION OF CHARGES:



   Garbage and Refuse collection and disposal charges shall be a flat
charge per dwelling unit and shall be billed to the owner, occupant, owner's
agent, tenant or individual in whose name the water account appears for that
dwelling unit.  The garbage and refuse collection and disposal charge shall
be shown on and added to the water and sewer service bill.



4-12-4:  ALLOCATION OF PARTIAL PAYMENTS:



   Payment of less than the total amount due on a bill shall be applied
first to late payment charges due, if any, second to garbage and refuse
collection and disposal fees due and third to water and sewer charges and
fees due.



4-12-5:  APPEAL PROCESS:



   In the event of a dispute between the user of residential garbage and
refuse collection and disposal service and the Village, said dispute shall be
subject to the same hearing process as provided in this Code for disputes
relating to water and sanitary sewer service.  (Ord. 3294, 9/20/99)



TITLE 5 BUILDING



CHAPTER  1   BUILDING CODE



         (Ord. 4786, 2-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



CHAPTER  2   BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES



CHAPTER  3   ELECTRICAL CODE



CHAPTER  4   PLUMBING CODE



CHAPTER  5   FIRE CODE



         (Ord. 4807, 4-1-13)



CHAPTER  6   MECHANICAL CODE



CHAPTER  7   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



CHAPTER  8   RENTAL HOUSING



         (Ord. 4959, 1-9-15)



CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE



SECTION:



5-1-1:   Interpretation



5-1-2:   Scope of Regulations



5-1-3:   Compliance to Permit



5-1-4:   Certificate of Occupancy



5-1-5:   Inspection, Right of Entry



5-1-6:   Licensing and Insuring of Contractors



5-1-7:   Excavations and Grading (deleted by 5105, 6-20-16)



5-1-8:   Building Criteria for Landmark and Historic Buildings



5-1-9:   Additional Regulations



5-1-9-1:   Plugging of Water Taps



5-1-9-2:   Curing and Sealing of Concrete



5-1-9-3:   Village Code



5-1-10:   Rules and Regulations Adopted



5-1-10-1:   Building Code Official



5-1-11:   IBC 2018 & IRC 2018 Adopted (Model Code)



5-1-12:   Deletions from IBC 2018 & IRC 2018 (Model Codes)



5-1-13:   Amendments to IBC 2018 (Model Code)



5-1-14:   International Residential Code



5-1-15:   Violations and penalties



5-1-1:  INTERPRETATION:



   A.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Title shall be held to be the  minimum    requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare.



   B.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Chapter
upon the construction, alteration or maintenance of buildings or structures
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provision of this Title or of any other applicable law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations which are more
restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.



   C.   This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant
or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this
Title are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than
such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the requirements of this
Title shall govern.



   D.   No building or structure which was not lawfully existing at the
time of the effective date hereof shall become or be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of these provisions; and to the extent that, and in
any manner that, such building or structure is in conflict with the
requirements of this Title, said building or structure remains unlawful
hereunder.



   E.   Nothing contained in this Title shall be deemed to be a
consent, license or permit to locate, construct or maintain any building,
structure or facility, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or
activity.



(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-2:  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:



   No building or structure or any part thereof or any appurtenance
thereto shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered, installed, added
to, enlarged, repaired, converted, removed, demolished or maintained, nor
shall the use, location or occupancy thereof be changed except in conformity
with the provisions of this Code, and no work for which a building permit is
required under the terms of this Chapter or any work with respect to
excavation or grading in preparation therefore, shall be commenced until the
permit has been issued as herein provided.  Subdivision site grading may be
permitted prior to issuance of building permits only as approved by Village
staff engineers and after an accepted soil erosion plan is installed.



(Amd. Ord. 5105, 6-20-16; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-3:  COMPLIANCE TO PERMIT:



   All work performed under a permit issued hereunder shall conform to the
approved application, plans and any approved amendments thereto.  It shall
be unlawful for any owner, agent, architect, structural engineer, contractor,
or builder engaged in erecting, altering, or repairing any building, to
deviate from the drawings or plans as approved by the code official.  Any of
the requirements of the provisions of this Ordinance shall operate to annul
the permit, which has been issued for such work and shall render the same
void.



(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-4:  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:



   No building or structure or any part thereof shall be used or occupied
until a Certificate of Occupancy or Conditional Certificate of Occupancy has
been issued by the building code official.  No permit holder shall allow any
person or entity to use or occupy a building or structure or any part thereof
which is the subject of his or its building permit until a Certificate of
Occupancy or Conditional Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the
building code official. 



   The code official shall issue such certificate only if, after
inspection, he finds that such building or structure complies with the
provisions of this title and all other laws of the Village of Orland Park and
the State of Illinois, and that said building or structure has been completed
in accordance with the approved plans and documents filed in support of the
Application for Building Permit relating to said building or structure. 
Such certificate shall show the permitted use for the building or
structure.  A conditional certificate may be issued for the temporary use of
a building or structure or portion thereof under the conditions set forth
above, or the conditions set forth in Section 5-1-13, Paragraph 111.3 of this
Code.



   It shall be a violation of this Section for any person (which includes
for purposes of this Section any individual, partnership, corporation, firm
or entity which conducts, engages in, maintains, operates, carries on or
manages a business or occupation within the Village) to conduct, engage in,
maintain, operate, carry on, or manage a business or occupation without a
Certificate of Occupancy first having been procured from the Village for the
premises of such business or occupation. The fee for processing and issuing a
Certificate of Occupancy (see Section 5-2-9 of this Chapter) shall be doubled
for any person not having procured a Certificate of Occupancy for the
premises as required by this Section prior to maintaining, operating,
carrying on or managing a business. In addition, any person, as lessor or
landlord, leasing or renting out the business premises to a business owner or
operator ("tenant") who has not procured a Certificate of Occupancy as
required by this Section, prior to maintaining, operating, carrying on or
managing the business shall be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 in
accordance with the fine schedule located in Appendix B, for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted. Each tenant found to be maintaining,
operating, carrying on or managing a business without having first procured a
Certificate of Occupancy shall constitute a separate offense. 



(Ord. 3449, 12-04-00; Amd. Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5105, 6-20-16; Amd.
Ord. 5219, 9-5-17; Amd. Ord. 5398, 4-15-19; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19; Amd. Ord.
5438, 10-21-19)



   See Village Code 5-2-14 for work without permit violations.



   See Village Code 5-1-13 Section 114.4 for Violations of this adopted
Code.



5-1-5:  INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY:



   A.   Enforcement: The building code official shall inspect all
buildings or structures during construction or alteration to see that the
provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted
safely. He shall cause all violations or suspected violations to be brought
to the attention of all appropriate municipal authorities and shall enforce
the provisions of this Chapter, and for that purpose he and his assistants
shall have the right to enter any building, structure or premises at any
reasonable time.



   B.   Records Open to the Public: The building code official shall
keep, or cause to be kept, a record of his acts and doings, which records
shall be open to public inspection.



   C.   Inspection Approvals: No work shall be done on any part of the
building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive
inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the building code
official. Such written approval shall be given only after an inspection shall
have been made of each successive step in the construction. There shall be a
final inspection and approval by the building code official, on all buildings
when completed and ready for occupancy.



   D.   Posting of Permit: Work requiring a building permit shall not
be commenced until the permit holder or his agent shall have posted an
inspection record card in a conspicuous place on the front of the premises
and in such position as to allow the building code official to make the
required entries thereon regarding inspection of the work. This inspection
card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the
certificate of occupancy has been issued.



   E.   Re-Inspection Fees: In the event the permittee, contractor or a
subcontractor shall request an inspection and it is found by the building
code official that the construction, erection or installation does not meet
the requirements of this Chapter, or other applicable ordinances of the
Village, and that an additional inspection or inspections shall be necessary,
before any additional inspection shall be made, the permittee, contractor or
subcontractor shall pay to the Development Services Department the fee for
each such additional inspection. See Village Code, Title 5 Chapter 2, Section
7-5.



   F.   Stop Work Orders: In the event any construction, erection,
alteration, installation, addition to, enlargement, conversion of or repair
of any building or any part thereof or appurtenance thereto shall be done in
violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or is being done or has been
done without permit or permits required therefore by any of the provisions of
this Chapter or any other provisions of this Village Code, or is being done
or has been done contrary to the drawings or plans as approved by the
Development Services Department, the building code official is hereby
empowered and required forthwith to issue a stop order directing such
construction, erection, alteration, installation, addition to, enlargement,
conversion of or repair of any building or structure or any part thereof or
appurtenance thereto, to cease immediately. If after a stop order has been
issued, there is any reason to believe that further work is being done or has
been done, the building code official may, among other remedies provided by
law, petition the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, for an injunction
as provided by law against the continuing of such work. (See 5-1-15 of this
code for Violations and Stop Work Order.) 



(Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4786, 2-4-13; Amd.
Ord. 5105, 6-20-16; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-6:  LICENSING AND INSURING OF CONTRACTORS:



   A.   Scope of Contractor's License:  All contractors performing
construction within the Village shall comply with the provisions of the
Village Codes and Ordinances for minimum building standards regulated within
the corporate limits of the Village.  The intent of contractor licensing is
to require the name, address and phone number of all contractors on a job
site.



      1.   All general and sub-contractors licensed under this
Ordinance shall be responsible for any and all employees working for them
under the license.



      2.   All general contractors shall hire only sub-contractors
who are licensed as specified under this Ordinance.



      3.   Village licensing may not be required when contractors
are licensed through the State of Illinois and only when/if specified by
Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS).



         ILCS Examples:



         a.   Plumbing Contractors per IDPH (225 ILCS 320/)
Illinois Plumbing License Law.



         b.   Fire Alarm Contractors (225 ILCS 447/) Private
Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith
Act of 2004.



         c.   ILCS Roofing act allows Orland Park to license
contractors separately.



         Roofing Contractors per (225 ILCS 335/) Illinois Roofing
Industry Licensing Act.



      4.   Licensed contractors must provide a Certificate of
Insurance naming the Village as the Certificate holder.  The minimum
insurance requirements are $1,000,000 per occurrence for General Liability
and the statutory minimum for Workers Compensation.



      5.   Licensed contractors are to complete all work in
compliance with the Village Codes.



      6.   Inspection requests must be submitted to the Village to
verify compliance approval with Village Codes.  Construction is to remain
exposed for inspection(s) until approval(s) are issued by Village inspectors.



      7.   A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee is to be charged to
the owner and/or contractor for Village Code enforcement proceedings due to
each nonconformity or inaction.



   B.   License Required:  No person shall act or perform any services
as a contractor or sub-contractor within without first having issued a
license by the Village Development Services Department, as herein provided.



      1.   Application Required:  All applications for a Village
contractor's license shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the
Village.



         See Village Website;  https://orlandpark.org



      2.   Each application shall state:



         (1)   The name, physical business address and business
phone number of the applicant.



         (2)   Whether it is a general contractor or
sub-contractor's registration application.  If it is a general contractor
with tradesmen, a list of trades and tradesmen performing each trade will be
required at the time of registration.  A sub-contractor will be required to
list the trade or trades involved.



         (3)   A statement that the applicant is familiar with
all pertinent Village ordinances, codes and regulations and agrees to fully
comply with the same.



   C.   Definitions:  As used in this Ordinance:



      "Contractor" means any person, partnership, corporation or other
business entity engaged in the business of constructing, altering, or
repairing buildings or other structures or lots and all trades and crafts
associated with such work, including, but not restricted to, general building
contractors, excavating contractors, carpentry contractors, heating, air
conditioning, ventilating, mechanical, electrical and plumbing contractors
and "subcontractor" as defined below.



      (1)   Any person whose construction, repair or alteration of
any building or structure within the corporate limits of Orland Park,
Illinois, for which a building permit is required, is presumed to be a
contractor and must be licensed and insured hereunder unless not required by
other Village, county or State laws.



      (2)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other business
entity who engages in any construction work, shall not be considered a
contractor for purposes of this Ordinance where such work is performed for no
compensation.



      (3)   Any land owner who employs workers paid an hourly rate
is not considered a contractor.  Employees of this type must be licensed or
registered by the State of Illinois as determined by the work performed.  A
landowner under this subsection must not employ more than five employees and
must not engage in more than three trades.



      "General Contractor with Trades" shall mean a contractor who uses
one or more tradesmen or sub-contractors to perform the required construction
to complete any project for which a building permit is required.  When a
general contractor employs a full-time tradesman or tradesmen who perform a
variety of miscellaneous tasks (i.e., carpentry, siding, excavating or
concrete, etc.) the registration fee shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00).  A list of tasks and tradesmen performing the tasks will be
required from the General Contractor or property owner at the time prior to
permit issuance.  The general contractor shall be responsible for all work
performed by the general contractor's employees.



      "General Contractor/Construction Manager" shall mean not
employing full-time tradesmen and using sub-contractors to complete
construction.  A General Contractor/Construction Manager shall pay a fee of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) and all sub-contractors working on that
project shall be required to register and pay the sub-contractors fee of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00).



         A contractor with no employees is considered a General
Contractor or Project Manager.



      "Subcontractor" means a contractor who performs only the type of
work that is classified as a specific trade, such as but not limited to:
carpentry, roofing, electrical, etc.



   D.   License Fees:  All licenses shall be valid for one calendar
year from January 1 to December 31.



      The fees for the contractor license are as follows:



 


License fee



General contractor
 
$300.00


Sub-contractor's License fee per specialty:
 
$75.00



 



   E.   License Issuance:  The Village's Development Services
Department shall license contractors to work within its corporate limits upon
proper application, compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and
payment of the fee set out in this ordinance.



      1.   All licenses shall be valid for one calendar year from
January 1 to December 31, unless otherwise revoked as prescribed in this
Ordinance.



      2.   All general contractors and sub-contractors must be
licensed prior to being issued any building permits by the Village's
Development Services Department. Any change in the general or sub-contractors
once a permit has been issued shall be put in writing by the general
contractor or sub-contractor if no general contractor is present, within
three (3) business days of such change, and delivered to the Village's
Development Services Department.



   F.   License Revocation and Reinstatement:  Any registration issued
under the provisions of this Ordinance may be revoked by the Village's
Development Services Department for violation(s) of any of the provisions of
this Ordinance not repaired within fourteen (14) days from the notice of
violation(s) or a limited amount of time as determined by the Building
Official.  Such revocation shall be in addition to fines or penalties
imposed and items listed below:



      1.   No person whose registration has been revoked as herein
provided shall be eligible for a reinstated new license for a period to be
determined by the Building Official, as based upon the severity of the
violation.  A fifty dollar ($50.00) administrative fee shall be paid to the
Village prior to any approved contractor license reinstatement.



      2.   All appeals from the action of the Building Official to
revoke a contractor or subcontractor's license shall be filed within ten (10)
days of such action with the Village who shall conduct a hearing on such
revocation.



      3.   The Village's Development Services Department may refuse
to issue or reinstate a license in the event that any of the provisions of
this Ordinance, which are conditions precedent to the issuance of the
license, have not been met.  The Village shall serve as the Building Board
of Appeals, and application for appeal shall be made to the Chairman of this
Committee within ten (10) days of the Building Official's decision.  Both
the aggrieved party and the Building Official shall be permitted to give
testimony, call witnesses and present evidence to the Building Board of
Appeals.  The Chairman shall administer and may, at his/her discretion,
place a time limit on all testimony.



   G.   A certificate of insurance is required from all contractors
performing work within the Village. The policy minimum requirements shall be
as follows:



      1.   General Liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence and Workers Compensation per statute.



         (1)   Exception: If you are a contractor that does not
have any employees or independent contractors assisting in the construction
of the permitted work, Workman Compensation insurance is not required.



      2.   The Village of Orland Park shall be listed as the
Certificate holder.



(Amd. Ord. 5404, 5-6-19; Amd. Ord. 5410, 5-20-19; Am. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-7:  EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING:



   (See 5-1-2 for general grading reference)



(deleted by Ord. 5105, 6-20-16)



5-1-8:  BUILDING CRITERIA FOR LANDMARK AND HISTORIC BUILDINGS:



   A.   The provisions of the Village building code ordinances relating
to the construction, repair, alteration, enlargement, restoration and moving
of buildings or structures, designated as Landmarks or designated Historic
Districts by the State or Village are not mandatory. Such buildings or
structures must meet the requirements of Section 5-110 of the Land
Development Code pertaining to Certificates of Appropriateness, the US
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Restoration, Rehabilitation and
Preservation and Chapter 34 of the 2015/IBC "Building Code" as amended. 
(Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4786, 2-4-13)



   B.   However, such buildings must be judged by the building code
official to be safe and not contrary to the public health, safety and welfare
with regard to any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement,
relocation or location. (Amd. Ord. 4786, 2-4-13)



   C.   Any proposed change must be based upon an applicant's complete
submission of professional architectural drawings and specifications and,
where applicable, engineering plans and specifications; and any drawings,
plans and specifications so submitted shall bear the professional seal of the
designer.



   D.   The plans, drawings and specifications shall indicate the
structural soundness, life safety and fire safety features of the existing
structure; and the plans, drawings and specifications shall show the
structural soundness, life safety and fire safety features to be included in
the proposed change(s).



   E.   Any building which is changed pursuant to the provisions of
this Section shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plans,
drawings and specifications.



(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-9:  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:



   In addition to the regulations adopted hereinafter the following
regulations shall also apply:



5-1-9-1:  PLUGGING OF WATER TAPS:



   Whenever a building or structure shall be demolished and water service
shall be discontinued, it shall be required that the tap into the main
theretofore made shall be permanently plugged as approved by the Village. In
the event a new water service shall be constructed hereafter for an existing
building or structure, and a new tap made into the water main, the tap for
the water service, the use of which is to be discontinued, shall be
permanently plugged.



5-1-9-2:  CURING AND SEALING OF CONCRETE:



   (deleted by Ord. 4786, 2-4-13)



5-1-9-3:  VILLAGE CODE:



   Additional rules, as referenced in the Village Code may be used for
regulating land usage, construction and/or occupancy within the corporate
limits of Orland Park.



(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-10:  RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:



   he following rules and regulations, printed in books or pamphlet form,
one (1) copy of each of which was on file in the office of the Village Clerk
prior to the enactment of this Section and which were available for
inspection by the public are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this Chapter for the construction, erection, alteration, installation,
addition, enlargement, repair, conversion, removal, demolition, use,
location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures thereof
or parts thereof and appurtenances thereof, provided however, the model
code’s penalty provisions are not adopted.  The general penalty  provided
in the Village Code of Orland Park should be applicable. (See 5-1-15, 5-2-14
& Village Code Appendix B provisions as amended). Where, in this Code, there
is a reference to the Building Code, it will also mean the Village Amendments
to the Building Code. 



(Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-10-1:  BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL:



   Whenever in said publications reference shall be made to a building
code official or building inspector or other enforcing officials, said
reference shall be construed to mean the Manager of the Building Division of
the Village, and the words “Building Division Manager” shall be
specifically substituted for any of said references.  (Ord. 4614, 1-17-11;
Amd. Ord. 4786, 2-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5105, 6-20-16; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-11:  IBC 2018 & IRC 2018 ADOPTED (MODEL CODE):



   Adopted and applicable to all buildings and structures or parts thereof
and appurtenances thereof, are those rules and regulations set forth with
particularity in the booklet entitled "International Building Code/2018" and
the International Residential Code/2018, first publications: August 31, 2017,
published by International Code Council, INC. 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country
Club Hills, Illinois, amended however, in that the following portions
indicated in deleted Sections of  5-1-13 and 5-1-14 hereof are not hereby
adopted, or are hereby amended or added to that code as indicated in Section
5-1-13 and 5-1-14. 



(Ord. 4614 - 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4786, 2-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5105, 6-20-16; Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-12:  DELETIONS FROM IBC 2018 & IRC 2018 (MODEL CODES):



   Code text deleted from the IBC Model Code's chapters, sections or
tables are so arranged to be viewed at or near each of the Village Code's
amendments as shown in 5-1-13 and 5-1-14 of this Code.



(Ord. 4786, 2-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5105, 6-20-16; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-13:  AMENDMENTS TO IBC 2018 (MODEL CODE):



   IBC CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION



1.   That Section 101.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   101.1 TITLE:  These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of
the Village of Orland Park hereinafter referred to as "the building code" or
"this code". (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



2.   That Section 101.2 shall be revised to read as follows:



   101.2 SCOPE:  These regulations shall control all matters concerning
the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition,
location, occupancy, change of owner, change of business name and maintenance
of all buildings and structures, and shall apply to existing or proposed
buildings and structures, except as such matters are otherwise provided for
in other ordinances or statutes, or in the rules and regulations authorized
for promulgation under the provisions of this code. See Sections 108 and 3103
for Temporary Structures. 



   Residential Construction: The International Residential Code (IRC)
referenced in Chapter 35 for the construction of single or attached dwelling
units (townhouses) shall be used by the Building Official. This residential
code shall not conflict with other ordinances referenced for the construction
of single family dwellings, as listed in Chapter 35. Sections or chapters of
The 2018 International Residential Code shall be used for building
construction regulations as amended in 5-1-14. The IRC Residential code,
Section P2904 shall not apply to require the fire sprinkler requirements in a
dwelling or dwelling units. (Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19).
Note: for interpretations requirements 5-1-13 also applies to residential
construction.



   101.2.1 APPENDICES: Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically adopted by the village.



3.   That Section 101.4 shall be revised to read as follows:



   101.4 REFERENCED CODES:  Title 5, of The Village Code, (Ordinance 2989
as amended), shall be used to reference other building related codes adopted
for regulating Permit Fees, Electrical, Plumbing, Fire Prevention,
Mechanical, Property Maintenance, The Village Health Code (6-1) and Rental
Housing where referenced in "this code".  Adoption of the State of Illinois,
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is referenced in Chapter 13 of
these amendments. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   101.4.1 FUEL GAS CODE: The provisions of the International Fuel Gas
Code as referenced in Chapter 35 and required appliance venting in Chapter 28
of this Code, shall apply to the installation of fuel gas piping and
appliances from the point of delivery, gas appliances, ventilation and
related accessories as covered in this code.  These requirements apply to
gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet
connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential
and commercial gas appliances and related accessories as referenced in
Chapter 35.  Where conflicts may occur with other Village Code amendments,
(Building and Mechanical Codes) the more restrictive shall apply. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY



4.   That Section 102 shall be revised to read as follows:



   102.1 GENERAL:  The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures, as set forth in Section 101.0. The
construction, alteration, repair, addition and removal of all structures
shall comply with this code. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.



   102.2 OTHER LAWS: The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, state or federal laws. (Ord. 4614, 1-17-11)



   102.3 MATTERS NOT PROVIDED FOR:  Any requirements that are essential
for the structural, fire or sanitary safety of an existing or proposed
building or structure, or for the safety of the occupants thereof, which are
not specifically provided for by the code, shall be determined by the code
official.



   102.4 REFERENCED STANDARDS:  The standards and ordinances referenced
in this code and listed in Chapter 35, shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where differences occur
between provisions of this code and the referenced ordinances of the Village
of Orland Park, the more restrictive or specific provisions shall apply.



   102.5  PARTIAL INVALIDITY:  See the model code's language.



   102.6  EXISTING STRUCTURES:  The legal occupancy of any structure
existing on the date of adoption of this code, or for which it has been
heretofore approved, shall be permitted to continue without change, except as
is specifically covered in this code, the property maintenance and Fire Codes
listed in Chapter 35, or as is deemed necessary by the code official for the
general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.



      102.6.1  CHANGE OF USE, OWNER, NAME OF BUSINESS OR OCCUPANCY: 
A change of use, owner, name of business or occupancy shall not be made to
any structure or space which will subject the structure or space to any
special provisions of this code without approval of the code official. The
code official shall certify that such structure or space meets the intent of
the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new
use, owner, name of business or occupancy, and that such change does not
result in any greater hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
Changes include any of the specific Occupancy Classifications shown in
Chapter 3.



      102.6.2  ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR REPAIRS:  Additions,
alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to that required of a
new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all of
the requirements of this code.



      Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing
structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the
building. Any building plus new additions shall not exceed the height, number
of stories and area specified for new buildings. Alterations or repairs to an
existing structure which are structural or adversely affect any structural
member of any part of the structure having a required fire-resistance rating
shall be made with materials required for a new structure.



      Entire structures shall be made to conform to the requirements of
this code for new buildings under the following conditions:



      .   When remodeling or alterations take place in more than 50%
of its original building area.



      .   When remodeling increases the original market value by
more than 50%.



      .   When increased in floor area by more than 10% of the
original area.



      .   When a structure is increased in the number of stories.



      .   When a structure or building is changed to a more
hazardous use classification.



      Exception:  Single Family Dwellings separately regulated under
the IRC code, as amended (5-1-14) 



   Any building or structure which is destroyed or damaged by wind, fire
or other casualty or act of God, to an extent which reduces its market value
by less than 50% may be repaired or restored to its prior condition, if a
building permit for the repair or restoration is issued and construction is
begun within six months of the date of the damage.  If a permit is not so
obtained and construction is not begun within six months for such repair or
restoration OR if a building or structure is damaged or destroyed to an
extent which reduces its market value by more than 50%, it may be repaired or
restored only if the repaired or restored building or structure conforms to
the standards of these regulations for new construction.  Market value shall
be determined by reference to the most recent official property tax
assessment rolls available in the year the structure is destroyed or
damaged.  The extent of damage or destruction shall be determined by the
code official by comparing the estimated cost of repairs or restoration with
the market value as shown on the tax assessment rolls of the appropriate
county collector or as determined by credible cost data publications.  (Ord.
3910, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 104 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL



5.   That Sections 104.1 and 104.1.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   104.1 GENERAL DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL:  The
building code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of
the provisions of this code and shall act on any question relative to the
mode or manner of construction and materials to be used in the erection,
addition to, alteration, repair, removal, demolition or installation of
service equipment and the location, occupancy and maintenance of all
buildings and structures.



      104.1.1  RULE-MAKING AUTHORITY:  The building code official
shall have authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety
and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to
interpret and implement the provisions of this code to secure the intent
thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or
other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural
or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code or of
violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 105 PERMITS



6.   That Section 105.1 and 105.2 shall be revised to read as follows:



   105.1  PERMIT REQUIRED:  It shall be unlawful for any owner, or
owner's authorized agent to construct, erect, alter, install, add to,
enlarge, repair, convert, remove, demolish, locate, or maintain any building
or structure or any part of appurtenance thereof; or change the occupancy of
a building or structure requiring greater strength, exit or sanitary
provisions; or to change to another use of change of occupancy or change in
tenants or owners; or to install or alter any equipment for which provision
is made or the installation of which is regulated by this code and other
codes adopted in Title 5 of the Village Code; or to move or add a lot line
which affects an existing structure without first filing an application with
the code official in writing and obtaining the required permit therefor;
except that repairs, as defined in Section 105.2.2 and which do not involve
any violation of this code, shall be exempted from this provision. Notice
shall also be given to the appropriate Fire Protection District for any fire
sprinkler and alarm system work (Orland, Mokena, or the Palos Fire Protection
Districts).



   Existing commercial/business buildings and rental housing units shall
be inspected for property maintenance and life safety requirements (business
licenses and rental housing VC 7-1 & 5-8). 



   105.2  WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT:  Exemptions from permit requirements
of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be
done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other
Village laws or ordinances. Permits shall not be required for the following:



   Building:



   1.   Landscape (cantilevered) Retaining walls that are not over
three (3) feet (thirty-six (36) inches) in height measured from the bottom of
the footing and only resisting natural soil and groundwater loads.  Site
grading elevation changes must be approved by Village engineers for
acceptable drainage.



   2.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops
and similar finish work.



   3.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy
that are less than twenty-four (24) inches deep, do not exceed one thousand
(1,000) gallons and are installed entirely above ground. See Land Development
Code 6-310.1 for regulations.



   4.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one
and two-family dwellings.



   5.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not
project more than thirty (30) inches from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support of Groups R-3 and U occupancies.



   6.   Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and
partitions not over six (6) feet in height.  Permits are required when
reducing a required exit access passageway width.



   7.   Minor building maintenance and/or alterations that are not
regulated or violate the Village Codes.  Examples:



      a)   The replacement of existing exterior glass if the natural
light and ventilation is maintained, and/or the window/door framing is not
enlarged for structural concerns. Safety glass shall comply with all Village
regulations.



         Note: Commercial alterations may require an appearance
review for any visual changes regulated by the Land Development Code. 



      b)   Roof and building repairs needed for leaks. (new roof
materials allowed up to fifteen percent (15%) of roof area).



      c)   Tuck-pointing of brick.



         1.   Replacement of brick is allowed up to one hundred
(100) square feet per each floor level.



      d)   Interior gypsum wallboard repairs up for an area up to
sixty-four (64) square feet.



      e)   The replacement of plumbing fixtures in single family
dwellings when no drain, waste or venting pipe is changed or altered.



      Electrical, Gas, Mechanical, and Plumbing; exemptions referenced
in the model code are applicable for the remainder of this sub-section. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



7.   That Section 105.3 has additions to read as follows:



   105.3  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:  To obtain a Building Division permit,
the applicant shall first file an application therefor in an electronic form
or in writing on a form furnished by the Development Services
Department/Building Division for that purpose.  All forms of permit
applications and communications shall use the English language.



   Such application shall:



   1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made.



   2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
legal description, street address or similar description that will readily
identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.



   3.   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.



   4.   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information
as required in Section 107.



   5.   State the valuation of the proposed work.



   6.   Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.



   7.   Give such other data and information as required by the
building official.



   8.   A list of all contractors licensed and bonded by the Village of
Orland Park.



   Any permit application or business inquiries shall use the English
language.



      105.3.1 PERMITS FOR WORK NOT REQUIRING A CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY:  When a permit has been issued for any type of work that does not
require a certificate of occupancy (EG: decks, sheds, porches, fences,
swimming pools, building alterations and repairs etc.) and the
construction/installation of materials has been started on any project, the
work shall continue until it has been completed. It is understood that unless
a substantial start on construction is made within six (6) months, and unless
substantial progress is made within one (1) year, and unless construction is
completed within two (2) years from the date of issuance of a permit, the
permit will become null and void. Only one extended permit shall be issued
for the completion of the work.work. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



8.   That Section 105.5.1 and 105.2 are added to Section 105 to read as
follows:



   105.5.1 TIME LIMITATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS, ADDITIONS,
REMODELING AND ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES:  Permits issued for the
construction or remodeling of residential buildings and any accessory
structures shall become expired when the work permitted is not commenced
within 180 days, is abandoned for 180 days and/or is not completed with final
approval is issued within 365 days from the date of a permit issuance.



   Work not completed within three hundred and sixty five (365) days shall
be considered abandoned, unless such work has been pursued in good faith;
except that the building official is authorized to grant one (1) or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days
each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. Permit renewal fees shall also be paid with consideration given
for the extent of remaining work to be performed but in no case shall be less
than one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for new residential units and
fifty dollars ($50.00) for accessory structures. (Ord. 3910, 7-19-04).



   105.5.2  TIME LIMITATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL BUILDING, ADDITIONS
REMODELING AND ACCESSORY COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES: Permits for commercial
construction shall follow the same restrictions established for residential
construction except for larger commercial structures which may be extended
due to size or complexities, as determined by the Building Official. Permit
renewal fees shall be established on the amount of remaining work to be
completed. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 107 SUBMITTAL OF DOCUMENTS



9.   That specific subsections of Section 107.2 shall be revised and/or
added to read as follows:



   107.2 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:  The application for a permit shall be
accompanied by not less than three (3) sets of construction plans and other
required supporting documents necessary to monitor compliance, including a
statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data
necessary for code conformance. The construction documents shall be prepared
by a registered design professional where required by The State of Illinois
statutes. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized
to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered
design professional. Construction documents shall be prepared using the
English Language.



   The code official is permitted to waive the requirements for filing
construction documents when the scope of the work is of a minor nature. When
the quality of the materials is essential for conformity to the code,
specific information shall be given to establish such quality, and this code
shall not be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent used as a
substitute for specific information.



      107.2.1  INFORMATION ON CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:  Construction
documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable broadsheet, paper
material.  Electronic media documents may be submitted when approved by the
building official.  Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to
indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in
detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations as determined by the building official.
Plans submitted for permit review shall be scaled to a minimum size of ¼
inch equals one foot for floor plan portion unless alternate is approved by
the code official.



         107.2.1.2  REVISIONS REQUIRED TO PLANS:  Due to
additional Village Code municipal laws and ordinances established, plan
review specialists may require changes to be incorporated into the revised
set of plans and documents prior to the building permit approval.  Revisions
submitted from the original plans and documents are to be identified by means
of clouding or in a written format to reduce the incurred time needed in the
permit approval process.  Revised documents not clearly showing these
changes may include additional review fees per Village Code (Section 5-2-7-10
n). 



      107.2.2 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM SHOP DRAWINGS:  IBC Code Language
applies.



      107.2.3 MEANS OF EGRESS:   IBC Code Language applies



      107.2.4 EXTERIOR WALL ENVELOPE:  IBC Code Language applies



      107.2.5 EXTERIOR BALCONIES AND ELEVATED SURFACES: IBC Code
language applies.



      107.2.6 SITE PLAN:  IBC Code Language applies.



         107.2.6.1 DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATIONS:  IBC Code Language
applies.



         107.2.6.2  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM:  The site plan
shall indicate the location of a private sewage disposal system where a
public sewer is not available. All technical data and soil data required by
the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and by
the Plumbing Code listed in Chapter 35 shall be submitted with the plan.



         107.2.6.3 PLAT OF SURVEY:  A recent sealed boundary line
survey with a legal description shall be submitted with every permit
application unless the code official indicates the survey is not required. In
the case of demolition, the site plan shall show all construction to be
demolished and the location and size of all existing structures and
construction that are to remain on the site or plot.  As built boundary line
surveys shall include all site improvements.



      PROPOSED SURVEYS MUST SHOW (PRIOR TO BREAKING GROUND):



      •   Accurate foundation location and footprint,



      •   High/low foundation elevations and locations, and
building corners (U.S.G.S. datum),



      •   Driveway, and service walk, locations and elevations,



      •   Driveway grade (must be less than 10%),



      •   Top of curb elevations at property lines (extended),



      •   Grading: Ground elevations at all lot corners, summits
and drainage swales, and any adjacent foundation elevations.



      107.2.8  RELOCATABLE BUILDINGS: Revise the referenced Code
Section from 3112 to 3113 due to the Model Code’s printing error. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



10.   That Sections 107.3.1, 107.3.4 and 107.5 of Section 107 shall be
revised and read as follows:



   107.3.1 APPROVED CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:  The code official shall
stamp or endorse in writing all bound sets of construction documents "PERMIT
PLANS SHALL REMAIN ON THE JOBSITE DURING CONSTRUCTION". One set of the
approved construction documents shall be retained by the code official and
one set shall be kept at the building site, open to inspection of the code
official or an authorized representative at all reasonable times. The third
set of construction documents (when required) shall be forwarded to the
appropriate Fire District or other authority, for their records. 



   107.3.4  PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING SERVICES: The
construction documents for new construction, alteration, repairs, expansion,
addition or modification for buildings or structures shall be prepared by a
State of Illinois registered design professional as required by Illinois laws
or Acts.



   The construction documents shall include the name and address of the
registered design professional with a signature, seal or facsimile of the
license, date of license expiration and date prepared by the registered
design professional in accordance with the professional registration laws of
the state of Illinois.  A State of Illinois Licensed Architect or Structural
Engineer must also design residential plans included with a building permit
application.  Plans must clearly detail all structural specifications
necessary to construct and inspect all applications of the architects and/or
engineers design to meet Village Code requirements. Where structural
assemblies have not been provided for, the design professional shall submit
adequate details for a clear understanding of construction application by the
installer or trade professional.



   The registered design professional shall be responsible for reviewing
and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and
deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 



   Where structural, fire resistive or energy observations are required by
Chapter 17, the inspection program shall name the individual or firms who are
to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at
which structural observation is to occur. See Sections 1703, 1704 and1705 for
specific duties and reports required.



   EXCEPTIONS: Single-story residential additions less than 600 square
feet in total area where special structural engineering is not required.



   Construction plans for pre-manufactured structure elements must be
designed by a state of Illinois licensed architect or structural engineer.
The permit plans must include that professional's signature, seal and date of
license expiration affixed to plans.    (Ord. 3910, 7-19-04).



   107.3.4.1 DEFERRED SUBMITTALS   DEFERRED SUBMITTALS   The IBC (Model
Code) language applies.



   107.5  RETENTION OF CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS: Plans submitted with
building permit applications shall become part of the Village’s records for
future reference. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 108 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES



11.   That Section 108.5 shall be added and read as follows:



   108.5 TEMPORARY USE AND LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE: Temporary uses shall be
in conformance with the Village Land Development Code (6-304). (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 109 FEES



12.   That Section 109.2 and 109.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   109.2 FEE SCHEDULE: A fee for each plan examination and inspections
shall be paid in accordance with the Village of Orland Park's Village Code
Title 5 Chapter 2, Chapter 35 of this code and other applicable ordinances.



      109.2.1 LICENSING AND BONDING OF CONTRACTORS: All contractors
performing work in the Village of Orland Park shall be licensed and bonded in
accordance with all the appropriate ordinances listed in this code and
Chapter 35. (See 5-1-6 of this code)



      109.2.2 SPECIAL SERVICES PERFORMED:  Any person(s) requesting
special or emergency services performed by the Village including preliminary
inspection, evaluation and/or review shall pay additional fees as shown below:



         a.   Village Employees performing "Special Services"
during or after normal Business hours shall pay a minimum fee as shown in The
Village Code Title 5 Chapter 2. Special Services shall be defined as:



         •   Inspections, plan reviews or permit issuance
operations requested not during normal village business days/hours.



         •   Inspections requested for the same day as the
inspection is requested (before the normal 24 hour waiting period).



         •   Inspections requested during the normal village
business hours for a specific time of the day.



         •   Preliminary or special inspections requested, in
addition to a permit's required inspections.  (see Section 107.2.1.2 of this
code)



         b.   Independent services performed by other than
Village personnel (not directly employed by the Village), shall pay the fees
as required by The Village Code, 5-2-7-10 "Building Permits and Fees” (Ord.
3910, 7-19-04).



   109.4  WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE: See other Village Code
Sections referencing enforcement penalties in Section 114 and other Sections
of this Code (5-1-15) and the Village Code (5-2-14) as revised. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 100 INSPECTIONS



13.   That Section 110.3 changes shall read as follows:



   110.3 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS: Approvals shall be as specified in Section
110.1. The building official, upon request through adequate written or
electronic means of notification, shall make the inspections set forth in
Sections 110.3.1 through 110.3.12.  Only after phases of work are completed,
inspections requests are required to be submitted to the Development Services
Department by means of: 1) in person on a written form, 2) through an
electronic "Fax", 3) through the Village of Orland Park website at
www.orland-park.il.us.  Inspections require at least a one full workday's
notice to the Village before site/field inspections.  All communications
used for building inspections shall use the English language. 



      110.3.1 JOB ACCESS: A safe and reasonable access shall be
provided to all buildings or structures during the construction and final
inspections. This includes a dry gravel streets, walkway, non-slip platforms
secured so they do not move around, ladders or any other item the inspector
considers safe. If a safe access is not provided, the inspector may not
perform the required inspection until a safe access is provided. Guards shall
protect all floor and foundation openings from the public's access and
possible injuries.



      110.3.2  JOB SITE CONDITIONS: Any building or structure that is
to be inspected shall have all floors and levels accessible and shall be
clean of all debris and obstructions so a visual inspection of all the
construction can be performed.  Ladders or levels greater than 12 inches are
not considered accessible.



         110.3.2.1  SITE PROTECTION: Building site conditions shall
conform to the requirements from Chapter 33 of this Code. The Building
Official may require additional site protection where possible hazards can be
found as determined by the Code Official.



      110.3.3  FOOTING INSPECTIONS: Are made after all the footing and
slab work is formed but before the concrete is placed.  A minimum 24 hours
inspection request is required. See Section 110.3.7.1 for cold weather
inspection restrictions.



      110.3.4  UNDERGROUND, PLUMBING AND DRAIN TILE:  Are made prior
to pouring any concrete for the floor/crawl space and before backfilling.
Inspection request cards to be completed and returned to the Building
Department a minimum of 24 hours before the inspection is required. See
Section 110.3.6.1 for required perimeter foundation wall energy insulation
prior to backfill.



      110.3.5  PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND MECHANICAL: Rough inspections
are made prior to covering or concealment of construction materials, and
prior to a framing rough inspection. All rough inspections, including the
framing, shall be approved prior to any finishes or coverings being
installed. Inspection request cards to be completed and returned to the
building department a minimum of 24 hours before the inspection is required.



         110.3.5.1  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS: Before any rough
inspections are made by the Village, fire protection system plans and
inspections of enclosed fire system components, shall be approved by the
Village and inspection(s) for approvals performed by the appropriate Fire
Protection District (Orland, Palos or Mokena).



      110.3.6  FRAMING ROUGH: Inspections are made after all
structural framing, exterior and interior walls, wall bracing, fire blocking,
draftstopping, roofing, windows and doors are in place for structural
stability and weather protection, after the plumbing, electrical, fire and
mechanical rough inspection are made but prior to installing insulation that
may obstruct an inspection.  An inspection request is to be completed and
delivered to the Building Division before any construction is concealed from
viewing and at least 24 hours before the inspection time is forecasted.  All
construction shall conform to the code and plans reviewed for permit approval.



         110.3.6.1  ENERGY INSPECTIONS: Inspections shall be
requested and approved for compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but
not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U- values,
fenestration U-value, air leakage, duct system R-value, HVAC and
water-heating equipment efficiency.  See Village Code Title 5, Chapter 2 for
inspection fees required.  Special inspection services shall be provided for
commercial and multi-family structures as determined by the Building
Official. 



            ENERGY CONSERVATION - ILLINOIS PUBLIC ACT 096-0778



            Applicable as of 1/1/2016: as amended by the Village.
See Illinois website at
https://www.illinois.gov/cdb/business/codes/Pages/IllinoisEnergyConservationCod
e.aspx



         a.   Building exterior envelope insulation material,
installation and R-factors: Basement walls, slabs, crawl space, exterior
walls, ceilings (and vaults), attics or roofs and a certificate at electrical
panel inspections are required before occupancy.



         b.   Exterior windows/glazing, doors, and openings
during/after rough framing inspections:  Verify all product u-factors,
labels, air leakage film & seals.



         c.   Air Leakage and Infiltration prior to exterior
masonry veneers: Exterior wall barriers or films or solid material, caulking,
gaskets, weather-stripping for doors, windows, utility penetrations, knee
walls, garage attic wall(s), tubs and showers, attic openings, rim joist,
sill plates, combustion air, fireplace gaskets, recessed lighting, plumbing
and electric penetrations, duct joints and seams sealant, ductwork testing
etc.



         d.   Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Equipment:
Heating and cooling equipment sizing and efficiency, heat pump controls, duct
insulation, piping insulation, intakes and exhausts with automatic gravity
dampers, programmable thermostat, snow melt controls, electrical fixtures and
high-efficacy lamps.



         e.   Pools and Equipment:  Pool heaters, time switches,
pool covers etc.



         f.   A qualified 3rd party inspection agency: shall or
may be permitted to perform required energy and air leakage inspections as
determined by the Building Official.  Private inspection contracting
services are the responsibility of the land or building owner as a condition
of permit issuance. See Village Code (5-2) Permit Fee ordinance.



         110.3.6.2  FIRE AND SMOKE RESISTANT PENETRATIONS: 
Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies,
smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall  not be concealed from view until
inspected and approved.  Special inspection services shall be provided as
determined by the Building Official.  Special Inspections of Section 1705.14
through 1705.18 for Fire-Resistant Materials, Penetrations, Joints and Smoke
Control as Village amended, applies to all buildings.



      110.3.7  CONCRETE INSPECTIONS: Are required for all flat work,
interior and exterior, including but not limited to driveways, sidewalks,
crawl spaces and basements prior to placement. A minimum 24 hour inspection
request is required. Inspections within 24 hours will be timed from days in
which the Village is open for business (example: typical requests on a Friday
will be inspected on the next Monday).



         110.3.7.1  COLD WEATHER REQUIREMENTS: The following
requirements for cold weather exterior concrete flatwork placement
(sidewalks, drives, patios, etc.) will be in effect November 15th with the
possibility of an extension to December 1st or reduction to an earlier date
with the approval of the code official when weather conditions allow:



         a.   No concrete shall be placed on a frozen base or sub
base.



         b.   Outside air temperature must be a minimum of 32
degrees Fahrenheit before concrete can be placed.



         c.   If night time temperature is to fall below 32
degrees Fahrenheit, then protection consistent with the intended
serviceability of the structure shall be provided.



            Straw - 5 days, Insulated blankets - 3 days



            Straw or blankets directly in contact with the
concrete may cause the concrete to discolor.



         d.   Placement of concrete (footings and foundation
walls), when the air temperature is less than 20 degrees Fahrenheit is not
permitted unless approved by the code official.



      110.3.8  OTHER INSPECTIONS: In addition to the inspections
above, the Building Department may make or require any other inspections to
ascertain compliance with this code and other laws enforced by the Building
Department. Other inspections include, but not limited to Electrical,
Plumbing, Mechanical, Fire, State of Illinois Accessibility Code and Health
Code regulations per Village Code 6-1-1-6.



         110.3.8.1  "AS BUILT" SURVEYS: Prior to any construction
beyond the foundation, an "As Built" survey will show:



         1.   Actual foundation footprint and location, and



         2.   All foundation steps and brick ledge
locations/elevations.



      110.3.9  SPECIAL INSPECTIONS: Where applications for unusual
design or magnitude of construction are filed or where code referenced
standards in Chapter 35 or is required by Chapter 17 of this Code for special
inspections, the code official may require such inspections. The project
representative shall submit reports as required by code and code official.



      110.3.10  FINAL INSPECTION: Upon completion of the building or
structure for occupancy (including the final grading complying with Section
110.3.10.1 and the completion of any other work required in the approved
plans, and this code) and before the issuance of the certificate of use and
occupancy required in Chapter 110.0, a final inspection shall be made. All
violations of this code, the approved plans, and permit shall be noted and
the holder of the permit shall be notified of the discrepancies. Final
approvals may include regulations for: Building, Plumbing, Electric,
Mechanical, Fire, Energy, Accessibility, Health, Engineering, Planning,
conditions of a development agreement, legal and/or outstanding fees to be
paid. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



         110.3.10.1  FINAL GRADE CERTIFICATION (PRIOR TO
OCCUPANCY): Permit applicant shall submit certification stating the property
as developed conforms to the approved engineering grading plan and the
proposed survey.



      110.3.11  APPROVAL REQUIRED: Work shall not be done beyond the
point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the
approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification,
shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of
the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit
holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code.
Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not
be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 



      Occupancy of a building or structure prior to the approval of the
building official is subject to fines as stipulated in Section 114.4 of this
Code



      110.3.12  WORKMANSHIP: All work shall be conducted, installed
and completed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as to secure the
results intended by this code. (Ord. 3910, 7-19-04).



         110.3.12.1 SITE MAINTENANCE: All construction sites shall
maintain and provide access to the paved public right of ways as noted in
110.3.1.  Adjacent properties, exiting curbs and site construction
improvements shall be kept clear of site debris, materials and equipment
including and not limited to trades persons work vehicles.  A stop work
order and citation may be issued at any time these violations exist.  See
Title 5 Chapter 7 of the Village Code for additional Property Maintenance
rules.



SECTION 111 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY



14.   That Subsections 111.2 and 111.3 shall be revised and Section 114 is
added to read as follows:



   111.2  CERTIFICATE ISSUED: When a building or structure is entitled
thereto, the building code official shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy within ten days after final inspection and approval. The
certificate shall certify compliance with the provisions of this code and the
purpose for which the building or structure may be used in its several
parts.  (See VC 5-1-4).



   111.3  CONDITIONAL OCCUPANCY PERMIT: The building code official is
authorized to issue a conditional certificate of occupancy before the
completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such
portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building code official
shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy
is valid.  Upon request of the holder of a permit, the building code
official may issue a conditional occupancy permit for a specific building or
structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the permit
shall have been completed, provided that: (1) such portion or portions may be
occupied or used safely prior to full completion of the building, structure
or exterior land improvements without endangering life or public welfare; (2)
the incompletion is due to factors beyond the permit holder's control and
beyond his reasonable scheduling efforts, such as in the case of driveways,
sidewalks, rough and/or final grading, exterior painting, gutters and
downspouts which normally cannot be completed due to inclement weather during
the time period of November 1st through the following May 15th; (3) in the
cases of incomplete items, proof is shown that money is escrowed or otherwise
set aside to complete the improvements; and (4) all parties with an interest
in the building or structure give written concurrence with the issuance of
the conditional occupancy permits.



   The conditional occupancy permit shall be issued in the name of the
permit holder and the individual or business entity occupying the premises.



   In the event that an approved plan for a building is completed,
excepting only landscaping and/or grading requirements, a conditional
certificate of occupancy may be issued upon receipt of a request stating that
(1) the builder intends to complete the uncompleted work within thirty (30)
days (or within ninety (90) days or by June 1, whichever is earlier, if the
request is dated between December 1 and April 1); (2) the builder will
voluntarily provide a five thousand dollar  ($5,000.00) cash deposit (or
check) in exchange for the conditional certificate of occupancy; and (3) the
builder gives the Village the right to enter the property at the Village's
sole option to complete the uncompleted work if said work is not completed
within the time limit set (this right shall survive the closing of any sale
of the property).



   The builder's deposit will be refunded less two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) for program administration and inspection costs if the
uncompleted work is completed within the time limit set. Otherwise, the
Village may, at its sole option, complete the work or have it completed and
refund any remaining money to the builder less three hundred and fifty
dollars ($350.00) for program administration completion and inspection costs.
Acceptance of a builder's deposit creates no liability for the Village to
complete any uncompleted work.



   Builders are under no obligation to participate in this voluntary
program. If they prefer, they may simply complete all work shown on the
approved plan and receive a final certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 3449,
12-4-00).



   111.4 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: Existing structures legally occupied
during times when work is allowed under an active building permit shall
obtain a Certificate of Completion prior to use of those areas designated.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 113 MEANS OF APPEAL



15.   That Section 113 shall read as follows:



   SECTION 113: MEANS OF APPEAL:



   113.1  APPLICATION FOR APPEAL: The owner of a building or structure or
any other person directly affected by a decision of the code official
refusing to grant a modification to the provisions of this code concerning
the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection,
alteration or repairs of a building or structure may appeal to the President
and Board of Trustees. Application for an appeal may be made when it is
claimed that the true intent of this ordinance has been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this ordinance do not fully apply, or an
equally good or better form of construction can be used.



   113.2  MANNER OF APPEAL: Within fourteen (14) days of the code
official's decision for which an appeal is sought, the owner or person shall
file a written request for appeal with the Village Building Official. The
written request shall reference the Village Code Section and briefly state
the relief sought and the reasons for the relief.



   113.3  TIME OF CONSIDERATION: Not later than thirty (30) days after
the Village Building Official receives the appeal, the item will be placed on
the Development Services Department Building Committee (3-Trustees) agenda
for review and recommendation to the next available President and Board of
Trustee's meeting for consideration.



   113.4  CONSIDERATION: The Board of Trustees shall consider the matter
at a regularly scheduled board meeting for their input and recommendation(s)
for The Board's approval or denial. The person appealing, his representative,
the code official and any other person whose interests may be affected, shall
be given an opportunity to be heard. The board shall uphold the decision of
the code official by a majority vote of the members or the Board may modify
or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of 2/3 or
more of the Board.



      113.4.1  RESOLUTION: The decision of the board shall be by
resolution. Certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and the code
official.



      113.4.2  ADMINISTRATION: The code official shall take immediate
action in accord with the decision. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 114 VIOLATIONS



16.   That Section 114.4 shall read as follows:



   114.4  VIOLATION PENALTIES: See 5-1-15 of this Code



      114.4.1 WORK BEGUN WITHOUT A PROPER PERMIT:  See 5-1-15



      114.4.2 WORK CONTINUED BEYOND FOUNDATION PERMIT: See 5-1-15



      114.4.3 114.4.3 BUILDING/TENANT SPACES OCCUPIED WITHOUT APPROVAL:
See 5-1-15 (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 115 STOP WORK ORDER



17.   That Section 115.3 shall read as follows:



   115.3  UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE: Any person who shall continue any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation
or unsafe conditions, shall be liable and subject to the maximum penalty as
described in The Village Code Title 1 Chapter 4, and 5-1-15 in addition to
penalties specified in other code sections or as specified by other adopted
ordinances. (Ord. 3910, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 116 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT



18.   That Section 116.5 shall read as follows:



   116.5  RESTORATION OF UNSAFE STRUCTURE: A building, structure or
equipment determined to be unsafe by the building code official is permitted
to be restored to a safe condition provided that change of use or occupancy
is not contemplated nor compelled by reason of such reconstruction or
restoration; except that if the damage or cost of reconstruction or
restoration is in excess of 50 percent (50%) of its replacement value,
exclusive of foundations, such structure shall be made to comply in all
respects with the requirements for materials and methods of construction of
structures hereafter erected.  Restoration shall also be in compliance with
Section 102.6.2. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS



19.   That in Section 202.0 of the Building Code shall not conflict with
the Land Development Code and the following definitions are added or changed
to read as follows:



   AGRICULTURAL, BUILDING: A structure designed and constructed to house
farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural
products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place
of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged,
nor shall it be a place used by the public. See Appendix C of this Code.
(Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



      EXCEPTION:    A canopy structure of less than eight thousand
(8,000) square feet in area that is used to cover the sales area of
horticultural landscaping plantings only; may be considered an "Agricultural
Canopy" when horticultural sales are the principal use of the property. See
Section 312 of this code and The Fire Code VC 5-5-2 and Chapter 24 for
allowed permanent canopy structures as amended. (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



   AGRICULTURAL CANOPY:  A permanent structure or shelter less than eight
thousand (8,000) square feet constructed of fabric or pliable materials
supported by any manner, except by air or the contents it protects, and is
open without sidewalls or drops on 75 percent (75%) of the perimeter used as
a retail building with limitations as provided in this code and the Fire
Code. (per 2006 IFC) (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



   AREA BUILDING: See Model Code for this definition. Village amended
Sections 506.4 and 506.5 are used as a guide for allowable building area
calculations of multi-story buildings.



      TOTAL BUILDING FLOOR AREA: A building’s area summary of all
floor levels combined.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The corporate authorities of the Village of Orland
Park.



   BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy. For application of this code, each portion of a
building which is completely separated from other portions by fire walls
complying with Section 706 shall be considered as a separate building except
when calculating the total area of a building for requiring an approved fire
suppression system. (See Subsection 903.1.2)



   BUILDING CODE: The Building Code and its Amendments as adopted by the
Village of Orland Park.



   CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY: The certificate issued by the code
official which permits the use of a building or tenant space in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance
with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building or
tenant space in its several parts together with any special stipulations or
conditions of the building permit (see Section 111).



   CHANGE OF USE: An alteration by change of use in a building or tenant
space heretofore existing to a new use group which imposes other special
provisions of law governing building construction, equipment or means of
egress (see Section 102.6).



   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY: The change in purpose for which a building or part
hereof is used or intended to be used including a change in tenants or tenant
space in addition to:



      A)   A change of occupancy classification.



      B)   A change from one group to another group within an
occupancy classification.



      C)   Any change in use within a group for which there is a
change in application of the requirements of this Code.



   CHANGE OF OWNER: The change in ownership of a business, tenant space,
building or structure.



   FIRE CODE OFFICIAL: The Code Official for the Village of Orland Park.



   FIRE WALL:  A fire-resistance rated masonry wall, having protected
openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously from
the foundation to or through the roof with sufficient structural stability
under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side
without collapse of the wall.  Fire walls shall not be penetrated. (see
Section 706.0). 



   LANDING:



   A)   A landing shall be at least as wide as the stair or ramp
leading to it. 



   B)   A landing length shall be a minimum of 60 in. clear.



   C)   If stairs or ramps change direction at landings, the minimum
landing size shall be 60 in. by 60 in. or the minimum required width of the
stairs or ramp.



   D)   If a doorway is located at a landing, then the area in front of
the doorway shall have adequate maneuvering clearance as regulated by the
Illinois Accessibility Code.



   E)   Residential units shall not be less than thirty-six (36) inches
in width and depth.



   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING TOTAL FLOOR AREA: A building’s area summary of
all floor levels combined.



   ROOF REPAIR: Reconstruction or renewal of an existing roof surface up
to fifteen percent (15%) of the total roof areas. (see Sections 105.2
(Repairs) and 1511 (Reroofing) of this Code)



   TOTAL BUILDING AREA



   DELETE 202 - only items shown below:



   Accessible            See Illinois Accessibility Code
definition



   Accessible route      See Illinois Accessibility Code definition



   Accessible Unit         See Illinois Accessibility Code
definition



   Area of Refuge         See Illinois Accessibility Code
definition



   Alternating tread device   Shall not be used as a stairway



   Detectable Warnings      See Illinois Accessibility Code for
definition



   Marquee            See Land Development Code definition



   (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 3 - USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATIONS



   DELETE - 305.2, Deletes a Day Care from an E Use Group



SECTION 307 HIGH HAZARD GROUP H



20.   That Section 307 shall be revised to read as follows: 



   307 HIGH HAZARD GROUP H:  High hazard buildings are not permitted
within the Village "Fire Limits" as noted Chapter 5 of this Code (503.2.2). 
Allowable restricted quantities of materials are acceptable within Control
Areas as specified in Sections 307.1 and 414 of the adopted code. This may
include limited hazards when located within specific "Control Areas" as
determined by the Building Official.  Subsections of Section 307 apply for
the determination of High Hazards.  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 308 INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I



21.   That Subsection 308.3.3, 308.6.1 and 308.6.4 shall be amended as
follows:



   308.3.3 delete the allowance for six (6)  to sixteen (16) persons
receiving custodial care from an I-1 Use Group's Classification to be
classified as an R-4 Use (per IBC), and maintain this amount of persons
within the I-1 Use Group. (Village has deleted R-4 Structures (Section 310.5)
from this code)



   DELETE 308.5.4 - Institutional Custodial Care (not permitted as R-3)



   308.5.5  DAY CARE FACILITY: A Day Care Facility, which provides care
for any length of time for more than five (5) children less than six (6)
years of age shall be classified as Use Group I-2. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 310 RESIDENTIAL GROUP R



22.   That Section 310.1 shall include revisions to the items shown and
read as follows:



   310.1  RESIDENTIAL GROUP R: Residential Group R includes, among
others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for
sleeping purposes when not classified as an Institutional Group I or when not
regulated by the International Residential Code in accordance with Section
101.2. Residential occupancies shall include the following:



      USE GROUP R-1 Residential occupancies containing sleeping units
where the occupants are primarily transient in nature, including: Boarding
houses (transient), Hotels (transient), Motels (transient).



      USE GROUP R-2 STRUCTURES: This use group shall include all
multi-family dwellings or dwellings having more than one (1) dwelling unit
where one (1) tenant space is above another tenant space. This use shall also
include all apartments, boarding houses, convents, dormitories, fraternities
and sororities and monasteries and similar buildings arranged for shelter and
sleeping accommodations in which the occupants are primarily non-transient in
nature.



      USE GROUP R-3 STRUCTURES: This use group shall include all
buildings arranged for occupancy as detached single family dwellings,
including not more than five (5) lodgers or boarders per family and multiple
side by side attached single family dwellings where each unit has an
independent means of egress and is separated by a two (2) hour fire
separation assembly with fire-retardant roof sheathing (see Sections 310.5
and 708.0). (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



23.   That Subsection 310.1.1 is added to Section 310.1 and shall read as
follows:



   310.1.1  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE: This code shall be used by
the building official where specific information is not clearly referenced in
the International Building Code and shall not conflict with other ordinances
or this code for the construction of single family dwellings, as listed in
Chapter 35. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 310.2  DEFINITIONS RESIDENTIAL



24.   That Subsection 310.2 shall read as follows:



   310.2 DEFINITIONS: The definitions below are added to Section 310.2:



   BEDROOM: A room within a dwelling unit capable of being used for
sleeping purposes and having a closet.



   RESIDENTIAL CHILD CARE FACILITIES: A child care facility which
accommodates five (5) or less children of any age may be classified as Use
Group R-3 and may be located in the residential single family zoning
districts.



   DORMITORIES: A dormitory facility which accommodates more than five (5)
persons six (6) or more years old shall be classified as Use Group R-2.



   FAMILY: Means an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by
blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit;
or a group of not more than five (5) persons not related by blood, marriage
or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit. (See ordinance
3271- 8/6/99).



   CUSTODIAL CARE/ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES:  A building or part thereof
housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or
other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides
personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an
emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. This
classification shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
residential board and care facilities, assisted living facilities, halfway
houses, group homes, congregate care facilities, social rehabilitation
facilities, alcohol and drug abuse centers and convalescent facilities. They
shall be classified as an I-1 or I-2 Use Group, as defined for each occupancy.



   TRANSIENT. Occupancy of a dwelling unit or sleeping unit for not more
than thirty (30) days.



   See Chapter 2 of the adopted IBC code for additional definitions. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 310.3 RESIDENTIAL FIRE SEPARATIONS



25.   That Section 310 shall include Subsection 310.3.1 and 310.3.2
additions to read as follows:



   310.3.1  REQUIRED DWELLING UNIT AND GUESTROOM SEPARATIONS: Townhomes
(vertically attached) shall be separated by a masonry wall or three (3) wall
system with the center wall having a two (2) hours fire resistance rating and
shall be continuous from the foundation to the underside to the fire
retardant roof sheathing installed per Sections 705, 706, 707 and 708 and as
required further by this code and the ordinance listed in Chapter 35. The two
(2) hour fire resistance rated wall shall not be penetrated. See fire rated
wall for an R-2 Uses per Section 501.3.4 c., and exceptions when a building
has an approved fire sprinkler protection system. See Sections 708 and 711.2
for restrictions.



   Planned Unit Developments (P. U. D's) of single family vertically
attached townhouse units (R-3), may use a two (2) hour fire rated
non-combustible wall assembly when located on a lot line between units.
Exterior walls when located on or near lot lines and open to a separate
non-buildable lot of at least thirty feet (30') in width used as a common
yard or open to a public way (street), may have zero (0) hours fire rating
when all is located within the same P. U. D.



   310.3.2  R-1 HOTELS AND MOTELS: Hotel, Motel rooms and corridors of an
R-1 Use Group may be separated with a single non-combustible wall system
having a one (1) hour fire resistance rating when the building has a minimum
Construction Type as regulated in Section 503 and is fully fire sprinkler
protected per 903.2.8



   The fire rating shall continue from a fire rated floor assembly below
to a fire rated floor ceiling assembly above or to the roof deck above. Fire
retardant sheathing shall be installed as described in Section 310.3. Wall
penetrations shall be as specified in Section 714.3.1.1.1. The wall assembly
shall be insulated to provide a minimum STC rating of fifty (50), per
Sections 1207.2 and 1207.3. (refer to 501.3.4 for additional details). See
Section 708.1 and 708.3 for similar amendments.



   Special inspection services shall be provided for wall and floor
conformance to structural design and fire tested assemblies by approved
agencies or individuals. Reports shall be in writing to verify conformance
with fire tested assemblies per Section 104.4 of this code. (Ord. 3994,
3-7-05; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 310.4  GROUP R-3 RESIDENTIAL DETACHED AND ATTACHED DWELLINGS



26.   That Section 310.4 shall be revised to read as follows:



   310.4 RESIDENTIAL GROUP R-3:  Use Group R-3 Structures shall include
all buildings arranged for occupancy as detached single family dwellings,
including not more than five (5) lodgers or boarders per family.  An R-3
Group also includes multiple side by side attached single family dwellings
where each unit has an independent means of egress and is separated by a two
(2) hour fire separation assembly with fire-retardant roof sheathing.  Group
R-3 Construction is regulated in Chapter 14 of this ordinance (5-1-14).



   IBC Subsection 310.4.1 regulations are included as part of this Section
310.4



   310.4.2 LODGING HOUSES: Owner-occupied lodging houses with five (5) or
fewer guests shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the
International Residential Code.



   DELETE- 310.5 - USE GROUP R-4 STRUCTURES (residential drug, rehab
centers etc.)



   Note: The IBC Code's R-4 Residential Group type occupancies as noted
with 5-16 persons needing custodial care and supervision on a 24 hour basis
are re-classified as either I-1 or I-2 Groups.



SECTION 312 UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U



27.   That Section 312 is revised to add amend Agricultural Canopies to
read as follows:



   312.1  GENERAL:  Buildings and structures of an accessory character
and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy shall
be constructed, equipped and maintained to conform to the requirements of
this code commensurate with the fire and life hazard incidental to their
occupancy. Group U shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



   Agricultural Canopies



   See Sections 202, 501.3.2, 907.1.2 and Appendix C, Village amendments



   Aircraft hangars, accessory to a one- or two-family residence (see
Section 412.3)



   Barns



   Carports



   Canopies



   Fences more than six (6) feet (1829 mm) high



   Grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy



   Greenhouses



   Livestock shelters



   Private garages



   Retaining walls



   Sheds



   Stables



   Tanks



   Towers (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 4 - SPECIAL USE OCCUPANCIES



SECTION 402 COVERED AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS



28.   That Additions, Changes or Deletions to Subsections of 402 for
Covered and Open Malls shall read as follows:



   DELETE- 402.1 Exception 1. only - Foyers and lobbies in covered malls
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 402.4 MALL CONSTRUCTION AND TYPE



   402.4.1  TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION:  Covered and open mall buildings
shall be of Type 1 or 2 construction.  Covered and open mall buildings two
(2) stories (levels) or less in height above grade plane are exempt from the
area limitations of Table 503.  Covered Mall buildings shall be surrounded
on all sides by permanent open space of at least sixty (60) feet.



   The construction type of open parking garages and enclosed parking
garages shall comply with Sections 406.5 and 406.6 respectively.



      EXCEPTION: The type of construction allowable building height and
area of anchor buildings greater than three (3) stories above grade plane
shall comply with Section 503, as modified by Sections 504 and 506.



   402.4.1.1  MALL FLOOR/CEILING ASSEMBLIES:  Floor/ceiling assemblies
and their supporting columns and beams within multi-level covered malls shall
be of one hour fire-resistance rated non-combustible construction. A common
plenum type air handling system between adjacent tenants, does not allow
combustible sales merchandise to be directly open or part of a plenum air
system. 



      EXCEPTION: Ceiling Assembly may be penetrated for supply and
return air ductwork and lighting fixtures only.  The requirement for fire
dampers or tented ceiling fixtures does not apply when fixtures are of a
plenum type. (Ord. 3910, 7-19-04).



   402.4.1.2  ANCHOR BUILDINGS: Covered and open mall anchor buildings
shall be regulated as a separate building, based on Table 503 and the Village
Code amendments for the type of construction allowed. Other specific
regulations of this Section are permitted for design purposes however village
amendments shall apply.



   DELETE 402.4.1.3  PARKING GARAGE: This subject is referenced in
Section 402.4.1 (2nd paragraph).



   402.4.2.1  MALL TENANT SEPARATIONS:  Each tenant space shall be
separated from other tenant spaces by a wall having a fire resistance rating
of not less than one (1) hour.  The separation wall shall extend from the
floor to the underside of the floor or roof deck above.  A fire resistive
wall is not required between a tenant space and the open mall common spaces.
The ceiling shall be a one-hour fire resistance rated assembly per Section
402.4.1.1.



   In a return air plenum ceiling system the fire resistance rated tenant
wall may be penetrated by the required amount of grillwork for the proper
airflow of the fire exhaust system and the return air system.  (Ord. 4133,
5-1-06) 



   402.4.2.2 ANCHOR BUILDING SEPARATION: The building area and building
height of any anchor building shall be based on the type of construction as
required by Section 503 as modified by Sections 504 and 506. An anchor
building shall be separated from the covered or open mall building by fire
walls complying with Section 706.  IBC Section 402.4.2.2.1 applies for
openings. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



402.6  MALL FINISHES AND FEATURES



   402.6.2  KIOSKS:  (Amend only IBC item #4 for the maximum kiosk areas
with exception conditions)



   4.      Kiosks and similar structures shall have a maximum area
of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet.



      EXCEPTION: When a mall is sixty (60) feet or greater width, the
maximum area of a kiosk may be increased one hundred percent (100%) having a
maximum area of three hundred (300) square feet in area under the following
conditions:



      A.   The mall exiting and occupant load design shall comply
with Subsections 402.8 "Means of egress" and 402.8.1 "Mall width" as amended
of this Chapter.



      B.   A kiosk of more than one hundred and fifty (150) square
feet shall not be placed within the intersecting center spaces of mall
corridors (center court).



      C.   A minimum of fifteen (15) feet clear exit width to a
height of eight (8) feet shall be provided between any projection of a tenant
space bordering the mall and the nearest kiosk, vending machine or similar
structure for the adequate means of clear egress travel.



      D.   Kiosks with an area increase shall not be located within
thirty-five (35) feet of an adjacent kiosk or within forty-eight (48) inches
of floor openings for stairways, escalators or guardrails at floor openings.



      E.   Plans submitted with a permit application must include
all dimensions for the mall width, kiosk size(s) and the distance between the
proposed and nearest existing kiosks and/or other structures.



      F.   Kiosk design must comply with the Illinois Accessibility
Code for the public and employees accessibility.



   402.6.4  PLASTIC PANELS AND PLASTIC SIGNS:  Within every story or
level and from side wall of each tenant space, approved plastic panels and
signs shall be limited as specified in Sections 402.6.4.1:



      402.6.4.1  AREA: The panels and signs shall not exceed 7.5
percent (.075%) of the wall area facing the mall.



      402.6.4.2 - 402.6.4.5:  Remaining IBC code sub-sections are
applicable.



   402.8  MALL EGRESS



   402.8.1.1  MINIMUM MALL WIDTH: The minimum width of the covered or
open mall shall be thirty (30) feet (6096 mm). The mall width shall be
sufficient to accommodate the occupant load served. There shall be a minimum
of ten (10) feet (3048 mm) clear exit width to a height of eight (80) feet
(2438 mm) between any projection of a tenant space bordering the mall and the
nearest kiosk, vending machine, bench, display opening, food court or other
obstruction to means of egress travel.



   402.8.5  DISTANCE TO EXITS:  Within each individual tenant space in a
covered or open mall building, the maximum distance of travel from any point
to an exit or entrance to the mall shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet
(60 960 mm). The maximum distance of travel from any point within a mall
building to an exit shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet (60 960 mm).
Tenant spaces with only one means of egress shall meet the requirements of
Table(s) 1006.2.1 and 1006.3.2 (as amended).



   402.8.8  MALL TENANT SECURITY GRILLES: Horizontal sliding or vertical
security grilles that are part of a means of egress shall be able to open
from the inside without the use of a key of special knowledge or effort. A
sign indicating an emergency release along with the release shall be placed
within six (6) feet of the grille. The sign and release shall be placed
between eighteen (18) and forty-eight (48) inches above finished floor. The
grille shall be openable with a maximum force of five (5) pounds to a minimum
height of four (4) feet above the floor. The grille shall remain secured in
the full-open position during the period of occupancy by the general public.
Grilles shall not be brought to the closed position and locked when there are
more than ten (10) persons occupying the space. Where two (2) or more exits
are required, not more than one-half of the exits shall be equipped with
grilles. To facilitate fire district access to a space with grilles, a key
for the grille or grilles shall be placed in an alarmed Knox-Box for fire
district use in an emergency. See Section 1008.1.4.5.



   402.8.9  MAIN ENTRANCE DOOR HARDWARE: See village deleted items
referenced in Section 1010.1.9.4 and model IBC code Sections 1010.1.9.5 (Bolt
Locks) and 1010.1.9.6 (Unlatching) of this Code.



   402.9.  MALL SMOKE CONTROL: A covered mall building and anchor stores
shall have an approved smoke control system complying with Section 909.0. 
If a covered mall building or anchor store has an existing smoke control
system it will remain in good working order.



   402.10 MALL SALES AND SOLICITORS:  Sellers and employees at Mall
kiosks and store fronts shall not solicit sales or call out for their
products or services to the public. (See Village Code Title 7, Chapter 13).



   DELETE- 403.2.1.2 -   High Rise Shaft Enclosure Reduction to 1-Hour
(maintain a 2-hour minimum).



   DELETE- 404.3 -    Exception #1, for Non Sprinkler Atrium Reduction
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 406 MOTOR VEHICLE OCCUPANCIES



29.   The following Subsections of Section 406 shall be revised or added
to read as follows:



   406.1.1  DEFINITIONS:  The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this code, have the
meanings shown herein.  Also See Chapter 2 for definitions.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE: A garage with a maximum area as listed in Section 14
of this Code (5-1-14) with three (3) or less passenger motor vehicles or one
(1) commercial motor vehicle without provision for repairing or servicing
such vehicles for profit subject to the provisions of The Village Land
Development Code (Ordinance 2084 as amended). Also see the Village Land
Development Code's zoning districts for any variations.



   Private garage fire separation regulations shall include open carports
which are within ten (10) feet of a residence.



   FLOOR SURFACE: The floor surface shall be of concrete or other approved
noncombustible material.  See Section 14 of this Code (5-1-14) for
construction details.



   406.3 PRIVATE GARAGES AND CARPORTS:  See Residential Code regulations
as noted in Chapter 14 of this ordinance (5-1-14)



   406.3.4  SEPARATION REQUIRED: See Residential Code regulations as
noted in Chapter 14 of this ordinance (5-1-14).



   406.4.4 PUBLIC GARAGES CLEAR HEIGHT:  The clear height of each floor
level in vehicle and pedestrian traffic areas shall be not less than
ninety-eight (98) inches. Vehicle and pedestrian areas parking shall comply
with the Illinois Accessibility Code (400.310 c) or as may be revised.



   406.4.5  BENEATH ROOMS USE GROUPS R-1, R-2 or I-1:  Private garages
located beneath rooms in occupancies in Use Group R-1, R-2 or I-1 shall be
separated from adjacent interior spaces by fire partitions and floor/ceiling
assemblies which are constructed of solid masonry partitions and concrete
floors with not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating (See Section
501.3.3).  Attached private garages shall be completely separated from the
interior spaces and the attic area by means of 2-hour fire resistance
rating.  The door opening protectives shall be 1-1/2 hour, Class B fire door
meeting the requirements of Section 716. 



      406.4.6  PARKING GARAGE SPRINKLER PROTECTION: All parking
garages shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903 as amended:



      1.   Where the total building area exceeds eight thousand
(8,000) square feet.



      2.   Where located beneath other use groups except for an R-3
Use.



      See 406.5 for Open Parking Structures



      406.4.6.1  MIXED USE OCCUPANCY SEPARATION: Parking garages shall
be separated from other occupancies in accordance with Section 508.1.



   406.5  OPEN PARKING GARAGES:



      406.5.12 FIRE PROTECTION: Open parking garages, when not fire
sprinkler protected, shall include a fire alarm system as referenced in
Section 907 as amended.



   406.6  ENCLOSED PARKING GARAGES:



      406.6.3  ENCLOSED PARKING (S-2 Use Group) GARAGES SPRINKLER
PROTECTION: All parking garages shall be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903:



      1.   Where the total building area exceeds eight thousand
(8,000) square feet.



      Note: See Section 903.2.9 for garages of commercial motor vehicle
parking for trucks and busses as limited to five thousand (5,000) square
feet. 



      2.   Where located beneath other use groups.



   406.7.3  MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL AND SERVICE STATIONS SPRINKLER PROTECTION:
All parking garages shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903:



   1.   Where the total building area exceeds eight thousand (8,000)
square feet.



   2.   Where located beneath other use groups.



   3.   Commercial repair of trucks or busses shall not exceed five
thousand (5,000) square feet as noted in Section 903.2.9.1 #4.



   406.8.3  REPAIR GARAGES SPRINKLER PROTECTION: All parking garages
shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903:



   1.    Where the total building area exceeds eight thousand (8,000)
square feet.



   2.   Where located beneath other use groups.



   3.   Commercial repair of trucks or busses shall not exceed five
thousand (5,000) square feet as noted in Section 903.2.9.1 #4. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 407 GROUP I-2 INSTITUTIONAL USE



30.   That Section 407.12 and its Subsections are added to Section 407 and
shall read as follows:



   407.12  GROUP I-2 DAY CARE CENTERS GENERAL: All day care centers shall
meet the following requirements in addition to other applicable provisions of
this code.



      407.12.1  CONSTRUCTION: All buildings or areas used as and in
conjunction with a day care center shall be constructed of non-combustible
construction, a minimum of Type 2B. No wood or fire retardant treated wood
will be allowed for any part of the construction.



      407.12.2  HVAC CONSTRUCTION: All heating, air conditioning and
ventilation duct work shall be constructed of metal in the appropriate gauges
as required by the mechanical code and its amendments as listed in Chapter 35.



      407.12.3  FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM: All buildings or areas used
as and in conjunction with a day care center shall have an approved fire
suppression system installed regardless of size. The fire suppression system
shall conform to NFPA13 as listed in Section 903.2.6. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 415 GROUPS H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 AND H-5 USES



31.   That Section 415 references Village amendments to read as follows:



   415  GROUPS H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 AND H-5: See Section 307 and 503.2.2 of
this Village Code amendment.



   415.11.7  GAS DETECTION SYSTEMS: The Village building official may
require and use this code Section to regulate flammable gases in a building
or structure when not of classified as a High Hazard Use.



   415.11.12  HAZARDOUS FUMES: Various levels of hazardous types of fumes
may also be designated as rule by the building official as a nuisance and a
safety concern to adjacent tenants/properties.



   DELETE- 419 - Live/Work Units.  Delete entire Section (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



SECTION 420 I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, AND R-4



32.   That Section 420 shall revise Sections to read as follows:



   420.1  GROUPS I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3: Occupancies in Groups I-1, R-1, R-2
and R-3 shall comply with the provisions of this section and other applicable
provisions of this code.



   420.2  SEPARATION WALLS: Walls separating dwelling units in the same
building, walls separating sleeping units in the same building and walls
separating dwelling or sleeping units from other occupancies contiguous to
them in the same building shall be constructed as fire partitions in
accordance with Sections 310.3.1, 310.2, 310.4, 501.3.4, Table 601 Footnote
h, and 708.3.



   420.3  HORIZONTAL SEPARATION. Floor assemblies separating dwelling
units in the same buildings, floor assemblies separating sleeping units in
the same building and floor assemblies separating dwelling or sleeping units
from other occupancies contiguous to them in the same building shall be
constructed as horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 501.3.2,
708.3 and 711.



   420.4  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM: Group R occupancies shall be
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
903.2.8. This section only requires R-3 single family dwellings to include
automatic fire suppression per amended Section 903.2.8).



   420.7 SMOKE BARRIERS IN GROUPT I-1, CONDITION 2:  IBC Section as
written applies. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 429  PARKING AREAS



33.   That Section 429 and its Subsections are added to Chapter 4 and
shall read as follows:



   429.1  CURB CUTS: Parking areas shall be arranged to afford ready and
accessible means of entrance and exit at sidewalk level and as required by
the State of Illinois Accessibility Code listed in Chapter 35.



   429.2  LANES AND PARKING SPACES: Access lane shall be provided and
parking space as required by the Village of Orland Park Land Development Code
as amended and the Illinois Accessibility Code listed in Chapter 35.



   429.3  SURFACE AND DRAINAGE: Public and private parking areas and
driveways shall be graded and paved with asphalt, concrete or other approved
materials and shall be maintained to prevent drainage onto adjoining property
or sidewalk. Parking areas shall also be maintained to provide a good walking
and driving surface. Parking lots shall be designed for the loads
anticipated. All parking areas shall be maintained in accordance with this
code, the property maintenance and Fire Codes, as amended and listed in
Chapter 35. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 5 - GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS



SECTION 501 GENERAL - WALLS, VENEERS AND FLOORS



34.   That Section 501.2  and 501.3 are added to read as follows:



   501.2  WALLS, VENEERS AND FLOORS:



      501.2.1  SINGLE FAMILY EXTERIOR VENEERS: See Section 14 of this
ordinance (5-1-14).



      501.2.2  EXTERIOR WALLS ALL OTHER USES: All exterior walls shall
be of non-combustible construction using solid masonry, or steel column and
beam construction using metal studs with a veneer of decorative masonry,
decorative architectural concrete panels or similar materials. The same
material shall be used for all of the exterior walls of a building. See
Section 503.2.1 items #7 for wood framing & item #8 for metal wall studs.
(Ord. 4499 - 8-3-09). The minimum concrete or masonry veneer is 2.625" in
depth for anchored veneer applications as noted in Table 1405.2 as amended.
(Ord. 4643, 5/2/11).



         EXCEPTIONS:



         A.   Use Group R-1 (Hotels, Motels) buildings equipped
throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system per 903.3.1.1, may use a
structurally engineered noncombustible exterior wall system when special
inspections are performed by a State of Illinois Licensed Architect or
Structural Engineer per Section 104.4 and Chapter 17 of this code. (Ord.
3994, 3-7-05)



         B.   Buildings of masonry and anchored veneer
construction more than 3-stories in height may use an exterior wall
finish/veneer of other exterior permitted materials for its top (uppermost)
story only, with the following conditions:



            1.   The finish material shall be of an approved
durable product.



            2.   The highest/upper story when of metal stud
wall construction and not using a masonry veneer, must be designed of a
1-hour fire rated minimum assembly using cement board on the exterior side of
stud walls, however not less than the hourly rating required in table 601 for
exterior walls or fire separation based on distance.  (Ord. 4643, 5/2/11)



         C.   Agricultural Canopies as allowed in Section 312.1
for an Agricultural Use and are not classified as a Tent may use a roll up
type side wall material. Pliable material may only be lowered for protecting
plant material during frost conditions when the canopy is not open to the
public or occupied. Permanent Canopy construction and materials shall also
comply with the Village Fire Code (VC 5-5). (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08). Construction
and maintenance approval of permanent canopies using fabric or pliable
materials shall comply with all of the following conditions: (Ord. 4342,
3-3-08)



            1.   Special inspection reports must be submitted
to the Village by a qualified inspection agency, a State of Illinois licensed
architect or engineer or the manufacturer's representative stating the canopy
was installed per installation requirements. (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



            2.   Special Inspection reports shall review the
canopy for: (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



               a.   Structural integrity conformance to the
design engineer's plan and Building Code.



               b.   Design materials used in compliance to
the Building and Fire Codes.



               c.   All matters regulated by the Fire Code
for a permanent canopy. (3/08)



               d.   Citations will be issued to the land
owner and a court appearance is required for violations of this ordinance
without preliminary warnings. (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



            See Sections 202, 312, 907.2 and Chapter 35 Appendix
C of this ordinance for additional Code references (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



         D.   1-story Business (B) Use Group occupancies with
less than five thousand (5,000) total square feet of floor area, allow a
1-hour Type V-A Construction Type with a decorative masonry veneer. Lot line
setbacks and multiple buildings located on the same lot must conform with
Fire Limits exception in section.



      503.3.1 GENERAL R-1 AND R-2 FIRE RESISTANCE (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



         501.3.1.1 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS FIRE RATINGS: Fire
Separation ratings of exterior walls and openings shall also comply with
Table 503.2.3 when applicable. (See Table footnotes b & c)



         501.3.2  FLOORS FOR USE GROUP R-1: Floors in Use Group R-1
shall be precast or engineered reinforced concrete where separating tenant
spaces. See Section 711.3.



         EXCEPTIONS:



         1.   Floors of an R-1 Use Group building may use an
engineered combustible floor framing system to separate tenant spaces. A
minimum fire separation shall not be less than a one (1)-Hour fire resistance
rated assembly when buildings are designed having a minimum Type of
Construction per Section 503.5 of this code and are fully fire suppressed per
Section 903.2.8. (Ord. 4056, 7-19-05).  See Section 310.3.2 for required
special inspections. Approved fire rated opening assemblies shall be limited
to a maximum membrane penetration as allowed in Section 714.4.2 for the floor
ceiling assembly area. A minimum Sound Transmission Classification shall be
as indicated in Section 1207.2 and 1207.3 of this code. (Ord. 3994, 3/7/05).



         501.3.3  FLOORS FOR USE GROUP R-2: Floors in Use Group R-2
shall be precast or engineered reinforced concrete where separating tenant
spaces. See Section 711.3.



         1.   Floors of an R-2 use group may use a combustible
floor truss system with the following conditions:



            A.   Minimum one and a half (1 1/2) hour
horizontal assembly rating.



            B.   Horizontal system shall be U.L. rated.



            C.   Building shall be equipped with a full NFPA
13 sprinkler system including any attics or concealed areas.



            D.   All recessed lighting shall be installed
within rated enclosures limited to three percent (3%) of the net area of
unit. All enclosures shall conform to U.L. 263m ASTM E 119 & NFPA 251.



            E.   All electrical and low voltage receptacles
shall be fire sealed by U.L. approved materials.



            F.   All penetrations within the rated horizontal
and vertical assemblies for sprinklers, conduits, junction boxes etc. shall
have the annual area sealed with listed and labeled fir sealant per ASTM E
814.



            G.   All HVAC ceiling supply, return and exhaust
grilles shall be ceiling radiation dampers listed and labeled per U.L. 555C.



            H.   Membrane protection of dwelling unit tenant
walls, rated stair and elevator enclosures shall extend through the nominal
depth of prefabricated wood truss.



            I.   Any load bearing partitions within the
dwelling unit shall be non-combustible one (1)-hour fire rated.



            J.   Fiber sprayed insulation installed for the
full nominal depth of truss at entire floor line.



            K.   Layer of gypsum board membrane protection at
underside of floor truss system shall extend through the top plate on
intersection dwelling unit room sub dividing partitions. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



      501.3.4  INTERIOR WALLS: Interior walls totally separating
dwelling units in Use Group R-1 & R-2 shall be solid masonry.



         EXCEPTIONS:



         a.   Buildings with an approved automatic fire sprinkler
system throughout may use a metal stud 3-wall system with a tested/listed
2-hour fire rating. (See Section 310.3 for intent).



         b.   R-1 Hotels and Motels: Hotel, Motel rooms and
corridors of an R-1 Use Group building may be separated with a single
non-combustible wall system having a one (1) hour fire resistance rating when
the building has a minimum Construction of Type II-B or III-B (602.2 and
602.3) and is fully fire sprinkler protected per 903.2.8 (see Section
310.3.1). (Ord. 4056, 7-18-05). See Section 310.3.1 for required special
inspections.



            Fire barrier wall partitions shall continue from a
fire rated floor assembly below to a fire rated floor ceiling assembly above
or to the roof deck above. Fire retardant sheathing shall be installed as
described in Section 310.3. Wall penetrations shall be as specified in
Section 714.3.1.1.1. The wall assembly shall be insulated to provide an STC
rating per Sections 1207.2 and 1207.3. See Section 310.3.1 for required
special inspections.



            In multi-story buildings, plumbing drain, waste and
vent piping shall not be located within tenant wall fire separation
assemblies. Plumbing drain, waste and vent piping shall be located in
separate fire rated shafts of a two (2) hour fire rated assemblies per
Section 707. (Ord. 3994, 3-7-05)



         c.   R-2 Multi-family: Multi-family R-2 use groups may
reduce the 2-hour fire rated 3-wall assembly to a 1-hour tested fire rating
with no penetrations if the building is fully fire sprinkler protected in
accordance with Section 903 and when a minimum STC sound ratings are provided
in accordance with Sections 1207 and 708.3. (See Table 601 footnote h. for
additional notes) (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



            When the building is 100% fully fire sprinkler
protected per Section 903.3.1.1, penetrations are allowed and shall be
limited to fire sprinkler and non-combustible piping only. Other fire
resistive wall openings shall be no larger than sixteen (16) square inches
and adequately spaced with an approved penetration firestop systems per
Section 714.3.1.2. All openings shall be effectively sealed to limit the
movement of air and sound to adjoining tenants. Sound ratings shall be
designed and maintained per Sections 708.3, 1207.2 and item #5 below. When a
building is fully fire sprinkler protected, the tenant wall may be
constructed of a 2-stud wall system having a minimum one (1) inch air space
between walls. An approved fire rated assembly is allowed with the following
conditions:



            1.   The fire rated tenant walls shall be
continuous from the foundation to the roof or to fire rated floor/ceiling
assemblies of an equal fire rating to that of the common tenant wall(s).



            2.   Each framing member of the double stud-wall
system shall be of at least 2 x 4 stud framing members with minimum nominal
thickness of 3-1/2".  Vertical piping placed within this tenant wall
assembly shall not consume more than fifty percent (50%) of the wall cavity's
thickness or depth (3.5 + 3.5 + 1 = 8" min.).  If equipment and pipes are
larger than 4", a larger stud cavity must be used.



            3.   Fire rated wall penetrations between tenants
shall be restricted to small non-combustible electrical and plumbing pipe
openings no larger than four (4) inches. Electrical outlet boxes and plumbing
pipe shall be adequately sleeved, insulated and caulked for sound control
with a design as approved by the building code official.



            4.   Kitchen sinks, disposals, dishwashers and
similar sound producing equipment shall not be designed adjacent to this type
of common 2-wall system.



            5.   When a 2-wall system is used, the minimum
sound rating shall be increased to a 55 STC rating from that referenced in
amended Section 1207 (also see amended section 711.3 regarding floors). Wall
penetrations must be sound insulated and offset at least twenty-four (24)
inches from adjacent residential tenant units as noted in Section 714.3.2
exceptions.



            6.   In addition to the sound rating noted above,
a two inch (2") mineral fiber sound reduction insulation, shall be added
between walls at and around allowed equipment penetrations, adequately
insulated and sealed between adjoining tenant walls.



            7.   Fire and sound ratings and penetrations shall
be part of the architectural plan design.



            8.   Common tenant walls shall be fire-stopped at
each floor level so as not to create a continuous shaft between floors. 
(Ord. 4643, 5/2/11)



         d.   All interior non-load bearing partitions contained
within the residential dwelling unit of R-2 occupancies can be standard
dimensional wood lumber with the installation of a full NFPA 13 sprinkler
system. Building shall be min. Type 3A construction and have a floor system
with the fire rating equal to one and a half (1 1/2)-hour fire rating. See
Section 501.3.2. Floor systems in R-2 occupancies. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 501.4  FIRE LANES



35.   That Section 501.4 is added to Section 501 and shall read as follows:



   501.4  FIRE LANE: Fire lanes of the approved size and location shall
be provided as required by The Village, the Orland Fire Protection District,
Mokena Fire Protection District or the Palos Fire Protection District and
maintained in accordance with this code, the property maintenance and fire
code, as amended and listed in Chapter 35.



      501.4.1 POSTING OF FIRE LANES: All fire lanes shall be posted
with the appropriate signage as required by the Village, Orland Fire
Protection District, Mokena Fire Protection District or the Palos Fire
Protection District and maintained in accordance with this code, the Property
Maintenance and Fire Codes, as amended and listed in Chapter 35. (See Village
Code 9-7-5, 9-7-10-1 and 9-7-10-3 for additional parking details). (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



36.   That Section 501.5 definition of "Area, Building" shall read as
follows:



   AREA, BUILDING: The area included within the exterior dimensions of the
surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of
courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be
included in the building area if such areas are included within the
horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. For the purpose of figuring
the total area of a building in determining if an approved fire suppression
system is required, fire walls and separation walls will not be considered in
establishing separate buildings or fire areas. See amended Section 508.5
defining “Separate Buildings.”



      EXCEPTIONS:



      1.   Multi-family buildings, Use Group R-2, for fire
suppression systems only.



      2.   Single-family dwellings, Use Group R-3. See Section
903.2.8.3 amendments.



SECTION 502 BUILDING ADDRESS



37.   That Section 502 shall be revised and Subsections are added to read
as follows:



   502  ADDRESS AND STREET NUMBERS:



      502.1  REQUIRED: All buildings, tenant spaces and structures
shall have an address shown using Arabic numerals of a size as described in
Section 501.2.4.



      502.1.2  APPROVAL: Developer's engineer to submit to the Village
Engineering Department a street and address map for approval.



      502.1.3  LOCATION: All numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous
place on or near the building entrance. The address is to be visible at night
from a light fixture nearby.  Additional address numbers shall be placed on
the rear entrances for Fire District information during emergencies.



      502.1.4  SIZE AND TYPE: Number for address to be block style.
Script type or written type not allowed.



         502.1.4.1  RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED AND
DETACHED (R-3): Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height.



         502.1.4.2  ALL OTHERS: Numbers to be a minimum of six (6)
inches in height.



         502.1.5  COLOR: Address numbers to be a contrasting color
to the background color they are being installed onto.



         502.2.6  STREET SIGNS: Temporary street signs shall be
installed by the developer so inspections can be made. The temporary signs
may be painted on a piece of wood, but must be large enough to see and
legible enough to read. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 503 BUILDING HEIGHT AREA AND NUMBER OF STORIES LIMITATIONS



38.   That the title of Section 503 and Table 503 shall read as follows:



   SECTION 503 GENERAL HEIGHTS AND AREA LIMITATIONS AND FIRE LIMITS:



   503.1 GENERAL. The building height, area and number of stories shall
not exceed the limits specified in amended Table 503 based on the type of
construction as determined by Section 602 and the occupancies as determined
by Section 302 except as modified hereafter. Each portion of a building
separated by one (1) or more fire walls complying with Section 706 shall be
considered to be a separate building.



      503.1.1 SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCIES. Buildings and structures
designed to house special industrial processes that require large areas and
unusual building heights to accommodate craneways or special machinery and
equipment, including, among others, rolling mills; structural metal
fabrication shops and foundries; or the production and distribution of
electric, gas or steam power, shall be exempt from the building height and
area limitations of Table 503.



      503.1.2 BUILDINGS ON SAME LOT. Two or more buildings on the same
lot shall be regulated as separate buildings or shall be considered as
portions of one (1) building if the building height of each building and the
aggregate building area of the buildings are within the limitations of Table
503 as modified by Sections 504 and 506. The provisions of this code
applicable to the aggregate building shall be applicable to each building.



      503.1.3 TYPE I CONSTRUCTION. Buildings of Type I construction
permitted to be of unlimited tabular building heights and areas are not
subject to the special requirements that allow unlimited area buildings in
Section 507 or unlimited building height in Sections 503.1.1 and 504.3 or
increased building heights and areas for other types of construction.



 

TABLE 503
ALLOWABLE HEIGHT AND BUILDING AREAS b,c, d
Height limitations shown as stories and feet above grade plane.
Area limitations as determined by the definition of “Area, building” per
story.


GROUP
 

 
TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION



 
TYPE I
 
TYPE II
 
TYPE III
 
TYPE IV
 
TYPE V

See 310.1 & 503



 
A
 
B
 
A
 
B
 
A
 
B
 
HT
 
A
 
B


HGT (ft)

HGT (S)
 
UL
 
160
 
65
 
55
 
65
 
55
 
65
 
35
 
30




A-1
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
5

UL
 
3

15,500
 
2

8,500
 
3

14,000
 
2

8,500
 
3

15,000
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


A-2
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
3

15,500
 
2

9,500
 
3

14,000
 
2

9,500
 
3

15,000
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


A-3
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
3

15,500
 
2

9,500
 
3

14,000
 
2

9,500
 
3

15,000
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


A-4
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
3

15,500
 
2

9,500
 
3

14,000
 
2

9,500
 
3

15,000
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


A-5
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
UL

UL
 
UL

UL
 
UL

UL
 
UL

UL
 
UL

UL
 
UL

UL
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


B
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
5

37,500
 
3

23,000

(Ord. 4614)
 
5

28,500
 
3

19,000

(Ord. 4614)
 
5

36,000
 
1

4999

(Ord. 4499)
 
Not

Permitted


E
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
5

UL
 
3

26,500
 
2

14,500
 
3

23,500
 
2

14,500
 
3

25,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


F-1
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
4

25,000
 
2

15,500
 
3

19,000
 
2

12,000
 
4

33,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


F-2
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
5

37,500
 
3

23,000
 
4

28,500
 
3

18,000
 
5

50,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


H-1

503.5. 2
 
S

A
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


H-2

503.5. 2
 
S

A
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


H-3

503.5. 2
 
S

A
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


H-4

503.5. 2
 
S

A
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


H-5

503.5. 2
 
S

A
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


I-1
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
9

55,000
 
4

19,000
 
3

10,000
 
4

16,500
 
3

10,000
 
4

18,000
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


I-2
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
4

UL
 
2

15,000
 
1

11,000
 
1

12,000
 
NP

NP
 
1

12,000
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


I-3
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
4

UL
 
2

15,000
 
1

11,000
 
2

10,500
 
1

7,500
 
2

12,000
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


I-4
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
5

60,500
 
3

26,500
 
2

13,000
 
3

23,500
 
2

13,000
 
3

23,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


M
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
4

21,500
 
2

12,500

(Ord. 4614)
 
4

18,500
 
2

12,500

(Ord. 4614)
 
4

20,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


R-1

Note a
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
4

24,000
 
4

16,000
 
4

24,000
 
4 (see 506.3)

16,000
 
4

20,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


R-2

Note a
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
4

24,000
 
4

16,000
 
4

24,000
 
4

16,000
 
4

20,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


R-3 Height Note; See LDC

(Ord. 3910)
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

UL
 
4

UL
 
4

UL
 
4

UL
 
4

UL
 
3

UL
 
3

7,000
 
2

7,000


S-1
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

48,000
 
4

26,000
 
2

17,500

(Ord. 4614)
 
3

26,000
 
2

17,500

(Ord. 4614)
 
4

25,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


S-2
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
11

79,000
 
5

39,000
 
3

26,000

(Ord. 4614)
 
4

39,000
 
3

26,000

(Ord. 4614)
 
5

38,500
 
Not

Permitted
 
Not

Permitted


U
 
S

A
 
UL

UL
 
5

35,500
 
4

19,000
 
2

8,500
 
3

14,000
 
2

8,500
 
4

18,000
 
2

9,000
 
1

5,500




 



   For SI: 1 foot = 305 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.



   S = Number of Stories,



   A = Building Footprint or Horizontal Projection Area,



   UL = Unlimited.



   See general exceptions to Table 503 for: height increase (504.4),
street frontage area (506.2), area (506.3) and Unlimited area building (507)



   LDC = LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE ARTICLE 6.



   Note a.   For interior walls and floors, see Section 501.3.



      b.   For open parking structures, see Section 406.5



      c.   For private garages, see Section 406.1 & 406.3



      d.   Due to past key changes in the current IBC edition,
Village Code revisions for Table 503, Height and Areas and increases are
intended to follow the previous edition of IBC as amended for Village Code
application.



   503.1.4  OCCUPIED ROOFS: A roof level or portion thereof shall be
permitted to be used as an occupied roof provided the occupancy of the roof
is an occupancy that is permitted by amended Table 503 for the story
immediately below the roof. The area of the occupied roofs shall not be
included in the building areas as regulated by Table 503. Exceptions 1 & 2
are not deleted from this amended Section.



39.   That Section 503.2 and its Subsections are added and shall read as
follows:



   503.2  FIRE LIMITS: For the purpose of control of use and construction
of buildings to prevent danger of or damage from fire, the code official may
establish limiting districts designated "fire limits" and "outside fire
limits," under the legal procedure of the jurisdiction for creating and
establishing fire limits. All other areas not included in the fire limits
shall be designated as outside the fire limits.



   All real estate now included within the corporate limits of the Village
of Orland Park, Illinois, and all real estate which may be hereafter included
within the Village's corporate limits is hereby declared to be within the
"fire limits," except real estate improved with single family detached
dwellings and associated accessory buildings, and real estate improved with
single family row dwellings where there is not a dwelling unit above another
unit or use, and associated accessory buildings.



      503.2.1  GENERAL:  All buildings and structures, and all
additions to existing buildings and structures, hereafter erected within the
boundaries of the fire limits shall be of Type 1, 2A, or 3A construction as
defined in Chapter 6 and regulated in Table 601 and 602; and shall be
constructed within the height and area limitations of Table 503 except as
herein provided. Open parking structures may be constructed as permitted
under Section 406.0.



      Within the "fire limits," no building or structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected or installed unless the
exterior walls thereof shall be constructed of non-combustible material or
solid material: brick, stone, decorative masonry, decorative architectural
concrete panels or similar materials or constructed of non-combustible metal,
steel columns and beams with a veneer of anchored masonry, decorative
architectural concrete panels or similar materials, except as hereinafter
provided in subparagraphs 1 through 6, inclusive. The same material shall be
installed on all of the exterior walls of the building. (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)
An anchored masonry veneer shall be a minimum of 2.625" in depth.



         EXCEPTION: Use Group R-1 buildings equipped throughout with
an automatic fire sprinkler system per 903.3.1.1, may use a structurally
engineered noncombustible exterior wall system when special inspections are
performed by a State of Illinois Licensed Architect or Structural Engineer
per Section 104.4, and Chapter 17 of this code. (Ord. 3994, 3-7-05)



      This Solid Masonry requirement shall not apply to:



         1.   Multi-family garages. These may be of anchored
brick veneer construction and allowed to be of wood frame exterior walls when
located ten (10) feet or more from all property lines. Less than a ten (10)
feet setback requires construction in accordance with the principal building
as amended; (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



         2.   Temporary one-story frame construction shed for use
of builders. These may be of wooden construction;



         3.   One-story frame sheds accessory to residential uses
as defined in the Land Development Code;



         4.   Wood fences not over six (6) feet in height;



         5.   Industrial buildings. These may be constructed of
metal siding under the following conditions:



            a.   The metal siding shall consist of panels
described as Architectural Composite Panels, but not of the corrugated style
or type;



            b.   The panels shall be factory assembled;



            c.   The panels shall have concealed fasteners;



            d.   The panels shall have an exterior protective
finish with a guaranteed minimum twenty (20)-year protection color life;



            e.   A solid brick or solid decorative masonry
knee wall shall be constructed to a minimum height of seven (7) feet on all
sides of the building;



            f.   The knee wall shall enclose a minimum
building floor area of thirty thousand (30,000) feet on all sides of the
building; and



            g.   When offices are built as part of or adjacent
to the building, the wall material of the office areas shall be of the same
material as the knee wall for the full height of the office areas.



         6.   Buildings over seventy-five (75) feet in height
when exterior walls have a tested two (2) hour fire-resistance rated
assembly. Protected openings are required per Section 503.2.3 and Section
705.5.



         7.   Exterior walls for one (1)-story office buildings
of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in gross exterior building
footprint area are permitted within the fire limits under the following
conditions:



            a.   Construction type must be a minimum of 5A
(one (1)-hour fire rating for structural members per Table 601.)



            b.   Buildings, exterior walls and their roof
projection more than thirty (30) inches are not permitted to be located less
than thirty (30) feet from an adjacent structure on the same lot. An interior
lot line setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet.



            c.   The occupant load of the entire building
shall not exceed fifty (50) persons.



         8.   Building exterior walls constructed of structural
metal studs are allowed when structurally engineered by a State of Illinois
Licensed Architect or Structural Engineer. Special  inspections must be
performed by an approved agency as specified in Section 1703 and inspection
reports shall be submitted before any interior finishes for a rough or
partial rough framing approval are requested (see Sections 104.4, 1704 and
1705).  Plans and special inspections for metal studs shall include:



            a.   Metal wall design shall be in accordance with
AISI-WSD for cold-formed steel studs, per Section 2210 for Light-Framed
Construction.



            b.   Labeling of metal studs for the
gauge/thickness on bearing wall conditions.



            c.   The connections for support and bracing of
all members shall be installed as structurally designed to resist vertical
and horizontal loads.



            d.   A statement of special inspections required
by the responsible contractor as noted in Sections 1704.2.3, 1704.3 of this
code. 



            All exterior walls require an anchored masonry veneer
as noted in this section above, section 501.3.2  and in Table 1405.2 as
amended. (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



      503.2.2  HIGH HAZARD NOT PERMITTED: Buildings of Use Group H
shall not be permitted within the fire limits.



      503.2.3  TYPE 2B OR 3B CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED:  Buildings and
structures, and additions to existing buildings and structures, hereafter
erected within the fire limits may be of Type 2B or 3B construction as
defined in Chapter 6 and regulated in Tables 602 and 503 when constructed and
located in accordance with the requirements of Table 503.2.3.



 

Table 503.2.3
EXTERIOR WALL FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS a.


Width of fire separation adjacent to exterior wall.

See fire separation definition in Chapter 2
 
2. Fire- resistance rating of exterior wall or barrier
 
3. Fire-resistance rating of exterior opening protectives
 
4. Minimum classification of roof covering


On lot lines or less than 3 feet therefrom or from any building
 
4 hour
 
Not Permitted
 
B


3 feet or more but less than 6 feet
 
3 hour
 
3 hour
 
B


6 feet or more but less than 11 feet - Notes b, c
 
2 hour
 
1 ½ hour
 
B


11 feet or more but less than 30 feet - Notes b, c
 
1 hour
 
3/4 hour
 
B


30 feet or more - Notes b, c
 
0 hour
 
0 hour
 
C



 



   Note a - Not less than required by Table 602. The exterior wall or
barrier shall extend to the height of the building and be so constructed so
that it will remain structurally in place for the duration of time indicated
by the required fire-resistance rating. When the exterior wall or barrier is
adjacent to a flat roof, it shall be constructed with a parapet. (See
Sections 705.11 and 706.6.)



   Note b - For multi family (R-2) not greater than 3 stories in height
and vertically attached single family row dwellings (R-3 townhomes), the
width of required fire separation distances may be reduced by 50% for each
hourly rating.



   Note c - For multi-family (R-2) not greater than 3 stories in height
the exterior wall opening shall comply with Table 705.8.



      503.2.4  TEMPORARY STORM ENCLOSURES: Temporary storm enclosures
may be erected of Type 2B or 5 construction not more than ten (10) feet in
height and not more than three (3) feet wider than the entrance doors which
they serve, provided they do not project more than ten (10) feet beyond the
building. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



40.   That Section 503.3 and its Subsections are added and shall read as
follows:



   503.3  OUTSIDE THE FIRE LIMITS: Outside the fire limits all types of
construction for residential R-3 uses, except as herein specifically
prohibited or for which commercial or special approval is required in
connection with special uses and occupancies in Chapters 3 and 4 shall be
permitted within the height and area limitations of Table 503.



      503.3.1  FIRE SEPARATION: Exterior walls shall be constructed
with the fire-resistance ratings as required in Section 705.



      503.3.2  ROOF COVERINGS: Roof coverings shall conform to the
fire resistive requirements for Class A, B, or C or roofings complying with
the provisions of Chapter 15. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 504 BUILDING HEIGHT AND NUMBER OF STORIES



41.   That Sections 504.1 and 504.3 shall read as follows:



   504.1  BUILDING HEIGHTS AND NUMBER OF STORIES AS AMENDED: Amended
Section 503 shall be used for a building’s allowable Heights, Areas and
Number of stories. Exceptions may apply for special use applications where
designated in this Code.



   DELETE TABLE 504.3 (Table 504.3 has been amended by the Village and
amended Table 503 applies).



   504.3 Automatic sprinkler system increase. Where a building is equipped
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1, the value specified in Table 503 for maximum building
height is increased by twenty (20) feet (6096 mm) and the maximum number of
stories is increased by one (1). These increases are permitted in addition to
the building area increase in accordance with Sections 506.2 and 506.3.  For
Group R buildings designed of Type III-B Construction the value specified in
Table 503 for maximum building height shall not exceed sixty (60) feet (18
288 mm) or four (4) stories, regardless of type of sprinkler system.



      Exceptions: The use of an automatic sprinkler system to increase
building heights shall not be permitted for the following conditions:



      1.   Buildings, or portions of buildings, classified as a
Group I-2 occupancy of Type IIB, III, IV or V construction.



      2.   Buildings, or portions of buildings, classified as a
Group H-1, H-2, H-3 or H-5 occupancy. See Section 307 of this Code.



      3.   Buildings where an automatic sprinkler system is
substituted for fire-resistance rated construction in accordance with Table
601, Note d.



   504.3 HEIGHT IN FEET: The maximum height, in feet, of a building shall
not exceed the limits specified in Village amended Table 503 of this code.



      EXCEPTION: Towers, spires, steeples and other roof structures
shall be constructed of materials consistent with the required type of
construction of the building except where other construction is permitted by
Section 1510. Such structures shall not be used for habitation or storage.
The structures shall be unlimited in height where of noncombustible materials
and shall not extend more than twenty (20) feet (6096 mm) above the allowable
building height where of combustible materials (see Chapter 15 for additional
requirements).



   504.4 NUMBER OF STORIES. The maximum number of stories of a building
shall not exceed the limits specified in Table 503. Exception:  an increase
allowed up to one (1) story with fire sprinkler protection per Section
903.3.1.1. (NFPA 13 system).



   DELETE: Table 504.4 as written by the Model IBC Code which may conflict
with the Village Code adopting amended Table 503. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 506: MODIFICATIONS TO BUILDING AREA, HEIGHT AND STORIES



42.   That Section 506 shall be revised to read as follows:



   BUILDING AREA MODIFICATIONS: Note: The Village Code building area
calculations are similar to the IBC model code’s intent but cannot be used
due to the revision of Section 506.3 (fire sprinkler allowed increases).
Section numbers have been revised for comprehension purposes.



   506.1 GENERAL: The building areas limited by Table 503 shall be
permitted to be increased due to frontage (If) and automatic sprinkler system
protection (Is) in accordance with Equation 5-1:



   Aa = {At + [At × If] + [At × Is]}    (Equation 5-1)



   where:



   Aa = Allowable building area per story (square feet).



   At = Tabular building area per story in accordance with Table 503
(square feet).



   If = Area increase factor due to frontage as calculated in accordance
with Section 506.2.



   Is = Area increase factor due to sprinkler protection as calculated in
accordance with Section 506.3.



   506.2 FRONTAGE INCREASE: Every building shall adjoin or have access to
a public way to receive a building area increase for frontage. Where a
building has more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its perimeter on a public
way or open space having a width of not less than twenty (20) feet (6096 mm),
the frontage increase shall be determined in accordance with Equation 5-2:



   If = [F/P - 0.25]W/30    (Equation 5-2)



   where:



   If = Area increase due to frontage.



   F = Building perimeter that fronts on a public way or open space having
20 feet (6096 mm) open  minimum width (feet).



   P = Perimeter of entire building (feet).



   W = Width of public way or open space (feet) in accordance with Section
506.2.1.



      506.2.1 WIDTH LIMITS: To apply this section the value of W shall
be not less than twenty (20) feet (6096 mm). Where the value of W varies
along the perimeter of the building, the calculation performed in accordance
with Equation 5-2 shall be based on the weighted average calculated in
accordance with Equation 5-3 for portions of the exterior perimeter walls
where the value of W is greater than or equal to twenty (20) feet (6096 mm).
Where the value of W is greater than thirty (30) feet (9144 mm), a value of
thirty (30) feet (9144 mm) shall be used in calculating the weighted average,
regardless of the actual width of the open space. W shall be measured
perpendicular from the face of the building to the closest interior lot line.
Where the building fronts on a public way, the entire width of the public way
shall be used. Where two (2) or more buildings are on the same lot, W shall
be measured from the exterior face of each building to the opposing exterior
face of each adjacent building, as applicable.



      Weighted average W = (L1[ ][ ] w1 + L2[ ][ ] w2 + L3[ ][ ]
w3…)/F.    (Equation 5-3)



      where:



      Ln = Length of a portion of the exterior perimeter wall.



      wn = Width of open space associated with that portion of the
exterior perimeter wall.



      F = Building perimeter that fronts on a public way or open space
having a width of 20 feet (6096 mm) or more.



      Exception: Where the building meets the requirements of Section
507, as applicable, except for compliance with the 60-foot (18 288 mm) public
way or yard requirement, and the value of W is greater than 30 feet (9144
mm), the value of W divided by 30 shall be limited to a maximum of 2.



      506.2.2 OPEN SPACE LIMITS: Such open space shall be either on the
same lot or dedicated for public use and shall be accessed from a street or
approved fire lane.



      Section 506.2.3 for Single Occupancy multi-story buildings is
regulated in amended Section 506.4. 



      Section 506.2.4 for Multi-Occupancy multi-story buildings is
regulated in amended Section 506.5.



   506.3  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM INCREASE: Where a building is
protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the area limitation in Table 503 is
permitted to be increased by one hundred percent (100%) (I s = 100 percent)
for buildings with more than one (1) story above grade and a two hundred
percent (200%) (I s = 200 percent) increase is allowed for single story
buildings. 1 story Religious A-3 Occupancy Classifications allow a three
hundred percent (300%) area increase and a two hundred percent (200%) area
increase for Religious buildings more than one (1)-story above grade.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      a.   Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 (Use groups not permitted within
the Village).



      b.   R-1 hotels having 2 or more stories above grade,
(including "Mixed occupancies" per Section 508) of Type III-B construction
are allowed a 200% area increase when using 12,000 square feet as a maximum
area limitation in Table 503. See Table 601 footnote k, for Type III
Construction exception for this reduced basic floor area. (Ord. 4056, 7-18-05)



   506.4 SINGLE OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS WITH MORE THAN ONE STORY: The total
allowable building area of a single occupancy building with more than one (1)
story above grade plane shall be determined in accordance with this section.
The actual aggregate building area at all stories in the building shall not
exceed the total allowable building area. Exception: A single basement need
not be included in the total allowable building area, provided such basement
does not exceed the area permitted for a building with no more than one (1)
story above grade plane.



      506.4.1 AREAS DETERMINATION: The total allowable building area of
a single occupancy building with more than one (1) story above grade plane
shall be determined by multiplying the allowable building area per story
(Aa), as determined in Section 506.1, by the number of stories above grade
plane as listed below:



      1.   For buildings with two (2) stories above grade plane,
multiply by two (2);



      2.   For buildings with three (3) or more stories above grade
plane, multiply by three (3); and



      3.   No story shall exceed the allowable building area per
story (Aa), as determined in Section 506.1, for the occupancies on that story.



      Exceptions:



      1.   Unlimited area buildings in accordance with Section 507.



      2.   The maximum area of a building equipped throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be
determined by multiplying the allowable area per story (Aa), as determined in
Section 506.1, by the number of stories above grade plane.



   506.5 MIXED OCCUPANCY AREA DETERMINATION: The total allowable building
area for buildings containing mixed occupancies shall be determined in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. A single basement
need not be included in the total allowable building area, provided such
basement does not exceed the area permitted for a building with no more than
one (1) story above grade plane.



      506.5.1 NO MORE THAN ONE STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE: For buildings
with no more than one (1) story above grade plane and containing mixed
occupancies, the total building area shall be determined in accordance with
the applicable provisions of Section 508.1.



      506.5.2 MORE THAN ONE STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE:  For buildings
with more than one (1) story above grade plane and containing mixed
occupancies, each story shall individually comply with the applicable
requirements of Section 508.1. For buildings with more than three (3) stories
above grade plane, the total building area shall be such that the aggregate
sum of the ratios of the actual area of each story divided by the allowable
area of such stories based on the applicable provisions of Section 508.1
shall not exceed three (3).



   DELETE- 507.3 Unlimited area for F-2 or S-2



   DELETE- 507.4 Exception 1. Unlimited Height for Rack Storage



   DELETE- 507.5 Unlimited area for 2-story Group B



   DELETE- 507.8 H-uses as part of unlimited F & S Use Group buildings
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 508 MIXED USE AND OCCUPANCY



43.   That Sections 508.2.2 and 508.2.3 are revised and shall read as
follows:



   508.2.2 ACCESSORY OCCUPANCIES BUILDING HEIGHT: The allowable height and
number of stories of the building containing accessory occupancies shall be
in accordance with Section 503 for the main occupancy of the building.
Accessory occupancies are ancillary to the main occupancy group.



   508.2.3 ACCESSORY OCCUPANCIES ALLOWABLE AREA: The allowable area of the
building shall be based on the applicable provisions of Section 503 for the
main occupancy of the building. Aggregate accessory occupancies shall not
occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the story in which
they are located and shall not exceed the tabular values for nonsprinklered
buildings in Table 503 for each such accessory occupancy.



   508.3.3  MIXED USE SEPARATION: No separation is required between
non-separated occupancies. The most restrictive provisions of Chapter 9 shall
apply to the entire building for non-separated uses.



      EXCEPTION:



      1.   I-1, R-1, R-2 and attached single family of an R-3 use
group shall be separated with 2- hour fire rated tenant wall as described in
Sections 310.3.



      2.   See restrictions for incidental uses as required by
Section 509 and Special provisions of Section 510. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



44.   That Section 508.5 is added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:



   508.5 SEPARATE BUILDINGS: Each use shall be considered a separate
building when each such use is completely separated from adjacent uses by
fire walls having a fire-resistance rating corresponding to that required by
Table 602. Each building shall then comply with the provisions of this code
applicable to the use of that building. For the purpose of figuring the total
area of a building to determine if an approved fire suppression system is
required, fire walls and separation walls will not be considered in
establishing separate buildings or fire areas. A building must have separate
exterior walls and roofs before it can be considered a separate building. 
See 503.1.2, Buildings on the same lot. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 511 TRASH ENCLOSURES



45.   That Section 511 is added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:



   511.1 WHERE REQUIRED:  Trash and Recycling enclosures shall be
provided at all buildings and uses except for single family attached and
detached dwelling units. The enclosed area shall be screened on three (3)
sides by a wall from view from public streets and any abutting properties.
There shall not be any types of enclosure or container in the front yard of
any building or use including single family attached and detached units.



   511.2  CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS: Any wall around a dumpster or trash
handling area shall be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone, or
other masonry materials with no greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
wall surface left open for a gate. The wall shall be constructed of the same
building material and in the same architectural style as the principal
structure.



      EXCEPTION: Manufacturing districts may use wood fencing materials
constructed in a durable fashion in place of required brick, stone or other
masonry materials as noted above. Newly constructed wooden garbage enclosures
must be part of a site/elevation plan review required through the Community
Development Department. (Ord. 4005, 4-4-05)



   511.3  ENCLOSURE HEIGHT: Any enclosure constructed shall have a height
not greater than seven (7) feet and not less than five (5) feet.



   511.4 FOUNDATION: Any enclosure constructed shall have a concrete
foundation and slab capable of supporting the walls and any other live and
dead loads anticipated.



   511.5  SIZE OF TRASH ENCLOSURE:  The area of a trash enclosure for a
site or business shall be sized using dimensions, which relate to the size
and use of the principal building and as approved by the Building Official.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 512 ADDRESS AND STREET NUMBERS



46.   That Section 512 is added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:



      512.1 REQUIRED:  All buildings, tenant spaces and structures
shall have an address shown.



      511.2  APPROVAL:  Developer's engineer to submit to the Village
Engineering Department a street and address map for approval. Streets and
address numbers shall use the English Language.



      512.3  LOCATION: All numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous
place on or near the building entrance. The address is to be visible at night
from a light fixture nearby.



      512.4  SIZE AND TYPE: Number for address to be block style.
Script type or written type not allowed.



         512.4.1  RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED AND DETACHED
(R-): 



         Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height.



         512.4.2  ALL OTHERS: Numbers to be a minimum of six (6)
inches in height.



      512.5  COLOR:  Address numbers to be a contrasting color to the
background color they are being installed onto.



      512.6  STREET SIGNS:  Temporary street signs shall be installed
by the developer so inspections can be made. The temporary signs may be
painted on a piece of wood, but must be large enough to see and legible
enough to read. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 513 MINIMUM FLOOR AREAS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS



47.   That Section 513 and its Subsections shall read as follows:



      513.1  R-4 ZONING DISTRICT MULTI-FAMILY AREA: The minimum floor
area above grade for multi-family dwellings of the R-2 Use Group, excluding
the garages, based on the appropriate zoning district shall be as required in
this Section:



      Multi-Family:



      a.   Efficiency Units 600 square feet.



      b.   One Bedroom Unit 700 square feet.



      c.   Two Bedroom Unit 800 square feet.



      d.   Three/more Bedroom Units 1,000 square feet. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 6 - TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION



48.   That Table 601 shall read as follows:



 

TABLE 601
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ELEMENTS (hours)


BUILDING ELEMENT
 
TYPE I
 
TYPE II
 
TYPE III
 
TYPE IV
 
TYPE V


A
 
B
 
Ad
 
Bd
 
A
 
Bd
 
HT
 
Ad
 
B




Primary structural frame g

(see Section 202)
 
3b
 
2b
 
1
 
0
 
1
 
0
 
HT
 
1
 
0


Bearing walls

Exterior f,g,i,j,k

Interior h,k
 
 

3

3b
 
 

2

2b
 
 

1

1
 
 

0

0
 
 

2

1
 
 

2

0
 
 

2

1/HT
 
 

1

1
 
 

0

0


Nonbearing walls and partitions
 
See Table 602


Exterior f,g,i,j,k
 



Nonbearing walls and partitions

Interior e,f,h,k
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
See Section 602.4.6
 
0
 
0


Floor construction Including supporting beams and joists e
 
2
 
2
 
1
 
0
 
1
 
0
 
HT
 
1
 
0


Roof construction Including supporting beams and joists e
 
1 ½ b, c
 
1c
 
1c
 
0c
 
1c
 
0
 
HT
 
1c
 
0




 



For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.



   a.   Roof supports: Fire-resistance ratings of primary structural
frame and bearing walls are permitted to be reduced by 1 hour where
supporting a roof only.



   b.   Except in Group F-1, H, M and S-1 occupancies, fire protection
of structural members shall not be required, including protection of roof
framing and decking where every part of the roof construction is 20 feet or
more above any floor immediately below.



   c.   In all occupancies, heavy timber shall be allowed where a
1-hour or less fire-resistance rating is required.



   d.   An approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 shall be allowed to be substituted for 1-hour
fire-resistance-rated of Type V-A construction, provided such system is not
otherwise required by other provisions of the Village Code or used for an
allowable area increase in accordance with Section 506.3 or an allowable
height increase in accordance with Section 504.2. The 1-hour substitution for
the fire resistance of exterior walls shall not be permitted.



   e.   Not less than the fire-resistance rating required by other
sections of this code.



   f.   Not less than the fire-resistance rating based on fire
separation distance (see Table 602 and 503.2.3).



   g.   Not less than the fire-resistance rating as referenced in
Section 704.10.



   h.   Attached residences shall be separated with a two (2) hour fire
rated assembly by using a rated masonry or a three (3) wall system, with the
center wall having a two (2) hours fire resistance rating and shall be
continuous from the foundation to the underside to the fire retardant roof
sheathing installed per Section 706.6, 707.5 and as required further by this
code and the ordinances listed in Chapter 35. The fire resistance rated
3-wall separations shall not be penetrated. Masonry wall penetrations shall
be limited as specified in Section 501.3.4 and shall be effectively sealed to
prevent the movement of air from adjoining tenants. Sound ratings shall be
maintained. (See Title 5, Chapter 1, Section 14 of this Code for more
specific regulations)



   i.   Planned Unit Developments (P. U. D.'s) of single family
vertically attached townhouse units (R-3) may use a 2 hour fire rated
non-combustible wall assembly when located on a lot line between units.
Exterior walls when located on or near lot lines and open to a separate
non-buildable lot of at least 30' in width used as a common yard or open to a
public way (street), may have zero (0) hours fire rating when all is located
within the same P. U. D.



   j.   Detached single family occupancies within the fire limits (R-4
Zoning or higher density Districts) may use unprotected openings when
building exterior walls have at least a 7 feet separation distance to an
imaginary line between 2 buildings (14 feet between buildings) allowing for a
0 hour fire rating of exterior walls. (See Section 708.8.3 exception #2 for
required fire separations between units)



   k.   Wall between tenants (in other than residential occupancies)
and within the same building shall be continuous and extend from the floor to
the floor or roof deck above. Openings for building service equipment less
than 100 square inches are permitted for every 25 feet of wall separation
length. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



TABLE 602 EXTERIOR WALL FIRE RESISTANCE RATING BASED ON SEPARATION DISTANCES



49.   That Table 602 shall read as follows:



 

TABLE 602
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTERIOR WALLS BASED ON
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE a,e,i


FIRE SEPARATION

DISTANCE = X (feet)
 
TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
 
GROUP Hf
 
GROUP F- 1, M, S-1g
 
GROUP A,B,E,F-2, Rh,S-2g,Ub


X < 5c
 
All
 
3
 
2
 
1


X    5

X < 10
 
IA

Others
 
3

2
 
2

1
 
1

1


X    10

X < 30
 
IA, IB

IIB, VB

Others
 
2

1

1
 
1

0

1
 
1d

0

1d


X    30
 
All
 
0
 
0
 
0



 



   For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.



   a.   Load-bearing exterior walls shall also comply with the
fire-resistance rating requirements of Table  601.



   b.   For special requirements for Group U occupancies, see Section
406.1.2.



   c.   See Section 706.1.1 for party walls.



   d.   Open parking garages complying with Section 406 shall not be
required to have a fire-resistance rating.



   e.   The fire-resistance rating of an exterior wall is determined
based upon the fire separation distance of the exterior wall and the story in
which the wall is located.



   f.   For special requirements for Group H occupancies, see Section
415.3 (see 503.2.2).



   g.   For special requirements for Group S aircraft hangars, see
Section 412.4.1.



   h.   Group U when used as accessory to Group R-3, as applicable in
Section 101.2 shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating where
fire separation distance is 10 feet or more from the residence or five (5)
feet or more from the interior lot line(s).



   i.    See Table 503.2.3 for Buildings of Types 2B and 3B
Construction within the Fire Limits. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 602.3  TYPE III CONSTRUCTION



50.   That Section 602.3 shall read as follows:



   602.3 Type III: Type III construction is that type of construction in
which the exterior walls are of noncombustible and masonry- materials and the
interior building elements are of any material permitted by this code.
Fire-retardant-treated wood framing complying with Section 2303.2 shall be
permitted within exterior wall assemblies for blocking and backing only.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 603  COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS IN TYPES I AND II CONSTRUCTION



   DELETE 603.1 - Allowable combustible materials only items # 1.2 & 1.3
and 1.4. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)       



   IBC CHAPTER 7 - FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION



51.   That in Section 701.2 the definition for "Fire Wall" shall read as
follows:



   701.2  DEFINITIONS: (see additional definitions in chapter 2)



   FIRE WALL:  A fire-resistance rated masonry or solid concrete wall,
having protected openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends
continuously from the foundation to or through the roof with sufficient
structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction
on either side without collapse of the wall. Fire walls shall not be
penetrated. (See Section 706.0) (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 703  FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING AND FIRE TESTS



52.   That Section 703.3 shall read as follows:



   703.3  ALTERNATIVE METHODS FOR DETERMINING FIRE RESISTANCE:  The
application of any of the alternative methods listed in this section shall be
based on the fire exposure and acceptance criteria specified in ASTM E 119 or
UL 263. The required fire resistance of a building element shall be permitted
to be established by any of the following methods or procedures:



   1.   Fire-resistance tested designs documented in approved sources.



   2.   Alternative protection methods as allowed by Section 104.11.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 705  EXTERIOR WALLS



53.   That Section 705.1 shall be revised, 705.5.5 shall be added and
Table 705.8 revised to read as follows:



   705.1 GENERAL:  All exterior walls shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this code and with the fire-resistance rating requirements of
this section, Section 501.3, 503.2.3 and Section 602.0.



      EXCEPTION: The provisions of Sections and 705.3 shall not apply
to exterior walls which face buildings on the same lot where the buildings
are such that, if combined into one (1) structure, the resulting building
will otherwise comply with the height and area limitations of Section
503.0.  (See Section 501.3.2)



      705.5.1  EXTERIOR WALLS OF ATTACHED R-3 RESIDENTIAL UNITS:



      See Residential Construction standards referenced in Section 14
of this ordinance (5-1-14)



 

Table 705.8
Maximum Area of Exterior Wall Openings on Fire Separation Distance and Degree
of Opening Protection j,k


Fire Separation Distance (Feet)

a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i,j,k
 
Degree of Opening Protection
 
Allowable Area a




0 to less than 3 b,c
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
Not Permitted


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
Not Permitted


Protected (P)
 
Not Permitted


3 to less than 5 d,e
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
Not Permitted


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
15%


Protected (P)
 
15%


5 to less than 10 e,f,j

 
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
10%


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
25%


Protected (P)
 
25%


10 to less than 15 e, f, g
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
15%


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
45%


Protected (P)
 
45%


15 to less than 20 f, g
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
25%


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
75%


Protected (P)
 
75%


20 to less than 25 f, g
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
45%


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
No Limit


Protected (P)
 
No Limit


25 to less than 30 f, g
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
70%


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
No Limit


Protected (P)
 
No Limit


30 or greater
 
Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)
 
No Limit


Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP,S) i
 
Not Required


Protected (P)
 
Not Required




 



For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.



   UP, NS = Unprotected openings in buildings not equipped throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.



   UP, S = Unprotected openings in buildings equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.



   P  = Openings protected with an opening protective assembly in
accordance with Section 705.8.2.



   a.   Values indicated are the percentage of the area of the exterior
wall, per story.



   b.   For the requirements for fire walls of buildings with differing
heights, see Section 706.6.1.



   c.   For openings in a fire wall for buildings on the same lot, see
Section 706.8.



   d.   An R-3 Use subject now referenced in Section 101.2 and
ordinance 5-1-14 of this Code.



   e.   Unprotected openings shall not be permitted for openings with a
fire separation distance of less than 15 feet for Group H-2 and H-3
occupancies.



   f.   An R-3 Use subject now referenced in Section 101.2 and
ordinance 5-1-14 of this Code.



   g.   The area of openings in an open parking structure with a fire
separation distance of 10 feet or greater shall not be limited.



   h.   An R-3 Use subject now referenced in Section 101.2 and
ordinance 5-1-14 of this Code.



   i.   Not applicable to Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies.



   j.   For special requirements for Group U occupancies, see Section
406.3.2.



   k.   An R-3 Use subject now referenced in Section 101.2 and
ordinance 5-1-14 of this Code.



   l.   See Table 503.2.3 for exterior wall openings in types 2B and 3B
construction classifications. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 706 FIRE WALLS



   DELETE- 706.3 Exception Type 5 Const. for masonry wall materials.



54.   That Section 706.9.1 shall read as follows:



   706.9.1  FIRE WALLS PENETRATIONS AND CUTTING:  Cutting of fire walls
and party walls for chases, piping or for structural members shall not be
permitted. Penetrations shown in Section 714 shall apply to Fire Barriers,
Shaft Enclosures, Fire Partitions and Horizontal Assemblies as noted in
Sections 707, 708, 712, 713 and fire resistive assemblies that are not
classified as a "Fire Wall" as defined in Section 701.2. The only permitted
penetrations allowed in a "Fire Wall" are for non-combustible fire sprinkler
piping with listed assemblies.



   DELETE 706.11 Exception Only - Duct and opening Fire Wall penetrations
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 707 FIRE BARRIERS (not amended)



SECTION 708 FIRE PARTITIONS



55.   That Section 708.1 and 708.3 shall be revised to read as follows:



   708.1 FIRE PARTITIONS GENERAL:



   Wall assemblies of a minimum 1-hour fire rating shall be installed as
required by Sections, 310.3.1,  402.4.2, 1020.1 and 508.4 shall comply with
this section, including: (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



   1.   Walls separating dwelling units. (See Section 310.3, 501.3.4
and Table 601 footnotes h, i, & j).  (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



   2.   Walls separating sleeping units in Group R-1, R-2 and I-1
Occupancies.  (See sections 310.3.1, 501.3.4.). (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



   3.   Walls separating tenant spaces in covered mall buildings.



   4.   Corridor walls as required by Section 1018.1.



   5.   Elevator lobby separation as required by Section 3006 and
3007.6.2.



   6.   Residential aircraft hangars.



   7.   See Table 601 Footnote h, i, j and k.



   8.   Wall separating tenants in multi-tenant business and commercial
buildings shall be of a 1-hour fire rated assembly and shall act as a fire
barrier. Buildings with 100% fire sprinkler protection where facing open area
lobbies may reduce the lobby wall fire rating to ½ hour fire barrier and
allow non-fire rated glass to be installed similar to a covered mall
application (Table 601 footnote "k"). (Ord. 3910, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4499,
8-3-09; Am. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   708.3  FIRE-RESISTIVE RATING OF FIRE PARTITIONS AND FLOORS: (Ord.
4499, 8-3-09)



   The fire-resistance rating of fire partitions and floors shall be not
less than 1- hour and as specified below:



   1.   Corridor walls as permitted by Table 1020.1 EXCEPTIONS shall
not conflict with any special provisions of this Village Code.



   2.   MULTIPLE SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS: Single family dwelling unit
walls (Use Group R-3) may be located adjacent to other single family dwelling
units (Use Group R-3) provided each dwelling unit is completely separated
from the adjacent dwelling unit(s) by fire separation wall(s) of not less
than two hours fire-resistance rated construction as required by Section
310.1. The fire separation wall shall not be penetrated. Single family
dwelling units having independent means of egress when attached in this
manner, shall be considered as one building classified as Use Group R-3 for
the purpose of determining the applicable provisions of this code. Sections
501.3.2 and 501.3.3 for R-2 Walls and Floors using fire sprinkler exceptions
is allowed. See single family residential (R-3) regulations in 5-1-14 of this
Village Code.



   3.   USE GROUPS R-1 AND R-2 - PARTITIONS AND FLOORS:  Tenant Walls
for R-1 and R-2 Use Groups shall be as specified in Section 501.3.3. Floors
in Use Groups R-1 and R-2 as specified in Section 501.3.2 shall be a precast
or engineered reinforced concrete fire barrier of at least a two (2) hour
fire resistance rating where separating guest rooms, tenant spaces, dwelling
units and exit corridors and continue to the fire restive rated  floor/roof
deck above.  Fire sprinkler protected buildings allow a reduction to a one
(1) hour fire rated floor assembly per Section 501.3.2. (Section 503.2
references fire limits and restrictions).



      EXCEPTION:



      a.   Floors In Hotels or Motels of an R-1 Use Group building
may be reduced to a combustible one (1) hour horizontal fire resistance
rating as required by Section 711 when a building is fully fire sprinkler
protected per Section 903.2.8 and is designed with a minimum construction of
Type IIB or IIIB. (See Sections 501.3.3 and 503.2) (Ord. 3994, 3-7-05; Amd.
Ord. 4056, 7-18-05)



      b.   Floors of a multi-family (R-2) use group may use a
non-combustible floor joist (metal bar joist per Section 501.3.3) with a
non-penetrated fire resistive separation rating with all the following
conditions when:



         1.   The residential floor is not located above a garage
floor or other more hazardous use.



         2.   The building floor area does not exceed the height
and area limitations when the building is not non-fire sprinkler protected
per Section 903 as amended.  (note; area and height increases are only
allowed per 506.3 & 903.3.1.1)



         3.   A drop ceiling is installed below the fire rated
floor/ceiling assembly for the installation of plumbing, electrical and
mechanical equipment supply to rooms.



         4.   An airborne sound transmitting (STC) rating of at
least 55, and a structure borne (IIC) rating of 50 or more are provided.
(Ord. 4499, 8-3-09; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



56.   That Section 708.4 shall read as follows:



   708.4  CONTINUITY: All fire partitions shall extend from the top of
the floor assembly below to the underside of the floor/roof slab or deck
above or to the fire-resistance rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly
above, and shall be securely attached thereto. The supporting construction
shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the wall
supported, except for exit access corridor walls in buildings of Types 2B, 3B
and 5B construction.  All concealed combustible vertical spaces shall be
fireblocked at every floor level as required in Section 718.



   DELETE: 708.4.2 Exceptions 1, 2, 3, and 4 (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 711 FLOOR AND ROOF ASSEMBLIES



57.   That Subsection 711.2.4 shall read as follows:



   711.2.4 HORIZONTAL FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING: The fire-resistance rating
of floor and roof assemblies shall not be less than that required by the
building type of construction. Where the floor assembly separates
occupancies, or separates a single occupancy into different fire areas, the
assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required
by Section 508 based on Mixed Use occupancies separated. Floor assemblies
separating dwelling units or guestrooms shall be a minimum of two (2) hour
fire-resistance-rated construction. See Sections 310.3, 501.3 and 708.3
Exceptions in R-1 Use Group buildings. Horizontal fire assemblies shall
require special inspection reports by approved agencies or individuals for
conformance to tested fire assemblies per Section 104.4 of this code. (Ord.
3994, 3-7-05). Commercial tenant spaces shall be separated as noted in
Section 708.3, item #4.



   DELETE- 711.2.4.3 "Exception" only - Sleeping room horizontal
separation reduction (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 713  SHAFT ENCLOSURES



58.   That Section in 713.4 shall be revised to read as follows:



   713.4  SHAFT FIRE RESISTANCE RATING: Shafts and stairwells shall be
enclosed with fire separation assemblies having a fire resistance rating of
not less than two (2) hours. The number of stories connected by the shaft
enclosure shall include any basements but not any mezzanines. Shaft
enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than the floor
assembly penetrated, but need not exceed two (2) hours.  Shaft enclosures
shall meet the requirements of Section 703.2.1.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      1.   Shaft and Stairway enclosures of less than three (3)
stories may be of a fire resistive rating of not less than 1-hour. (See
Section 1022.1 for interior exits stairways and ramp enclosures)



      2.   Single Family Dwellings. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 714  PENETRATIONS



59.   That Subsection 714.4.1.1.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   714.4.1.1.1  R-1 USE GROUP HOTEL AND MOTEL GUESTROOM FIRE
PENETRATIONS:  Fire separations of a single wall assembly allowed in Hotels
and Motels per amended Section 310.3 and 501.3.3 may be penetrated with
electrical outlets only, using approved opening protectives. Electrical
openings shall be as permitted in Section 714.4.2. In multi-story buildings,
plumbing drain waste and vent piping shall not be located within tenant wall
fire separation assemblies. Plumbing piping shall be located in separate fire
rated shafts of a two (2) hour fire rated assemblies, per Section 708, when
penetrating floors. (Ord. 3994, 3-7-05; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19).



SECTION 721  PRESCRIPTIVE FIRE RESISTANCE



60.   That Subsection 721.1 shall read as follows:



   721.1  GENERAL:  The provisions of this section contain prescriptive
details of fire-resistance-rated building elements. When allowed by the
building official, the materials of construction listed in Tables 721.1(1),
721.1(2), and 721.1(3) may be assumed to have the fire-resistance ratings
prescribed therein.  A state of Illinois licensed architect or structural
engineer must submit a plan detailing the field assembly of any fire
resistive applications used in these tables. Where materials that change the
capacity for heat dissipation are incorporated into a fire-resistance-rated
assembly, fire test results or other substantiating data shall be made
available to the building official to show that the required fire-resistance
rating time period is not reduced.



   DELETE 722 - Fire Resistance assemblies without laboratory testing.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 8 - INTERIOR FINISHES - NO AMENDMENTS



   IBC CHAPTER 9 - FIRE PROTECTION AND LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS



61.   That Section 901.2 shall read as follows:



   901.2  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS: All fire protection systems required
by this code shall be installed, repaired, operated and maintained in
accordance with this code, the Fire Code and Village Codes and ordinances
listed in Chapter 35. All required fire suppression and standpipe systems
shall be provided with at least one (1) automatic supply of fire
extinguishing agent of adequate pressure, capacity and reliability to perform
the function intended.



   901.2.1  HOOD AND DUCT PROTECTION: Fire Protection systems used for
hood and duct systems protection reference in Section 904.12 or the
Mechanical Code referenced in Chapter 35, shall use the NFPA Standard 96 for
applications. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



62.   That Subsection 901.5.1 shall be added and read as follows:



   901.5.1 CERTIFICATION: The contractor shall provide the code and fire
officials with a certification indicating that the system is installed in
compliance with this code and that the appropriate acceptance tests have been
conducted. These systems shall be certified to U. L. or F. M. certification
standards. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



63.   That Sections 901.8, 901.9 and 901.10 are added to read as follows:



   901.8  KNOX BOX REQUIRED: All buildings, structures or tenant spaces
to be supervised as required by this code shall provide a Knox Box for
placement of keys for access to the building, structure or tenant space for
fire district use is case of an emergency. Tenants in a shopping center and
multi-story office building may share a Knox Box with other tenants, however,
verification in writing from the fire district is required. There shall be a
maximum of seven (7) tenants or keys per box. See Sections 903.4.1 and
907.6.5 for required monitoring/supervision.



      901.8.1 RESERVED:



      901.8.2  LOCATION: The location of the Knox Box shall be by the
main entrance unless an alternate location is approved in writing by the fire
district.



      901.8.3  MOUNTING HEIGHT:  The Knox Box shall be mounted
between a minimum of eighteen (18) inches to a maximum height of six (6) feet
above the immediate surrounding grade in which a person can stand on without
any assistance.



      901.8.4  SUPERVISION:  All Knox Boxes shall be supervised in
the "trouble mode" of the fire alarm by the dispatchers for:



         901.8.4.1  ORLAND FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT:  All Knox
Boxes installed within the Village limits south of 135th Street.



         901.8.4.2  PALOS FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT: All Knox Boxes
installed within the Village limits north of 135th Street.



         901.8.4.3  MOKENA FIRE DISTRICT: All Knox Boxes installed
within the Village and located within the Mokena Fire District. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 901.9  TESTING/MONITORING OF FIRE PROTECTION SUPERVISION



      901.9  CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE:  All required fire suppression
and fire protection systems required to be supervised shall have the complete
system checked, tested and certified that it meets this code and the Fire
Code listed in Chapter 35, and is in proper working condition. All tests
shall be witnessed by a member of the appropriate fire district with 24 hour
notice given to the appropriate district. A new certificate shall be
submitted to the code and fire officials on a yearly or multi-year basis.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 901.10  FIRE PROTECTION DOCUMENTS SUBMITTAL



      901.10  CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS REQUIRED: Construction documents
or shop drawings, or both, for the installation of fire protection systems
shall be submitted to indicate conformance to this code and shall be reviewed
by the Village of Orland Park or professional services as approved by the
Building Officials, appropriate fire district prior to issuance of the
permit. See Section 107 of this Code.



      Note:  Since fire departments are responsible for inspecting the
proper maintenance of fire protection systems in buildings, the
administrative authority shall cooperate with the fire districts in the
discharge of responsibility to enforce this chapter.



      The construction documents and shop drawings submitted to the
Village, shall contain sufficient detail as outlined herein to evaluate the
protected hazard and the effectiveness of the system.



         901.10.1 DETAILED SHOP DRAWINGS: Shop drawings for the
installation of fire protection systems shall be submitted for review and
approval prior to the installation of a fire protection system. Included on
the shop drawings shall be information showing the basis for compliance with
the design density, the specific arrangement of the system, the devices and
their method(s) of operation, and the suppression agent. The details on the
construction documents or shop drawings for the fire protection system shall
include design considerations, spacing and arrangement of fire protection
devices, protection agent supply and discharge requirements, calculations
with sizes and equivalent lengths of pipe and fittings, and protection agent
source. Sufficient information shall be included to identify the apparatus
and devices utilized and other information as required by this code.



         901.10.2  MATERIALS AND CONTENTS INFORMATION: Construction
documents for fire protection systems permit shall include information on the
contents, the occupancy, the location and arrangement of the structure and
the contents involved, the exposure to any hazard, the extent of the system
coverage, the suppression system design criteria, the
         supply and extinguishing agents, the location of any
standpipes, and the location and method of operation of detection and alarm
devices. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



64.   That Section 902.1.1 is amended to read as follows:



   902.1.1  FIRE DISTRICT ACCESS: All buildings, structures and tenant
spaces shall provide a key for the Knox Box to be used by the Fire District
in case of an emergency for access to the equipment room.



      EXCEPTION: Buildings, structures or tenant spaces not required to
have a Knox Box. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 903 USE GROUPS - AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS REQUIRED



65.   That Subsection 903.1.2 is added to Section 903.1 and shall read as
follows:



SECTION 903.1.2  BUILDING SEPARATION FOR TOTAL AREA



   903.1.2  TOTAL AREA: For purposes of calculating total square feet
(area), the total floor area includes mezzanines and basements contained
within the surrounding exterior walls of the building on all floors and
levels which are added together. The area included within the surrounding
exterior walls of a building includes canopies, when in the opinion of the
code official the canopy creates or may create a hazardous situation, and all
enclosed extensions and is also added to the calculation. Areas of a building
not provided with surrounding walls shall be included within the building
area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof
or floor above. Interior walls, including fire walls, and horizontal fire
walls (floors), fire separation walls and party walls, shall not be
considered as walls which divide a structure into two (2) or more separate
buildings, but a structure containing such interior walls shall be considered
as one (1) building for the purposes of this Section.



      EXCEPTION:  Fire walls may be utilized to divide a structure of
Use Group R-2 (multi-family) into more than one (1) building. The total area
then shall be calculated between fire walls for compliance to this Chapter.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 903.2  WHERE FIRE SPRINKLERS ARE REQUIRED



66.   That Subsection 903.2.1shall read as follows:



   903.2.1  USE GROUP A: An automatic fire suppression system shall be
provided throughout all buildings and/or areas of Use Group A as follows:



   1.   Where the total area of a Use Group A exceeds five thousand
(5,000) square feet.



   2.   Where a seating capacity of a restaurant exceeds seventy-four
(74) seats or in other A-use groups with an occupant load of one hundred
(100) or more persons.



   3.   Throughout all levels above and below where the Use Group A
exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet.



   Subsections 903.2.1.1 through 903.2.1.4 shall comply with this
Subsection of Assembly Uses. Use Group A-5 requirements for concession stands
etc. noted in Subsection 903.2.1.5 shall apply as written by the IBC. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



67.   That Subsection 903.2.3 shall read as follows:



   903.2.3 USE GROUP E: An automatic fire suppression system shall be
provided throughout all buildings of Use Group E. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



68.   That Subsection 903.2.4 shall read as follows:



   903.2.4  USE GROUPS B, F-1, F-2, M, S-1, S-2: An automatic fire
suppression system shall be provided throughout all buildings of Use Group B,
F-1, F-2, M, S-1, S-2 having a total area of eight thousand (8,000) square
feet or greater. Public garages shall also conform to Section 406.0.



      903.2.4.1 WOODWORKING OPERATIONS: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 occupancy fire areas that contain
woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet (232 m2) in area which
generate finely divided combustible waste or which use finely divided
combustible materials.



      903.2.4.2 MERCANTILE: An automatic fire suppression system shall
be provided throughout all M Use Group buildings when used for display and
sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses when exceeding three thousand
(3,000) square feet. 



      DELETE- 903.2.6 Use Group I. Exceptions only  Day Care exceptions



      DELETE- 903.2.7 (Group M) fire sprinklers relocated to 903.2.4
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



69.   That Subsection 903.2.8 shall read as follows:



903.2.8  GROUP R OCCUPANCIES SHALL COMPLY WITH THE FOLLOWING:



   903.2.8.1  USE GROUP R-1:  An automatic fire suppression system shall
be provided throughout all buildings and/or areas of Use Group R-1.  (See
Section 708. for partition wall references).



   903.2.8.2  USE GROUP R-2: An automatic fire suppression system shall
be provided throughout all buildings and/or areas of Use Group R-2 having a
total floor area greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet or four (4)
or more stories in height.  (See amended construction type restrictions of
Sections 501 & 503.



      903.2.8.2.1 USE GROUP R-2 FURNACE ROOMS: A minimum of one (1)
sprinkler head is required in each furnace room and/or utility room in all
multi-family, multi-story buildings less than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet when a building is not fully fire sprinkler protected as noted in this
Sub-Section. The required sprinkler head shall be installed in the potable
water system without any branch piping. A backflow preventer will not be
required.



   903.2.8.3  GROUP R-3 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM: Installation of an
automatic fire sprinkler system is required for single family detached R-3
Residential Use when the building has more than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of total gross floor area (total floor area includes garages, basements
and attic spaces which have an occupiable floor). Other conditions for
required fire sprinkler protection are when a residence has more than two (2)
stories in height or if lacking the minimum required amount of yard spaces or
building hazards as may be determined by the building official.



   Building Area Definition: For the purposes of a required automation
fire sprinkler system in an R-3 residence, a building’s area includes all
floor levels to determining a total area.



   Exception: Attached townhouse buildings of an R-3 Use Group, with two
(2)-hour fire rated separations (See 310.4), may increase the total gross
floor area to a maximum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet without fire
sprinkler protection. (Note: attached dwellings areas are calculated as model
IBC defines building area).



   DELETE: Group R-4 OCCUPANCIES from this Chapter 9 due to the
Villages’ deletion of this Use as referenced in Section 310.5 of this
ordinance (Residential Care Facilities). (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



70.   That Subsection 903.2.9 shall read as follows:



   903.2.9 GROUP S-1: See section 903.2.4 for fire sprinkler area
requirements.  Areas used for the storage of commercial vehicles of  trucks
or busses shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. IBC Code Section 903.2.9, item
# 5 shall apply for storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeding
2,500 square feet in area for required automatic fire sprinkler protection. 



      903.2.9.1 REPAIR GARAGES:  Shall comply with Section 406.8.3 and
903.2.4 as amended.  IBC model code item # 4 of this sub-section is
applicable for the repair of commercial trucks or buses fire areas greater
than 5,000 square feet shall be protected with automatic fire sprinkler
protection.



      903.2.9.2 BULK STORAGE OF TIRES:  See the IBC model code 3 for
this section's requirements. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



71.   That Subsection 903.2.10 shall read as follows:



   903.2.10 GROUP S-2 ENCLOSED PARKING GARAGES: Section 903.2.4 shall
apply for fire sprinkler system requirements.



      EXCEPTION: Enclosed parking garaged located beneath R-3 (Single
Family Dwellings).



      903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages: An automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided throughout buildings used for storage of commercial
trucks or buses where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet). (See Section
903.2.4 and 903.2.9 that also regulate this and S-1 Use Group). (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 903.3  FIRE SPRINKLER INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS



72.   That Subsection 903.3.1.2 and 903.3.1.3 shall read as follows:



   903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R SYSTEMS:  In Use Group R-2 buildings (as amended in
501.3.2, 501.3.3 and 503.2.1) and greater than 10,000 square feet and less
than four (4) residential stories in height, systems may be designed and
installed in accordance with NFPA 13R listed in Chapter 35. An addressable
fire alarm system shall be installed as required by the Orland, Palos or
Mokena Fire Protection District.



      903.3.1.2.1  BALCONIES AND DECKS SPRINKLER SYSTEM:  See
2018/IBC model code language of this section applicable to existing and new
structures that may be of Type V Construction (note; Type V construction for
new R-2 Use/buildings are not permitted by the Village Code per code Section
503.2).



      903.3.1.2.2  OPEN ENDED CORRIDORS: IBC Code Language applies.
See Definitions Chapter 2.



      903.3.1.2.3  ATTICS: Attic protection shall be provided as
follows:



      1.   See Village amended Code Sections for required automatic
fire sprinkler protection.



      2.   IBC Code Language applies.



      3.   IBC Code Language applies.



      4.   Village amendments have deleted the R-4 Use and this item
does not apply.



   903.3.1.3  NFPA 13D SPRINKLER SYSTEMS: When allowed, automatic
sprinkler systems installed in one and two-family dwellings and townhouses
may be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D.  Note; required
fire sprinkler protection has been amended (903.2.8.3) for single family
residences as determined by area. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



  73.   That Subsection 903.3.5 shall read as follows:



   903.3.5  WATER SUPPLIES:  Water supplies for automatic sprinkler
systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in
Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow
in accordance with the requirements of this section and the Village Plumbing
Code. Locations of exterior Fire District connections shall be as approved by
the building and fire officials.



      903.3.5.1  DOMESTIC CONNECTION:  A backflow preventor shall be
installed as required by Section 903.3.5. Shut off valves shall not be
permitted in the suppression system piping. Water supply shall be controlled
by the riser control valve to the domestic water piping.



         EXCEPTION:  Shut-off valves in the sprinkler system piping
are permitted provided that such valves are supervised (signaled) in
accordance with Section 903.4.1. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



74.   That Subsections 903.3.5.3 and 903.3.5.4 are added to Subsection
903.3.5 and shall read as follows:



   903.3.5.3 CROSS CONNECTION:  Public water supply shall be protected
from all suppression, standpipe and limited area systems by a backflow
preventor as required by Village Ordinance No. 1519 and the plumbing code as
listed in Chapter 35.



   903.3.5.4  MULTI-TENANT OCCUPANCY:  When an automatic fire
suppression system is installed in a multi-tenant building, each tenant shall
have its own supply line off the main or riser with its own water flow
switches control valve and strobe light mounted on the exterior of the tenant
space and as indicated in Section 903.4. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 903.4  SPRINKLER SUPERVISION AND ALARMS



75.   That Subsection 903.4 and 903.4.1.1 shall read as follows:



   903.4  FIRE SUPPRESSION SIGNALS AND MONITORING:  All automatic fire
suppression systems shall be electronically supervised by connecting to the
appropriate dispatcher for the Village of Orland Park in accordance with NFPA
72 listed in Chapter 35. Appropriate Districts include: Orland Fire
Protection District, Palos Fire Protection District and Mokena Fire
Protection District.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      1.   Underground gate valves with roadway boxes.



      2.   Limited area sprinkler system.



      DELETE - 903.4 Exceptions 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, & 7 Sprinkler Monitoring
and Alarms Exceptions only



      903.4.1.1  TENANT SPACE LIGHT:  In every tenant space in a
shopping center, strip mall, or where there are multiple tenants, there shall
be a flashing, blinking or revolving strobe light visible in a public access
area indicating which tenant space the activated system is in. The exact
location of the light shall be verified with the fire official. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



76.   That Subsection 905.3.1 shall read as follows:



   905.3.1  BUILDING HEIGHT STANDPIPES:  Standpipe systems (vertical or
horizontal)shall be installed throughout all buildings greater than two (2)
stories in height or floor levels more thirty (30) feet above fire department
vehicle access or when there is more than one (1) story below the highest
level of fire department vehicle access or has more than two hundred and
fifty (250) feet of travel from the nearest point of fire department vehicle
access to the furthest location within the building.



      EXCEPTIONS: Buildings of Use Group R-3. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



77.   That Section 906.1 shall read as follows:



   906.1:  PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS WHERE REQUIRED:  Portable fire
extinguishers of the approved type and size (4A 60BC) shall be installed in
all buildings and tenant spaces at readily accessible locations (within five
(5) feet of required exit doors) as approved by the "Fire Code Official" or
as referenced in the Village Fire Code adopted and referenced in Chapter 35.
Fire extinguishers shall also be located near cooking areas and other
specific locations noted within this Code or as determined by the code
official. A Group E occupancy shall include fire extinguishers in each room..
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 907  FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS



78.   That Section 907.2, 907.2.10.1 and Subsection 907.2.10.6 shall read
as follows:



   907.2  FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEM WERE REQUIRED: An approved
manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be
provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through Section 907.2.23. Where
automatic sprinkler protection, installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, is provided and connected to the building fire alarm
system, automatic heat detection required by this section shall not be
required. An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72. Devices,
combinations of devices, appliances and equipment shall comply with Section
907.1.2. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that
an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as
boiler rooms where, during normal operation, products of combustion are
present in sufficient quantity to actuate a smoke detector.



   Fire Alarm and Detection systems are required in all buildings and/or
portions thereof unless the building has one hundred percent (100%) fire
sprinkler system protection per this code. Notification and alarms are
required per NFPA 72 and the Illinois Accessibility Code.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      1.   A permitted Agricultural Canopy that is less than eight
thousand (8,000) square feet in area of an Agricultural use not containing
combustible storage except for plant sales, may be permitted without a fire
alarm system when design complies with the Village Code and Land Development
Code regulations. (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



         See Sections 202, 312.1, 501.3.2, 3105, 2404.5 and Chapter
35 Appendix C for other code amendments. (Ord. 4342, 3-3-08)



      2.   Single story buildings less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet for gross exterior footprint area and with an occupant load of
less than fifty (50) persons are allowed with a local alarm only, when no
other type of fire suppression system protection is required by this code. A
local alarm does not apply to Institutional, residential or other hazardous
uses.  (Ord. 4499, 8-3-09)



         907.2.10.2.1  SINGLE AND MULTIPLE STATION CARBON MONOXIDE
ALARMS R-2, R-3 AND I-1 USE GROUPS: Carbon monoxide detectors shall be placed
in residential and I-1 units within fifteen (15) feet of bedroom door
openings and in locations indicated in the State of Illinois Compiled Statute
(430 ILCS 135/Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act.)



      907.2.10.6 SINGLE STATION SMOKE ALARMS POWER SOURCE:  In new
construction, required smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from
the building wiring where such wiring is served from a commercial source and
shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal
when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for over current protection.



      The Illinois Smoke Detector Act shall apply and take precedence
where more restrictive to all residential units.



         EXCEPTIONS:



         1.   Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with
battery backup in Group R-1 where they are connected to an emergency
electrical system.



         2.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery
operated in existing buildings, buildings not served from a commercial power
source and in existing areas where alterations or repairs regulated for
Residential alterations and repairs and do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



(79.   That Subsection 907.5.2 shall be revised and Subsection 907.5.3
shall be added to read as follows:



   907.5.2 ALARM INDICATING APPLIANCES:  Audio and visual alarm
notification appliances shall be provided and shall be listed for their
purpose. Alarm indicating appliances shall meet the requirements of the
"Illinois Accessibility Code", listed in Chapter 35, or meet Sections
907.5.2.1 through 907.5.2.3, whichever is more restrictive.



   907.5.3  FIRE PROTECTION SIGNALING SYSTEMS:  All new and existing
fire detection and protective signaling systems installed within the Village
of Orland Park shall be monitored by remote supervisory station as designated
by the Village of Orland Park as the Authority Having Jurisdiction in
accordance with NFPA 72-13 (2013 Edition), listed in Chapter 35 and in
Sections 907.5.3.1, 907.5.3.2 and 907.5.3.4.  Note: this section is also
referenced in the Fire Code.



      EXCEPTION:



      1.   Single station detectors as required by Section 907.2.11.



      2.   Smoke detectors in patient sleeping rooms in buildings of
Use Group I-2 (see Section 407.7 Exception)



      907.5.3.1 ORLAND FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT:  All installations
within the village limits and within the Orland Fire Protection District
limits.



      907.5.3.2 PALOS FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT:  All installations
within the village limits and within the Palos Fire Protection District
limits.



      907.5.3.4 MOKENA FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT:  All installation
with the village limits within the Mokena Fire Protection District limits.



      907.5.3.5 USE GROUP R-2 PUBLIC AREAS:  Required smoke detectors
and manual pull stations located in the public hallways of all multi-family,
multi-story buildings shall be connected to the appropriate dispatcher for
the Village of Orland Park through the main fire alarm panel. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 10 - MEANS OF EGRESS



SECTION 1006 NUMBER OF EXITS AND EXIT ACCESS DOORWAYS



80.   That Subsection 1006.2.1 shall read as follows:



   1006.2.1 COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL:  Single or Common paths of exit
access shall follow the requirements of Table 1006.2.1 as amended.  For
common path of egress travel in Group A occupancies and assembly occupancies
accessory to Group E occupancies having fixed seating, see Section 1029.8.



   That Table 1006.2.1 shall read as follows:



 

TABLE 1006.2.1
SPACES WITH ONE MEANS OF EGRESS (COMMON PATH OF TRAVEL)


USE GROUP
 
MAX. OCCUPANT LOAD
 
MAX. TRAVEL DISTANCE (FT)
 
MAX. SIZES SPACE (SQ. FT.)




A, E
 
49
 
< 50 persons is 75' w/100% fire sprinkler protection (Sec. 903.3.1)  See
Sec. 1029.8
 
1000


B
 
49
 
75
 
3000


F
 
30
 
75
 
3000


H-1, H-2 & H-3
 
3
 
25
 
1000


H-4 & H-5
 
10
 
50
 
1000


I*
 
10*
 
50*
 
2000*


M
 
49
 
75
 
2000


R-1 &R-2

R-3
 
10

10
 
75 or 125 w/fire sprinkler protection

125
 
2000

3000


S, U
 
29
 
100
 
3000




 



* Except Day Care Centers (2 means of egress are required for Day Care
Centers.)



(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



81.   That Subsection 1006.3.3 shall read as follows:



   1006.3.3. BUILDINGS AND STORIES WITH ONE EXIT:  Only one (1) exit
shall be required in buildings of Use Group R-3 and in buildings of the use
groups and characteristics specified in Table 1006.3.3.  Exterior doors that
are provided in addition to the minimum required shall conform to this code
for landings and stair requirements to grade when installed. See Table
1006.3.3, footnote #1 for basements.  Tables 1006.3.3(1) and 1006.3.3(2)
from the IBC Code shall use Table 1006.3.3 below as amended. 



 

TABLE 1006.3.3
BUILDINGS AND STORIES WITH ONE EXIT see footnotes #1 & #2


Use Group
 
Max. Height Above Grade* or Basements
 
Size
 
Maximum Exit Access Travel Distance
 
Minimum Fire Resistance Rating of Exit Enclosure
 
Minimum Fire Resistance Rating of Opening Protection


B, M & S

see footnote #3
 
2 Story with 800 sf max 2nd floor
 
2000 square feet total
 
75 feet
 
0-hour
 
0-hour


R-2
 
3 stories
 
2 dwelling units per floor
 
50 feet
 
2 hour
 
1 hour


B
 
2 stories
 
3000 square feet per floor
 
50 feet
 
1 hour
 
1 hour



 



   1.   No Basements or Cellars are allowed with a single exit except
as allowed for an R-3 Use.  See Section 104.1 for minor exceptions.



   2.   Also see Table 1006.2.1 for Rooms and Spaces allowing only one
(1) means of egress.



   3.   Applies only in the Orland Park Historic District. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1008 MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION



82.   That Sections of 1008.2, 1008.3 and 1009 shall read as follows:



   1008.2 MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION, ARTIFICIAL /EMERGENCY LIGHTING: 
All rooms and usable floor surfaces in a building requiring a means of
egress, including the exit discharge, shall be equipped with artificial
lighting facilities shall be illuminated at all time the building or space is
occupied.



      EXCEPTION:



      1.   Occupancies in Group U.



      2.   Aisle access ways in a Group A.



      3.   Dwellings and Sleeping units in Groups R-1, R-2 and R-3.



      4.   Sleeping units of Group I Occupancies.



   Means of egress lighting in occupancies in Use Group R-2, other than
lighting within a dwelling unit, shall be wired on a circuit independent of
circuits within any dwelling unit. The disconnecting means and overcurrent
protection device shall not be located within a dwelling unit or such that
access to such devices must be obtained by going through a dwelling unit.



      1008.2.1 ILLUMINATION LEVEL:  See referenced IBC code for this
general one (1) foot-candle note (11 lux) and the Exception as noted. 
Subsection 1008.2.2 applies for exit discharge.



   1008.3 ILLUMINATION EMERGENCY POWER SOURCE:  All required means of
egress lighting in all buildings or portions thereof shall be connected to an
independent power source (battery back-up) or other approved auxiliary power
(emergency generator) to assure a duration of not less than 1-1/2 hour
continued illumination in case of an emergency or power loss. All power
sources shall be installed in accordance with The Village Code Title 5
Chapter 3 (Village Electrical Code).



   1009 ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS:  See the Illinois Accessibility Code
(IAC) Section 400.310 b) for means of egress specifications.  Sections of
the model Code may be used by the Building Official when there is no conflict
with the State of Illinois Accessibility Code.



      EXAMPLE: Areas of Refuge Section 1009.6 (rescue). 



   Subsections 1009.6, through 1009.11 may be used where no conflict
exists with the Illinois Accessibility Code.  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1010  DOORS GATES AND TURNSTILES



83.   That Subsection 1010.1.1 Exception #13 shall be added to read as
follows:



   1010.1.1  SIZE OF DOORS: EXCEPTION #13: Dwelling and sleeping units
not required to meet the State of Illinois Accessibility standards shall meet
these minimum door size requirements:



   1.   Main entrance/egress door shall be at least of a nominal width
of thirty-six (36) inches and a minimum height of eighty (80) inches. A clear
minimum opening width shall be at least thirty-four (34) inches. When doors
are used in pairs (double entry doors) the door leafs can be reduced to
thirty-two (32) inches for each of the doors.



   2.   Interior doors for all other habitable rooms shall use a
minimum nominal width of thirty-two (32) inches with clear openings of not
less than 30.25 inches.



   DELETE- 1010.1.1 - Exceptions 6 & 7.  Size of Door reductions for
dwelling units. 



   DELETE- 1010.1.4.1 - allowing Revolving Doors as an Exit component is
deleted. Revolving doors may be used, but only in addition to a required
means of exit door. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)   



84.   That Subsection 1010.1.4.5 shall read as follows:



   1010.1.4.5 SECURITY GRILLES:  Horizontal sliding or vertical security
grilles that are part of a means of egress shall be openable from the inside
without the use of a key of special knowledge or effort. A sign indicating an
emergency release along with the release shall be placed within six (6) feet
of the grille. The sign and release shall be placed between eighteen (18) and
forty-eight (48) inches above finished floor. The grille shall be openable
with a maximum force of five (5) pounds to a minimum height of four (4) feet
above the floor. The grille shall remain secured in the full-open position
during the period of occupancy by the general public. Grilles shall not be
brought to the closed position and locked when there are more than ten (10)
persons occupying the space. Where two (2) or more exits are required, not
more than one-half (½) of the exits shall be equipped with grilles. To
facilitate fire district access to a space with grilles, a key for the grille
or grilles shall be placed in an alarmed KnoxBox for fire district use in an
emergency.



   DELETE- 1010.1.9.4-Exceptions 2, 2.1, 2.2 & 2.3, Locks/Latches w/key
for egress.   



   DELETE- 1010.1.9.5 Bolt Locks



   DELETE- 1010.1.9.6 Unlatching



   DELETE- 1010.1.9.8 (Delayed Egress)



   DELETE- 1010.1.9.9 (Sensor Release of Egress Doors)



   DELETE- 1010.1.9.10 (Release of electrically locked Egress Doors) (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



85.   That Subsection 1010.1.10 shall read as follows:



   1010.1.10 PANIC AND FIRE EXIT HARDWARE:  Doors Serving rooms or spaces
with an occupant load of fifty (50) or more in a Group A, E, I-2 occupancies
or electrical equipment rooms rated at one thousand two hundred (1,200)
amperes or more shall not be provided with a latch or lock unless it is panic
hardware or fire exit hardware. Where panic and fire exit hardware is
installed, it shall comply with the following Subsection 1010.1.10.1



      1010.1.10.1 INSTALLATION:  Where panic or fire exit hardware is
installed it shall comply with the following:



      1.   The actuating portion of the releasing device shall
extend at least one-half (½) of the door leaf width.



      2.   A maximum unlatching force of fifteen (15) pounds (67 N).



      3.   Each door in a means of egress from an occupancy of Group
A, I-2 or E having an occupant load of fifty (50) or more and any occupancy
of Group H-1, H-2, H-3 or H-5 shall not be provided with a latch or lock
unless it is panic hardware or fire exit hardware.



      4.   Panic or Fire exit hardware shall be of a listed UL 305
and UL 10 assemblies.



      DELETE- 1010.3.2 (conditions for allowing Security Turnstiles for
exiting) (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



86.   That Section 1010.4 shall be added to read as follows:



   1010.4 DOORS LEADING TO HAZARDOUS AREAS:  See Illinois Accessibility
Code (400.310 t) 2). (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1011 STAIRWAYS



87.   That Sections 1011.1 and 1011.14 shall read as follows:



      1011.1 GENERAL. Stairways serving occupied portions of a building
shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1011.2 through 1011.13.
Alternating tread devices shall comply with Section 1011.14. Ships ladders
and ladders shall comply with Sections 1011.15 and 1011.6 but are only
allowed for building maintenance personnel and not permitted for use as a
means of egress by the general public.  Exit stairways shall be enclosed
with fire rated construction per Section 1023. Exception: Within rooms or
spaces used for assembly purposes, stepped aisles shall comply with Section
1029.



      Also note; The Illinois Accessibility Code Section 400.310 b) 4)
B) ii) requires 48" minimum between handrails for stairways having areas of
refuge.  (1-1/4"-1-1/2" diameter handrail with 1/1/2" clear space to walls =
2-3/4" to a 3" projections from walls or a 6" total.  (Note; 48" + 6" = 54"
possible width without wall recesses)).



      Remaining Sections of 1011 apply as written by IBC except for
Section 1011.14 as amended.



      1011.14 ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICES:  Alternating Tread Devices
are only permitted for accessing building equipment and to a rooftop located
from within the building for maintenance by service personnel and not
accessible for use to/by the general public. Exit heights from these areas
permitted shall not be greater than a 20'-0" rise between floor levels or
landings.  When allowed, these tread devices shall follow construction
details of Sections 1011.14.1 and 1011.14.2 (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



88.   That Section 1012.1 shall read as follows:



   1012.1 RAMPS:  The provisions of this section shall apply to ramps
used as a component of a means of egress.  Ramps shall also meet the State
of Illinois Accessibility Code listed in Chapter 35 when applicable.  Exit
enclosures shall comply with the requirements of Section 1023. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1013 EXIT SIGNS



89.   That Sections 1013.1, 1013.5, and 1013.6 shall read as follows:



   1013.1 EXIT SIGN LOCATION: EXIT signs shall be located at all exit
doors and/or exit access areas, so as to be readily visible from any
direction of egress travel. Sign placement shall be such that any point in
the exit access shall not be more than one hundred (100) feet from the
nearest visible sign. Exit signs shall direct occupants to required exits.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      1.   "EXIT" signs are not required in sleeping room areas of
Use Group I-3, R-1 and R-2.



      2.   Use-Group R-3 and its accessory buildings.



      3.   In a tenant space of Use Groups B & M having an area of
two hundred fifty (250) square feet or less and having only one (1) door in
the space which is the exit access door.



      1013.1  STAIRWAY EXIT SIGNS: Each door to an enclosed exit
stairway required for an area of rescue assistance shall be equipped with
tactile signage reading "EXIT" complying with the Illinois Accessibility Code
listed in Chapter 35 and installed on the side of the door from which egress
is to be made.  IBC's intent of this Section is similar to the Illinois
Accessibility Code.



      1013.5 EXIT SIGN ILLUMINATION:  In all buildings and portions
thereof, all required means of egress shall be indicated with approved
internally illuminated signs reading EXIT, visible from the exit access and,
when necessary, supplemented by directional signs in the access corridors or
wherever indicated or required, indicating the direction and way of egress.
Signs shall be listed and labeled and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Exit signs shall be illuminated at all times.



      Note: Section 1013.6, for Externally Illuminated Exit Signs has
been deleted from our Code and replaced with an amended Section 1013.6 as
noted below.



      1013.6 SIZE AND COLOR FOR EXIT SIGNS:  "Exit" signs shall have
red letters at least six (6) inches high and the minimum width of each stroke
shall be 3/4 inch on a white or black background. The word "EXIT" shall have
letters having a width of not less than two (2) inches except that the letter
"I" and the minimum spacing between letters shall not be less than 3/8 inch.
Signs larger than the minimum size herein required shall have letter widths
and spacing in the same proportions to the height as indicated in this
section. If an arrow is provided as part of an "Exit" sign, the construction
shall be such that the arrow direction cannot be readily changed. The word
"Exit' shall be clearly discernible and energized at all times. Light
Emitting Diodes (LEDS) exit signs will be considered as meeting the
requirements of this Section and Section 1011.1.1.



         1013.6.1 POWER SOURCE: All exit signs shall be illuminated
at all times. Exit signs shall be connected to an independent power source
(battery back-up for each unit) or other approved auxiliary power (emergency
generator) to assure a duration of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2)
hour continued illumination in case of an emergency or power loss. All power
sources shall be installed in accordance with The Village Code Title 5
Chapter 3 (Village Electrical Code).   



      DELETE- 1013.6 - Externally Illuminated Exit Signs 1013.5 and
replace with amended Code Sections. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1015  GUARDS         



90.   That Section 1015.9 shall be added to read as follows:



   1015.9 GUARDS AT EXTERIOR WINDOW WELL OPENINGS AND WITHIN 3 FEET OF
WALKING PATHS:  Exterior window well openings at grade levels having more
than a thirty (30) inch change of elevation and within thirty-six (36) inches
of a walkway, must be protected with an approved structural, grate or grill
for the protection of these openings at the ground levels adjacent to the
exterior wall of buildings. Design of protecting grates/grills must resist
two hundred (200) pounds of force at any point and be readily removable from
the interior side at an emergency escape well opening required by Section
1030.5.



   DELETE- 1020.4 Dead Ends Exception #3  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



91.   That Section 1023.2 shall read as follows:



   1023.2 INTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY ENCLOSURES:  Interior exit stairways and
interior exit ramps shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in
accordance with Sections 707, 1022 or horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 711, or both. Exit enclosures shall have a
fire-resistance rating of not less than two (2) hours where connecting three
(3) stories or more and not less than one (1) hour where connecting less than
three (3) stories. The number of stories connected by the exit enclosure
shall include any basements but not any mezzanines. Exit enclosure shall lead
directly to the exterior of the building or extend to the exterior with an
exit passageway conforming to Section 1023.3 except as permitted in Section
1028.1. An exit enclosure shall not be used for any purpose other than means
of egress.  See Section 1019 for Exit Access Stairways and Ramps having
unprotected floor openings and Section 1011 for construction details.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      1.   Interior exit stairways and ramps in Group 1-3
occupancies in accordance with the provisions of Section 408.3.8.



      2.   Interior exit stairways within an Atrium enclosed in
accordance with Section 404.6.



      3.   Stairways serving and contained within a single
residential dwelling unit or sleeping unit in Group R-1, R-2 or R-3
occupancies are not required to be enclosed. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



92.   That Section 1027.2 and 1027.3 shall read as follows:



   1027.2 EXTERIOR EXIT RAMPS AND STAIRWAY USE IN A MEANS OF EGRESS: 
Exterior exit stairways and ramps shall not be used as an element of a
required means of egress for occupancies in Group I-2.  For occupancies in
other than Group I-2, exterior exit stairways shall be permitted as an
element of a required means of egress for buildings not exceeding two (2)
stories or thirty (30) feet (22 860 mm) in height subject to the provision of
Subsection 1027.3.



   1027.3 EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS OPEN SIDES:  Exterior exit
ramps and stairways serving as an element of a required means of egress shall
be open on at least one (1) side.  An open side shall have a minimum of
thirty-five (35) square feet of aggregate open area adjacent to each floor
level and the level of each intermediate landing. The required open area
shall be located not less than forty-two (42) inches (1067 mm) above the
adjacent floor or landing level.



   In occupancies other than Use Group R-3, treads, platforms and landings
which are part of the exterior stairways and ramps and are subject to snow
and ice shall be protected to prevent accumulation of same. The protection of
exterior stairways and ramps shall be a three (3) sided enclosure with a roof
or other approved designs. The enclosure shall be of the same materials and
type of construction as the structure it is attached to. Exterior stairways
shall not be accepted as an exit in the following cases:



      1.   Building of Use Group I-2.



      2.   Buildings greater than two (2) stories in height.



   Walls used for exterior exit stairway and/or ramp protection shall be
an approved design through the Village's Planning Division. 



   DELETE- Section 1027.6 Exception #4 only. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



93.   That Subsection 1028.1.1 shall be added to Section 1028.1 and read
as follows:



   1028.1.1 EXIT DISCHARGE LANDING: The grade level exit discharge shall
be onto a paved area of concrete, asphalt or other approved material and
shall be a minimum of five (5) feet by five (5) feet in size. The exit
discharge paved area shall also take into consideration the State of Illinois
Accessibility Code, listed in Chapter 35, for wheelchair use connecting to a
public way or design for areas of rescue adding at least 30" x 48" of area
with edge curbing as needed.  (IAC 400.310 a) 9). (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



IBC CHAPTER 11 - ACCESSIBILITY



94.   That Chapter 11, Accessibility, shall read as follows:



   1101.1 SCOPE:  The design and construction of facilities for the
physically disabled persons shall comply with the State of Illinois
Accessibility Code as listed in Chapter 35. Due to the State of Illinois
regulations, IBC Code Sections 1103 through 1110 are deleted.  (Ord. 3994,
3-7-05). 



   See Section 3401.3 of this code for additional Accessibility reference.



   1101.2 DESIGN: Buildings and Facilities shall be designed and
constructed to meet the Illinois Accessibility Code. (Ord. 3994, 3-7-05)



   1102  ACCESSIBILITY DEFINITIONS:



      DELETE- 1102 through 1109 - Accessibility Code conflicts with
State of IL.   



   1102.1  DEFINITIONS:  As referenced by the State of Illinois
Accessibility Code.



      DELETE - IBC Sections 1103, 1104, 1105, 1106, 1107, 1108, 1109
and 1110



   1111 SIGNAGE FOR ACCESSIBILITY: The ICC subsections of the Section
(1110.1 through 1110.3) may be used for reference by the "Building Official"
only when there is no conflict with the Illinois Accessibility Code. The
State of Illinois Accessibility Code shall be used where regulations are
similar. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 12 - INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT



SECTION 1202  VENTILATION



   DELETE- 1202.4.1.1 Ventilation Area for crawl spaces with open earth
floors.



   Note: Open crawl space floors are not permitted per Section 1907.1
which requires concrete in crawls.



95.   That Subsection 1202.2.3, 1202.5.4, 1202.5.5 and 1202.6.1 are added
to read as follows:



   1202.2.3 ALTERNATIVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION:  Enclosed attic, rafter,
and crawl spaces may be equipped with a mechanical ventilation system
conforming to the requirements of the Mechanical Code listed in Chapter 35.
The mechanical system cannot replace more than fifty percent (50%) of the
required roof vents.



   1202.5.4 RECIRCULATION:  Recirculation of air supplied to kitchens,
toilet rooms, bathrooms, restrooms, locker rooms, storage areas,
laboratories, garages and similar rooms shall not be permitted. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



96.   That Subsection 1202.5.5 is amended and Section 1203.7 is added to
Section 1203 and shall read as follows:



   1202.5.5  NON HABITABLE BASEMENT VENTILATION: Basements used primarily
for low hazardous storage are allowed to reduce the required ventilation at a
rate of two percent (2%) of the floor areas served.



   1202.6.1 BATHROOMS, TOILET ROOMS AND KITCHENS:  Every bathroom, toilet
and powder room and kitchen shall be provided with mechanical exhaust
ventilation.  Mechanical ventilation shall be provided in accordance with
the mechanical code as referenced in Title 5, Chapter 6 of the Village Code.
(Ord. 4694, 12-19-11).  Residential kitchen range hood and exhaust duct must
be of a smooth hard non-combustible material such as galvanized sheet metal,
stainless steel, aluminum or copper.  All range hood exhaust shall be vented
to the exterior with the joints sealed using a material that is suitable for
a long time exposure.  Backdraft dampers are required to prevent
infiltration of outdoor air when the exhaust system is not operating. 
Commercial range hoods and exhaust are required for any use group that is not
of a typical single family residential use group. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1204  LIGHTING



97.   That Subsection 1204.2.3 shall be added to read as follows:



   1204.2.3 BASEMENT NATURAL LIGHTING: A minimum natural lighting of two
percent (2%) of the floor areas (glass See Section 1205.2) is required for a
basement. Habitable spaces in basements require eight percent (8%) of the
floor area for exterior openings for the room or space served for light and
ventilation as noted in Section 1202.5. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1206  SOUND TRANSMISSION



98.   That Sections 1206.2, 1206.3 and 1208.4 are revised and added to
read as follows:



   1206.2 AIR-BORNE NOISE:  Walls, partitions and floor/ceiling
assemblies, separating dwelling units from each other or from public or
service areas shall have a sound transmission class (STC) of not less than
fifty (50) for air-borne noise when tested in accordance with ASTM E90 listed
in Chapter 35. This requirement shall not apply to dwelling unit entrance
doors; however, such doors shall be tight fitting to the frame and sill. 
Masonry walls shall be calculated in accordance with TMS 0302 or as
determined by through testing in accordance with ASTM E 492.  See Section
708.3 Exceptions for restrictions.



   1206.3 STRUCTURE BORNE SOUND:  Floor/ceiling assemblies between
dwelling units or between a dwelling unit and a public or service area within
the structure shall have an impact insulation class (IIC) rating of not less
than fifty (50) when tested in accordance with ASTM E492 listed in Chapter
35.  See Section 708.3 Exceptions for restrictions. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1207  INTERIOR SPACE DIMENSIONS



99.   That Section 1207.2 is only added for reference to 5-1-14
(Residential Amendments) as follows:



   1207.2  MINIMUM CEILING HEIGHTS: See Section 305.1, as part of the
Residential Amendments to this Code. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION 1208  ACCESS TO UNOCCUPIED SPACES



100.   That Section 1208 shall read as follows:



   1208.1 ACCESS TO CRAWL SPACE:  Access shall be provided to crawl
spaces by a minimum opening size of twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four
(24) inches, but not less than what would be required to remove and install
any equipment taken out.



   1208.2 ACCESS TO ATTIC: An opening not less than twenty (20) inches by
thirty (30) inches with ready access thereto shall be provided to any attic
area having a clear height of over thirty (30) inches. If an attic access is
provided for in a closet, it shall be of the walk in type only without
obstruction to the attic access opening. Access openings shall be large
enough to remove and install any equipment taken out. Pull down ladder/stairs
shall be provided when mechanical equipment is installed in the attic area. A
minimum twenty-four (24) inch wide walk way shall be provided up to and
around the mechanical equipment.  A safe means of access is required to
attic spaces for rough and final inspections.



   1208.3 MECHANICAL APPLIANCES: Access to mechanical appliances installed
in under-floor areas, in attic spaces, and on roofs or elevated structures
shall be in accordance with the International Mechanical Code and Section
1209.3.1.



      1208.3.1 EQUIPMENT ACCESS ON ROOFS OR ELEVATED STRUCTURES: 
Where equipment and appliances requiring access are installed on roofs or
elevated structures at a height exceeding sixteen (16) feet, such access
shall be provided by a permanent approved means of access, the extent of
which shall be from grade or floor level to the equipment's level service
space. Such access shall not require climbing over obstructions greater than
thirty(30) inches high or walking on roofs having a slope greater than four
(4) units vertical in twelve (12) units horizontal (33-percent slope). See
mechanical code listed in Chapter 35 for additional requirements.



      For the inspection and a safe mean of access, the maximum size of
a ladder shall not require its length to be greater than twenty (20) feet,
allowing for a thirty (30) inch minimum ladder extension above the top of a
wall, floor or roof surface for safety.  If a ladder is allowed for access,
the ladder shall be structurally sound and designed to support at least two
hundred fifty (250) pounds and be securely fastened to the building before
any inspections are performed.



   1208.4 ACCESS FOR WHIRLPOOL: Access to the motor and shut off switch
shall be provided by a minimum opening size of fourteen (14) inches by
fourteen (14) inches. Any plumbing fixture, framing or any electrical and/or
plumbing piping shall not block access. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



101.   That Section 1209.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   1209.1 REQUIRED TOILET ROOM FIXTURES: The number and type of plumbing
fixtures provided in any occupancy shall comply with the Village Plumbing
Code (Title 5 Chapter 4). (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



102.   That Section 1210 shall read as follows:



   MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING ELEMENTS



   1210.1 DOORSTOPS:  All swinging doors shall be provided with doorstops
to prevent damage to adjacent walls, equipment or fixtures. Stops may be
provided for on the wall, baseboard, floor or hinge. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   CHAPTER 13 ENERGY EFFICIENCY



103.   That Building Code Subsection 1301.1.1 shall read as follows: 
(Ord. 4534 - 12-21-09)



   1301.1.1 CRITERIA:  Buildings shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Village of Orland Park’s amended Building Code (5-1-13)
Section 1301.1 and 1302 and the active edition of ICC's, International Energy
Conservation Code, as published by the International Code Council, INC, and
as may be regulated by the State of Illinois (Illinois JCAR Administrative
Code, Title 71, Part 600.110 a) (Public Act 097-1033 with the following
amendments.



   The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC/2018) shall be added
to the Building Code ordinance with amendments referencing the Energy Code's
Subsections (IECC and ANSI/ASHRA/IES Standards) as shown below to read as
follows:



   Sections referenced below are from the IECC Code Book published First
Printing: August 2017.  Heading letters C=Commercial and R=Residential. 
Residential is defined as a Group R-2 & R-3 Uses when 3-stories or less.



      •   That Subsections C101.1 and R101.1 of the IECC shall be
revised to read as follows:



         C101.1 and R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the
International Energy Conservation Code of Orland Park, Illinois and shall be
cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code."



      •   That Subsections C101.6 and 104.6 shall be added to read
as follows:



         C101.6 and R101.6 Conflicts. When a conflict occurs between
the Building Code and the Energy Conservation Code, the Building Code shall
take precedence.



      •   That Subsection C104.2 and R104.2 shall be revised to
read as follows:



         C105.7 and R105.7  Required approvals. Work shall not be
done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first
obtaining the approval of the code official. The code official, upon
notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate
the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify
the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with
this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such
portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the code
official.  Subsection of C105.2 and R105.2 are applicable.



         Approved thermal envelope insulation and equipment shall be
inspected prior to the enclosure of products. See required energy inspections
in subsection 110 of this code.



      •   That Subsections C105.4.1 and R105.4.1 are added to read
as follows:  Special inspections and testing shall be required for
conformance to the Energy Conservation Code as amended by the Village. 
Inspection reports shall be submitted to the code official for air leakage,
duct leakage, recessed lighting, high efficacy electrical lamps (90%), a
means of outdoor air, controls, or other specific tests as required by the
code official.



      •   That Subsection C107.2 and R107.2 of the IECC shall read
as follows:



         C107.2 and R107.2 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each
permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as
established in the Village Code Title 5 Chapter 2.



      •   That Subsection C107.3 and R107.3 of the IECC shall read
as follows:



         C107.3 and R107.3; Work commencing before permit issuance.
Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary permits
shall be subject to an additional fee established by the Village Code, which
shall be in addition to the required permit fees per Village Code 5-2-14



      •   That Section C109 and R109  of the IECC shall read as
follows:



         C109 and R109 Means of Appeals: See Village Code 5-1-13,
Section 113.0 of the Village Code for means of appeals. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



104.   That Section 1302 shall be added to the Building Code's (5-1-13)
Section to read as follows:



   1302 RESIDENTIAL ENERGY/INSULATION MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:  (Ord. 4534,
12-21-09) See Village Code 5-1-14 of this ordinance for Residential R-Values
and additional prescribed Village amendments. The adopted code used for
Residential Structure Regulations references the same Code/Edition as used
for commercial buildings (per Section 1301.1.1 above).



      1302.1  RESIDENTIAL MINIMUM R VALUES:  See Village Code 5-1-14
of this ordinance for residential R-Values (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 14 - EXTERIOR WALLS



105.   That Section 1401.2 is added to Section 1401 and shall read as
follows:



   1401.2 GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS:  Gutters and downspouts, exterior or
interior, are required on all buildings and shall be constructed of approved
corrosion resistant non-combustible or schedule 40 plastic pipe materials.
All gutters and downspout material shall have a permanent color finish. Any
alternative commercial building drainage system(s) design, shall be approved
by the building official with the intent of designating roof drainage
locations, property maintenance and weather protection to the building and
the public. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



106.   That Subsection 1404.1.1 is added to Section 1404.1 and shall read
as follows:



   1404.1.1 EXTERIOR WALL & VENEER REQUIREMENTS:  Construction of
exterior walls shall comply with Sections 501.3 and 503.2.1 for required
masonry and minimum thicknesses for solid and anchored masonry.  When used
within the "Fire Limits" an exterior veneer, covering shown in Table 1404.2
must also comply with backing materials for commercial and multi-family
dwelling construction as noted in code sections 501.2 and 503.2. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



107.   That Subsection 1405.1.1 is added to Section 1405.1 and shall read
as follows:



   1405.1.1 BACKING AND SURFACES FOR VENEERS IN TYPE 5 CONSTRUCTION: 
Wood backing surfaces may be used in Type 5 construction and shall be a
minimum ½ inch thick.  All types of veneers shall have a backing surface
unless approved by the building code official. The Illinois Energy Code may
require more than ½" for insulating purposes. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



108.   That Table 1405.2 for exterior wall coverings shall be revised to
read as follows:



 

TABLE 1404.2
MINIMUM THICKNESS OF WEATHER COVERINGS d. e, f.


COVERING TYPE
 
MINIMUM THICKNESS (inches)




Anchored masonry veneer (see Section 501.2)
 
2.625 depth


   Stone natural
 
2.0


   Architectural cast stone
 
2.0 as Village revised


Aluminum siding
 
0.019


Cold rolled copper over ½” plywood sheathing (upper Residential walls only
as allowed by ordinance)
 
0.0216


Exterior plywood (with sheathing)
 
½ inch


Exterior plywood (without sheathing)
 
½ inch


Fiber Cement Board
 
0.375


Glass-fiber reinforced concrete panels
 
0.375


Marble slabs
 
1


Precast stone facing
 
0.625


Steel (approved corrosion resistant)
 
0.0149


Stone (cast artificial)
 
1.5


Stone (natural)
 
2


Structural glass
 
0.344


Stucco or exterior portland cement plaster

   Three-coat work over:
 
 


   Metal plaster base
 
0.875b


   Unit masonry
 
0.625b


   Cast-in-place or precast concrete
 
0.625b


Stucco or exterior portland cement plaster

   Two-coat work over:
 
 


   Unit masonry
 
0.5b


   Unit masonry
 
0.375b


Terra cotta (anchored)
 
1


Vinyl siding
 
0.035


Wood shingles
 
0.375


Wood siding (without sheathing)a
 
0.5




 



For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm



a.   Wood siding of thickness less than 0.5 inch shall be placed over
sheathing that conforms to Section 2304.6.



b.   Exclusive of texture.



c.   As measured at the bottom of decorative grooves.



d.   See Sections 501.3 and 1403.8 for required exterior masonry veneers.



e.   See Section 1408 for requirements of Exterior Insulation and Finish
Systems (EIFS).



f.   See Covering Types deleted from this Table. 
                  



   DELETE- Table 1404.2 Specific Items Only - Minimum thickness of
Exterior Weather Coverings



   Deletes the items listed below from the IBC Table:



      - Adhered masonry veneer 



      - Asbestos - cement boards



      - Asbestos shingles



      - Fiberboard Siding



      - Hardboard Siding



      - Particle Board (sheathing)



      - Particle Board (with sheathing)



      - Terra Cotta (adhered) (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



109.   That Subsections 1404.6.3, 1404.6.4, and 1404.6.5 are added to in
Section 1404.6 and shall read as follows:



   1404.6.3  MASONRY ANCHORED TO WOOD FRAME:  Masonry veneer anchored to
wood framing, shall be supported on concrete foundations and shall be
attached with corrosion-resistant corrugated sheet metal not less than 0.30
inch  by 7/8 inch wide, or corrosion-resistant wire ties of strand wire not
less than W1.7 (15.9-mm)  and  the ends of the wire bent to a 90-degree
angle to form a hook not less than two (2) inches long between bends. The
metal ties shall be embedded in the mortar joint a minimum of one-half the
veneer thickness. Each metal tie shall support not more than three (3) square
feet of wall area with a maximum spacing of sixteen (16) inches vertically
and thirty-two (32) inches horizontally. Where anchored veneer is applied
over wood frame the studs shall be spaced a maximum of sixteen (16) inches on
center. A 1-inch minimum air space shall be maintained between the anchored
veneer and the sheathing. Moisture protection shall be provided as required
by Section 1404.2.



   1404.6.4  STEEL FRAME:  Masonry veneer anchored to
corrosion-resistant steel framing shall be attached with corrosion-resistant
ties of strand wire not less than 0.148-inch (No. 9 W&M gage) wire with the
ends of the wire bent to a 90-degree angle to form a hook not less than two
(2) inches long. The wire ties shall be embedded in the mortar joint a
minimum of one-half the veneer thickness. Each metal tie shall support not
more than 2.67 square feet of wall area with a maximum spacing of sixteen
(16) inches vertically and twenty-four (24) inches horizontally. Where
anchored veneer is applied over steel frame, the studs shall be spaced a
maximum of sixteen (16) inches on center and be faced with sheathing (as
allowed for each type of construction in Chapter 6) on both sides. A 1-inch
minimum air space shall be maintained between the anchored veneer and the
sheathing. Moisture protection shall be provided as required by Section
1404.2.



   1404.6.5  MASONRY OR CONCRETE WALLS:  Masonry veneer anchored to
masonry or concrete walls shall be attached with corrosion-resistant ties of
strand wire not less than 0.148-inch (No. 9 W&M gage) wire with the ends of
the wire bent to a 90-degree angle to form a hook not less than two (2)
inches long. The metal ties shall be embedded in the mortar joint a minimum
of one-half the veneer thickness. Each metal tie shall support not more than
three (3) square feet of wall area with a maximum spacing of sixteen (16)
inches vertically and thirty-two (32) inches horizontally. A 1-inch minimum
air space shall be maintained between the anchored veneer and the supporting
masonry or concrete walls. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



110.   That Section 1404.9 shall be revised read as follows:



   1445.9 TERRA COTTA:  Anchored terra cotta or ceramic units not less
than 1.625 inches (41 mm) thick shall be anchored directly to masonry or
concrete construction.  Terra Cotta may be anchored to wood stud
construction on upper levels. Tied terra cotta or ceramic veneer units shall
be not less than 1.625 inches (1-5/8" 41 mm) thick with projecting dovetail
webs on the back surface spaced approximately eight (8) inches (203 mm) on
center. The facing shall be tied to the backing wall with corrosion-resistant
metal anchors of not less than No. 8 gage wire installed at the top of each
piece in horizontal bed joints not less than twelve (12) inches (305 mm) nor
more than eighteen (18) inches (457 mm) on center; these anchors shall be
secured to 0.25-inch (6.4 mm) corrosion-resistant pencil rods that pass
through the vertical aligned loop anchors in the backing wall. The veneer
ties shall have sufficient strength to support the full weight of the veneer
in tension. The facing shall be set with not less than a 2-inch (51 mm) space
from the backing wall and the space shall be filled solidly with Portland
cement grout and pea gravel. Immediately prior to setting, the backing wall
and the facing shall be drenched with clean water and shall be distinctly
damp when the grout is poured.



   DELETE- 1404.10 - Adhered Masonry Veneer as exterior wall finish (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



111.   That Subsection 1407.6.1 shall be added to 1407.6 to read as
follows:



   1407.6.1 SPECIAL INSPECTIONS FOR EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEM
(EIFS): Special inspection shall be required for any EIFS installations
having a total area greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet and shall
be in accordance with Section this section, 1704.2 and 705.15. The EIFS
installation shall be approved and tested materials complying with the ASTM
standards as listed in Chapter 35. When an EIFS is installed it shall not be
lower than the top of the front windows or seven feet (7'-0") above grade
whichever is higher or as approved by the Community Development Department.
For building constructed within the "Fire Limits" (section 503.2) this
material is only allowed over a solid masonry wall material. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 15 - ROOFING



112.   That Subsections 1502.4.1 and 1507.2.7 shall be added to read as
follows:



   1502.4.1 GUTTERS:  Add the requirement (for gutters required on
residential building) of Section 1401.2 as amended to this existing
sub-section.



   1507.2.7  ICE BARRIERS: The Village of Orland Park requires the
installation of ice barriers below new roof types as listed in Section
1507.1.2 of this Code. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 16 STRUCTURAL DESIGN



113.   That Sections 1603.1.5.1, 1608.4 and 1608.5 shall be added to read
as follows:



   1603.1.5.1  ORLAND PARK EARTHQUAKE SITE CLASSIFICATION: The Seismic
design category shall be classified as a group A for building design
parameters as indicated in figures 1613.2(1) through 1613.2.5(2).



   1608.4  FLAT AND LOW-SLOPED ROOF SNOW LOADS:  The snow loads on
unobstructed flat roofs and roofs having a slope of 5 degrees (1 inch per
foot = 4.76 degrees) or less (Pf) shall be calculated in pounds per square
foot using a minimum ground snow load of thirty (30) pounds per square
foot.  Snow drifts adjacent to parapets above a roof shall be part of the
structural design calculations where applicable. 



   The snow load on low sloped roofs having a slope of greater than 5
degrees (1 inch per foot = 4.76 degrees) but less than 18.43 degrees (4/12 or
4 inches per foot) shall be calculated in pounds per square foot using a
minimum ground snow load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot.  Reductions
to 30 pounds per square foot are not permitted.



   A state of Illinois licensed architect or structural engineer shall
prepare all structural design as required by the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulation Acts.



   1608.5  SLOPED ROOF SNOW LOADS:  The snow load on sloped roofs having
a slope of greater than 18.43 degrees (4/12 or 4 inches of rise per each 12
inches of horizontal run) shall be calculated in pounds per square foot using
a minimum ground snow load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot. 
Reductions to thirty (30) pounds per square foot snow load design are not
permitted except for the higher roof slopes as indicated below: 



   ROOF LOAD EXCEPTION:



   The ground snow load for sloped roofs having a slope greater than
thirty (30) degrees (7/12 or 7 inches of rise for 12 inches of horizontal
run) shall be not less than twenty (20) psf. Reductions in this twenty (20)
psf snow load application are not permitted.  Snow loads acting on a sloping
surface shall be considered to act on the horizontal projection of that
surface.



   A state of Illinois licensed architect or structural engineer shall
prepare all structural designs as required by the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulation Acts. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



114.   That Section 1609.3.1.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   1609.3.1.1 RESIDENTIAL BASIC WIND SPEEDS:  Buildings constructed of
residential (R-3 Use Group) use may use the International Residential Code as
referenced in Section 101.2 of this code and allowed to use a basic wind
speed design as referenced in that edition of that code (2018/IRC). Typical
residential buildings are of a "II" Risk Category and have a surface
roughness "B" Exposure Category.  This equated ultimate wind speed design is
of 115 MPH(See 5-1-14, Section 301.2.1).  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



115.   That Section 1612.1 and 1613.1.1 shall read as follows:



   1612.1 FLOOD RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION:  All buildings and structures
erected in areas prone to flooding shall be constructed and elevated as
required by the provisions of this section and Village of Orland Park
Ordinance Number 2028 and 2084, as amended, listed in Chapter 35. Where there
are conflicting requirements, the most stringent shall prevail.



   Within flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, all new
construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and
structures, including substantial improvements and restoration of substantial
damage to buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to
resist the effects of flood hazards and flood loads, unless not permitted by
other authorities.



   1613.1.1 EARTHQUAKE SITE CLASS: The Village of Orland Park is within
the Site Classification of “A” for structural design purposed. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 17 SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS



116.   That Section 1705.17.3 is added to read as follows:



   1705.17.3 FIRE-RESISTANT PENETRATIONS AND JOINTS:  Special inspections
shall be performed for through-penetrations, membrane penetration firestops,
fire-resistant joint systems and perimeter fire barrier systems that are
tested and listed in accordance with Sections 714.2 through 715.6 and shall
be in accordance with Section 1705.17. An approved agency and procedures
shall be as determined by the Building Official as noted in Section 1703 and
1704 of this code's Chapter 17.  Special inspection reports shall be
submitted to the Village of Orland Park's Building Division for final
approval. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



117.   That Section 1705.19 is added to Chapter 17 to read as follows:



   1705.19 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE INSPECTIONS: 



   SPECIAL INSPECTIONS:  Special inspections and testing shall be
required for conformance to the adopted Energy Conservation Code referenced
in Chapter 13 of this Code.  Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
building code official for the building's air leakage testing, duct leakage,
recessed lighting, high efficacy electrical lamps (75%), means of outdoor
air, and controls, before approvals.  See CHAPTER 13 of this Code which
references and amends the "International Energy Conservation Code".



   Approved thermal envelope insulation and equipment shall be inspected
prior to the enclosure of products. See required energy inspections
referenced in Chapters 1 and 13 of this building code. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 18 - SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS



118.   That Section 1801.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   1801.2 DEFINITIONS:  The following words and terms, for the purposes
of this section and as used elsewhere in this code, shall be included and
have the meanings shown herein:



   FOUNDATION WALL: A wall below the floor nearest grade which serves as a
structural support for a wall, pier, column or other part of a building, or
the wall of a basement that resists lateral soil load. Foundation walls shall
be constructed of solid concrete material as noted in Section 1807.1.5.



   RETAINING WALL: A wall that is not laterally supported at the top,
designed to resist lateral soil load. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



119.   That Subsection 1804.3.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   1804.3.1 BACKFILL COMPACTION:  All backfill material shall be laid and
compacted in layers of not more than 16 inches thick. Care must be used so
the foundation will not be damaged.  Wall bracing or floor framing is
recommended before exerting lateral loads to non-supported foundation walls.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



120.   That Section 1805.2 shall be revised to read as follows:



   1805.2 DAMPPROOFING REQUIRED:  Where hydrostatic pressure will not
occur as determined by Section 1803.5.4, floors and walls shall be damp
proofed in accordance with this section including Sections 1805.2.1 and
1805.2.2. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



121.   That Subsection 1805.3.2 shall read as follows:



   1805.3.2 WATERPROOFED WALLS:  Walls required to be waterproofed shall
be of concrete and shall be designed and constructed to withstand the
hydrostatic pressures and other lateral loads to which the walls will be
subjected.



   Waterproofing shall be applied from the bottom of the wall to not less
than twelve (12) inches (305 mm) above the maximum elevation of the
ground-water table. The remainder of the wall shall be dampproofed in
accordance with Section 1805.2.2. Waterproofing shall consist of two-ply
hot-mopped felts, not less than 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152 mm) polyvinyl
chloride, 40-mil (0.040 inch; 1.02 mm) polymer-modified asphalt, 6-mil (0.006
inch; 0.152 mm) polyethylene or other approved methods or materials capable
of bridging nonstructural cracks. Joints in the membrane shall be lapped and
sealed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.



   IBC Code Section 1805.3.2.1 is applicable for waterproofing "Surface
preparation of walls" (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



122.   That Sections 1805.4 and Subsection 1805.4.3 shall be revised to
read as follows:



   1805.4 SUBSOIL DRAINS:  Subsoil drains shall be provided around
foundations enclosing habitable or usable spaces located below grade or which
are subjected to ground water conditions. Drains shall be installed 1 inch
below the top of foundation footing and shall discharge by mechanical means
into an approved drainage system complying with the plumbing code listed in
Chapter 35.



   Model Code Sections 1805.4.1 and 1805.4.2 apply where there is no
conflict with the Village Code.



      1805.4.3 DRAINAGE DISCHARGE:  The floor base and foundation
perimeter drain shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an
approved drainage system that complies with the Illinois Plumbing Code as
listed in Chapter 35.



         1805.4.3.1  MECHANICAL DISCHARGE: When conditions warrant,
the Village may require additional mechanical equipment to remove larger
volumes (gallons) of building perimeter drainage as may be required for
control of ground water. Other means of controlled engineered subsoil
drainage may be acceptable only as approved by the building official. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



123.   That Section 1807.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   1807.1 FOUNDATION WALLS:  Concrete foundation walls shall be designed
in accordance with Chapter 19.  Foundation walls that are laterally
supported at the top and bottom and within the parameters of Table 1807.1.6.2
are permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with Section
1807.1.6.  Subsections 1807.1.1 and Subsection 1807.1.2 are applicable to
this Section.



   DELETE 1807.1.3  Rubble Stone Foundation Walls



   DELETE 1807.1.4  Wood Foundations (Amd .Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



124.   That Subsections 1807.1.5 through 1807.1.6 shall read as follows:



   1807.1.5 FOUNDATION WALL MATERIALS:  A foundation wall shall be
constructed of solid concrete building material (for its entire depth, width
and height) with a minimum thickness as specified in Section 1807.1.6 and is
continuous extending from the top of a footing to at least four (4) inches
above the building's final exterior grade elevations level(s). (Ord. 3910,
7-19-04)



   1807.1.6 FOUNDATION WALL THICKNESS:  The minimum thickness of concrete
foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall
comply with Sections 1807.6.1, 1807.6.1.2 and 1807.1.5 or shall be designed
in accordance with ACI 530/ASCE 5/TMS 402 or ACI 318 listed in Chapter 35.
Foundation walls that are not laterally supported at the top and bottom and
foundation walls that are not within the parameters of Table 1807.1.6.2 shall
be designed in accordance with ACI 530/ASCE 5/TMS 402 (masonry walls not
permitted as building foundations) or ACI 318 listed in Chapter 35.
Foundation walls greater than 3'-0" in height and resisting backfill
material, shall be engineered by an Illinois licensed design professional.



      1807.1.6.1 THICKNESS BASED ON WALLS SUPPORTED:  The thickness of
foundation walls shall not be less than the thickness of the wall supported
above, except that foundation walls of at least ten (10) inch nominal width
shall be permitted to support brick-veneered frame walls and ten (10) inch
wide cavity walls where the total height of the wall supported, including
gables, is not more than thirty (30) feet, provided all the requirements of
Section 1807.6 are met.



      1807.1.6.2 CONCRETE FOUNDATION WALL REINFORCEMENT:



      1.   The size and spacing of vertical reinforcement shown in
Table 1807.1.6.2 is based on the use of reinforcement with a minimum yield
strength of 60,000 psi (414 MPa). Vertical reinforcement with a minimum yield
strength of 40,000 psi (276 MPa) or 50,000 psi (345 MPa) is permitted,
provided the same size bar is used and the spacing shown in the table is
reduced by multiplying the spacing by 0.67 or 0.83, respectively.



      2.   Vertical reinforcement, when required, shall be placed
nearest the inside face of the wall a distance, d, from the outside face
(soil side) of the wall. The distance, d, is equal to the wall thickness, t,
minus 1.25 inches (32 mm) plus one-half the bar diameter, db [d = t - (1.25 +
db/2)]. The reinforcement shall be placed within a tolerance of ± 3/8 inch
(9.5 mm) where d is less than or equal to 8 inches (203 mm) or ±½ inch (2.7
mm) where d is greater than 8 inches (203 mm).



      3.   In lieu of the reinforcement shown in Table 1807.1.6.2,
smaller reinforcing bar sizes with closer spacings that provide an equivalent
cross-sectional area of reinforcement per unit length of wall are permitted.



      4.   Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from the inside
face of the wall shall not be less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Concrete cover
for reinforcement measured from the outside face of the wall shall not be
less than 1.5 inches (38 mm) for No. 5 bars and smaller and not less than two
(2) inches (51 mm) for larger bars.



      5.   Concrete shall have a specified compressive strength, fc,
of not less than 2,500 psi (17.2 MPa) at twenty-eight (28) days.



      6.   The unfactored axial load per linear foot of wall shall
not exceed 1.2 tfc , where t is the specified wall thickness in inches.



      The thickness of foundation walls shall comply with the
requirements of Table 1807.1.6.2 for plain concrete walls.  In all cases,
foundation walls shall be connected to footings with at least #4
reinforcement vertical dowel bars spaced no greater than 48" on center unless
additional or larger dowel bars are required by the licensed design
professional.



 

Table 1807.1.6.2
PLAIN CONCRETE FOUNDATION WALLS a, c


Wall height

(feet)
 
Depth of unbalanced backfill height (feet)
 
Minimum wall thickness (inches)


Soil classes and lateral soil load (pounds per square foot per foot of depth)


GW, GP, SW AND SP soils

30
 
GM, GC, SM, SM-SC AND ML soils

45
 
SC, MH, ML-CL and inorganic CL soils

60




7
 
4 (or less)
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
5
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
6
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
7
 
10
 
10
 
10


8
 
4 (or less)
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
5
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
6
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
7
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
8
 
10
 
10
 
12


9
 
4 (or less)
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
5
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
6
 
10
 
10
 
10


 
 
7
 
10
 
10
 
12


 
 
8
 
10c
 
12
 
12


 
 
9
 
Notes b,c
 
Notes b,c
 
Notes b,c




 



Note a.   For design lateral soil loads and description of soil classes,
see Section 1610. Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil
Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist soil
conditions without hydrostatic pressure.



Note b.   An analysis in compliance with ACI 318 listed in Chapter 35 is
required.



Note c.   Foundation walls shall be structurally designed by a State of
Illinois licensed professional architect or structural engineer.



1807.1.6.2.1  SEISMIC REQUIREMENTS: IBC Code Section Language applies for
wall reinforcement.



DELETE- 1807.1.6.3  Masonry  Foundation Walls             
            



DELETE- Table 1807.1.6.3.(1)  Plain Masonry Foundation Walls         
        



DELETE- Table 1807.1.6.3(2)  8" Masonry Foundation Walls with
Reinforcement       



DELETE- Table 1807.1.6.3(3)  10-Inch Masonry Fdn Walls with Reinforcement 
       



DELETE- Table 1807.1.6.3(4)  12-inch Masonry Fdn Walls with Reinforcement 
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



125.   That Section 1807.2 and 1807.2.4 shall read as follows:



   1807.2 DESIGN FOR RETAINING WALLS:  Retaining walls shall be designed
to resist the design lateral soil loads as noted in Section 1610, including
both dead and live load surcharges to which such walls are subjected; and to
ensure stability against overturning, sliding, excessive foundation pressure
and water uplift. Where the backfill or the retaining wall exceeds three (3)
feet in height, it shall be designed by an Illinois Architect or Structural
Engineer with seal affixed to the document. A safety factor 1.5 shall be used
as described in subsection 1807.2.3 of this code.  Retaining walls of less
than three (3) feet in height and supporting additional live, dead or special
concentrated loads shall also be designed by an Architect or Structural
Engineer.  Example: retaining wall adjacent to a driveway which supports
lateral loads from motor vehicles.



      1807.2.4 GUARDS FOR RETAINING WALLS: Where retaining walls with
differences in grade level on either side of the wall in excess of thirty
(30) inches are located closer than three (3) feet to a walk, path, parking
lot or driveway on the high side, such retaining walls shall be provided with
guard details that are constructed in accordance with Sections 1015.3 and
1015.4  or other approved protective measure.



   DELETE- 1808.8 Exception only - Deletes IBC Table for Prescriptive
Footings (small footings conflicts with amended 1809.8) (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



126.   That Subsection 1808.8.5 shall be revised to read as follows:



   1808.8.5 PLAIN CONCRETE FOUNDATION WALL THICKNESS:  The thickness and
strength of concrete foundation walls shall not be less than ten (10) inches
or that required in Section and Table 1807.1.6.2 where the height of the
unbalanced fill (height of finished ground level above the basement floor or
inside ground level) exceeds eight (8) feet or where the equivalent fluid
weight of the unbalanced fill exceeds thirty (30) pounds per cubic foot or
where the height of the foundation wall between lateral supports exceeds
eight (8) feet, the foundation wall thickness shall be determined by
structural analysis in accordance with ACI 318 listed in Chapter 35. Concrete
strength shall be not less than that specified in Table 1808.1. Concrete
foundations may be cast against the earth only for conditions approved by the
building official.



   DELETE - 1808.9 VERTICLE MASONRY FOUNDATION ELEMENTS (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



127.   That Subsection 1809.3.1 shall be added and Section 1809.5 shall be
revised to read as follows:



   1809.3.1 STEP FOOTINGS:  Step footings shall be tied to adjoining
foundation walls with reinforcement using a minimum of 2 #4 reinforcing bars
or as designed by an architect or structural engineer as licensed by the
State of Illinois.



   1809.5 FROST PROTECTION:  Except when erected upon solid rock or
otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other permanent
supports of all buildings and structures larger than one hundred twenty (120)
square feet in area or thirteen (13) feet in height, shall extend below the
frost line (minimum 42 inches), and spread footings of adequate size shall be
provided when necessary to properly distribute the load within the allowable
bearing value of the soil. Or such structures shall be supported on piles
when solid earth to rock is not available. Footings shall not bear on frozen
soils. 



   EXCEPTION:



   1.   Detached garages for single-family dwellings (Use Group R-3)
may use a monolithic type pour for floors with an 18" deep perimeter
foundation.



   2.   Sheds for single-family dwellings greater than 120 square feet
must use a monolithic type pour for floor and foundation construction. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



128.   That Sections 1809.7 and 1809.8 shall read as follows:



   1809.7 PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS FOR LIGHT FRAME CONSTRUCTION:  See
Section 1809.8 of this amended code. 



   1809.8 PLAIN CONCRETE FOOTING:  In plain concrete footings, the edge
thickness shall not be less than ten (10) inches (203 mm) for footings on
soil. In all cases, a footing shall be connected to a foundation wall with at
least #4 reinforcement vertical dowel bars spaced no greater than 48" on
center or a footing keyway of 1-1/2" x 1-1/2".  See Section 1807.1.6.2 as
amended.



   DELETE 1809.8 R-3 Exception (deletes footings thickness of six (6)
inches)     



      1809.8.1 MINIMUM FOOTING WIDTH FOR R-3 STRUCTURES: For
occupancies of Group R-3 of light- frame construction, the required minimum
footing width supporting foundation walls shall be twenty (20) inches.



      EXCEPTION: Minimum 12" trench footings are allowed for building
additions subject to design by a State of Illinois licensed architect or
engineer and as approval by Building Official.



   DELETE 1809.9 and its subsections (deletes Masonry-Unit Footings)



   DELETE 1809.12  Timber Footings  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 19 CONCRETE



129.   That Section 1906.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   1906.1 STRUCTURAL PLAIN CONCRETE DESIGN:  Structural plain concrete
walls, footings and pedestals shall be designed for adequate strength in
accordance with ACI 318. Residential concrete shall comply with this Village
Code as listed in Title 5-1-14, Chapter 4.



      EXCEPTION: For Group R-3 occupancies and accessory buildings of
light-frame construction, the required edge thickness shall comply with
Section 1807.1.6 (see exceptions for smaller sheds and detached garages not
required to have frost protection (1809.5) as permitted in this code). (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



130.   That Section 1907.1 and 1907.2 shall be revised to read as follows:



   1907.1 CONCRETE SLAB FLOORS GENERAL:  The thickness of concrete floor
slabs supported directly on the ground shall not be less than four (4) inches
(89 mm) except for crawl space floors are allowed to be two (2) inches
minimum. A 6-mil (0.006 inch; 152 mm) polyethylene vapor retarder with joints
lapped not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the base
course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab, or other approved equivalent
methods or materials shall be used to retard vapor transmission through the
floor slab.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      A vapor retarder is not required



      1.   For detached structures accessory to occupancies in Group
R-3 as applicable in Section 101.2, such as garages, utility buildings or
other unheated facilities.



      2.   For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70
square feet (6.5 m2) and carports attached to occupancies in Group R-3 as
applicable in Section 101.2.



      3.   For buildings of other occupancies where migration of
moisture through the slab from  below will not be detrimental to the
intended occupancy of the building.



      4.   For driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork that will
not be enclosed at a later date.



      5.   Where approved based on local site conditions.



   1907.2. LOCATION OF CONCRETE SLAB JOINTS:  Control and isolation
joints shall be provided for all flat work in accordance with Subsections
1907.2.1 and 1907.2.2.



      1907.2.1 CONTROL JOINTS LOCATION:  Control joints shall be
provided for in driveways, patios, walks and garage floors at:



      (a)   SIDEWALKS: Joints shall be spaced a maximum of four (4)
feet for service walks and five (5) feet for public walks for the full width
of the walk.



      (b)   PATIOS, GARAGE FLOORS AND DRIVEWAYS: Joints shall be
provided at maximum intervals of ten (10) feet each way.



      (c)   DEPTH OF JOINTS: Joints may be tooled or sawed and the
depth of the joint can be figured by T/4 (T= thickness of concrete). The
maximum width shall be 1/4 inch.



      1907.2.2 ISOLATION JOINTS LOCATION:  Isolation joints are used
to separate dissimilar construction. Joints shall be provided where the walk
abuts the house, porch, driveway, steps, curbs, and other construction. 



      JOINT MATERIALS: Isolation joint materials shall be ½" thick
premolded joint material or approved equal for the full depth of the slab.



      1907.2.3 SLEEVES:  When a structural column is to be installed
through a concrete slab, a sleeve shall be provided if the floor is placed
prior to setting the column. The sleeve shall be sized to accommodate the
steel column and shall be flush with the finished concrete column footing.
The sleeve shall sit on the center of the column footing. A structural steel
column shall not sit on a poured concrete floor. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 21 MASONRY



   DELETE 2109.2.4.5 (and its subsections) Adobe Foundations.     
      



131.   That Subsection 2111.10.2 shall read as follows:



   2111.10.2 FIREPLACE HEARTH EXTENSION THICKNESS:  The minimum thickness
of hearth extensions shall be four (4) inches (51 mm).



   DELETE 2111.10.2 Hearth Exception only.  3/8" Extension w/firebox 8"
above extn. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 23 WOOD



132.   That Subsection 2303.1.2 shall read as follows:



   2303.1.2 PREFABRICATED GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENT:



   Any floor, wall or roof framing plans that do not show conventional
applications must be designed by a State of Illinois Licensed Architect or
Structural Engineer as defined in The Illinois Architectural Practice Act
(P.A. 86-702, 305/6) and as required in Section 107.3.4. The design of
structural elements or systems, constructed partially or wholly of wood or
wood-based products, shall follow the systems of Section 2303.4 for Trusses
or other design parameters.  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



133.   That Table 2304.6.1 shall add footnote amendments to read as
follows:



   e.   Maximum Stud Spacing of twenty-four (24) inches on center is
only allowed using 2'x6" studs.



   f.   Minimum nominal panel thickness for any application is 7/16"



134.   That Table 2304.8 (3) shall read as follows:



 

TABLE 2304.8(3)
ALLOWABLE SPANS AND LOANS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEATHING AND
SINGLE-FLOOR GRADES AND CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS WITH STRENGTH AXIS
PERPENDICULAR TO SUPPORT a,b


SHEATHING GRADES
 
ROOF c
 
FLOOR d


Panel span rating roof/floor span
 
Panel thickness (inches)
 
Maximum span (inches)
 
Load e (psf)
 
Maximum span

(inches)


With edge supportf
 
Without edge support
 
Total load
 
Live load




12/0
 
½
 
12
 
12
 
40
 
30
 
0


16/0
 
½
 
16
 
16
 
40
 
30
 
0


20/0
 
½
 
20
 
20
 
40
 
30
 
0


24/0
 
½
 
24
 
20g
 
40
 
30
 
0


24/16
 
½
 
24
 
24
 
50
 
40
 
16


32/16
 
15/32, ½, 5/8
 
32
 
28
 
40
 
30
 
16


40/20
 
19/32, 5/8, 3/4, 7/8
 
40
 
32
 
40
 
30
 
20


48/24
 
23/32, 3/4,7/8
 
48
 
36
 
45
 
35
 
24


54/32
 
7/8, 1 1/8
 
54
 
40
 
45
 
35
 
32


60/32
 
 
 
60
 
48
 
45
 
35
 
32




 



 

TABLE 2304.8(3)

ALLOWABLE SPANS AND LOANS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEATHING AND
SINGLE-FLOOR GRADES AND CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS WITH STRENGTH AXIS
PERPENDICULAR TO SUPPORT a,b (Cont’d)


SINGLE FLOOR GRADES
 
ROOFc
 
FLOORd


Panel span rating roof/floor span
 
Panel thickness

(inches)
 
Maximum span (inches)
 
Loade (psf)
 
Maximum span (inches)


With edge support
 
Without edge support
 
Total load
 
Live load




16 oc
 
½, 19/32, 5/8
 
24
 
24
 
50
 
40
 
16 h


20 oc
 
19/32, 5/8, 3/4
 
32
 
32
 
40
 
30
 
20 h,1


24 oc
 
23/32, 34
 
48
 
36
 
35
 
25
 
24


32 oc
 
7/8, 1
 
48
 
40
 
50
 
40
 
32


48 oc
 
13/32, 11/8
 
60
 
48
 
50
 
40
 
48




 



For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.



a.   Applies to panels 24 inches or wider.



b.   Floor and roof sheathing conforming with this table shall be deemed
to meet the design criteria of Section 2304.8.



c.   Uniform load deflection limitations 1/180 of span under live load
plus dead load, 1/240 under live load only.



d.   Panel edges shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be
supported with blocking unless ¼- inch minimum thickness underlayment or 1
½ inches of approved cellular or lightweight concrete is placed over the
subfloor, or finish floor is 3/4-inch wood strip. Allowable uniform load
based on deflection of 1/360 of span is 100 pounds per square foot (psf)
except the span rating of 48 inches on center is based on a total load of 65
psf.



e.   Allowable load at maximum span.



f.   Tongue-and-groove edges, panel edge clips (one midway between each
support, except two equally spaced between supports 48 inches on center),
lumber blocking, or other. Only lumber blocking shall satisfy blocked
diaphragms requirements.



g.   For ½-inch panel, maximum span shall be 24 inches.



h.   Span is permitted to be 24 inches on center where ¾" wood strip
flooring is installed at right angles to the floor joists.



i.   Span is permitted to be 24 inches on center for floors where 1-1/2"
of cellular concrete is applied over the panels.



   DELETE 2306.1 Item ASABE only.  Design Standard for Agricultural and
Biological Engineers (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



135.   That Subsection 2308.4.6 shall be revised and Sections 2308.5.1.1
and 2308.5.1.2 and shall be added to read as follows:



   2308.4.6 LATERAL SUPPORT:  In all floor, there shall not be less than
one line of bridging for each eight (8) feet of span. The bridging shall
consist of not less than 1-inch by 3-inch lumber, double-nailed at each end,
or of equivalent metal bracing of equal rigidity. A line of bridging shall
also be required at supports where adequate lateral support is not otherwise
provided.  Attic ceiling joist and roof framing shall include bridging for
each eight (8) feet of span when framing members are 2x10 or larger. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



136.   That Subsections 2308.5.1.1 and 2308.5.1.2 shall be added to
Subsection 2308.5.1 to read as follows:



   2308.5.1.1 FRAMING OF BEARING WALLS:  Posts and studs in bearing walls
and partitions shall be designed using 2 X 4 studs and shall not be spaced
more than sixteen (16) inches on center and 2 X 6's spaced not more than
twenty-four (24) inches on center. The walls shall be fabricated in such a
manner as to provide adequate support for the material used to enclose the
building and to provide for transfer of all lateral loads to the foundation
in accordance with Section 1604.4. This Section amends Table 2308.5.1 to be
more restrictive.  Utility grade studs shall not be used for bearing wall
construction.



   2308.5.1.2 NON-STRUCTURAL EXTERIOR WALL SHEATHING:  Insulation type
sheathing panels may be applied vertically to wood studs not less than two
(2) inches nominal in thickness spaced sixteen (16) inches on center as a
non-structural element.  Exterior insulation type sheathing shall comply
with the ICC Energy Code where applicable.  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



137.   That Table 2308.6.3 (2) shall read as follows:



 

TABLE 2308.6.3 (2)
EXPOSED PLYWOOD PANEL SIDING


MINIMUM THICKNESS a.

(inch)
 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF PLIES
 
STUD SPACING

(inches)

Plywood siding applied directly to studs or over sheathing


½
 
3
 
16,  24" only if 2"x6" stud framing is used


½
 
4
 
16,  24" only if 2"x6" stud framing is used



 



For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm



a.  Thickness of grooved panels is measured at bottom of grooves. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



132.   That Table 2308.6.3 (3) shall read as follows:



 

2308.6.3(3)
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL WALL SHEATHING a. b


MINIMUM THICKNES S (inch)
 
PANEL SPAN RATING
 
STUD SPACING (inches)


Siding nailed to studs b.
 
Sheathing under coverage specified in Section 2308.9.3


Sheathing parallel to studs
 
Sheathing perpendicular to studs


½
 
12/0, 16/0, 20/0

Wall - 16" o.c.
 
16
 
-
 
16


½
 
16/0, 20/0, 24/0, 32/16

Wall - 24" o.c.
 
16
 
16
 
16


½
 
24/0, 24/16, 32/16

Wall - 24" o.c.
 
16
 
16a
 
16



 



a.   Plywood shall consist of four or more plies.



b.   2"x6" stud framing is allowed 24" spacing (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



139.   That Table 2308.6.3 (4) shall read as follows:



   2308.6.3 (4) PARTICLE BOARD WALL SHEATHING



   Not exposed to Weather, Long dimension of the panel is parallel or
perpendicular to the studs.



 

Table 2308.6.3(4)
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR PARTICLEBOARD WALL SHEATHINGa


Grade
 
Thickness (inches)
 
Stud Spacing (inches)


Siding Nailed to Studs
 
Sheathing Under Coverings Parallel or Perpendicular to Studs


M-S “Exterior Glue” and

M-2 “Exterior Glue”
 
½

 
 
16
 
16



 



(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



140.   That Table 2308.6.3 (5) shall read as follows:



 

2308.6.3(5)
HARDBOARD SIDING


SIDING
 
MINIMAL NOMINAL THICKNESS (inch)
 
2 x 4 FRAMING MAXIMUM SPACING
 
NAIL SIZE

a,b,d
 
NAIL SPACING


General
 
Bracing Panelsc




1 Lap siding


Direct to studs
 
½
 
16" o.c.
 
8d
 
16" o.c.
 
Not applicable


Over sheathing
 
½
 
16" o.c.
 
10d
 
16" o.c.
 
Not applicable


2 Square edge panel siding


Direct to studs
 
½
 
16" o.c.
 
6d
 
6" p/c/ edges; 12" o.c. at intermediate supports
 
4" o.c. edges; 8" o.c. intermediate supports


Over sheathing
 
½
 
16" o.c.
 
8d
 
6" p/c/ edges; 12" o.c. at intermediate supports
 
4" o.c. edges; 8" o.c. intermediate supports


3 Shiplap edge panel siding


Direct to studs
 
½
 
16" o.c.
 
6d
 
6" p/c/ edges; 12" o.c. at intermediate supports
 
4" o.c. edges; 8" o.c. intermediate supports


Over sheathing
 
½
 
16" o.c.
 
8d
 
6" p/c/ edges; 12" o.c. at intermediate supports
 
4" o.c. edges; 8" o.c. intermediate supports




 



For SI: 1 inch = 25.4



a.   Nails shall be corrosion resistant.



b.   Minimum acceptable nail dimension:



FASTENER SIZING



 


 
Panel Siding (inch)
 
Lap Siding (inch)


Shank diameter
 
0.092
 
0.099


Head diameter
 
0.225
 
0.240



 



c.   Where used to comply with Section 2308.6.



d.   Nail length must accommodate the sheathing and penetrate framing
1-1/2 inches.(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



141.   That Subsection 2308.7.3.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   2308.7.3.2 CATHEDRAL CEILINGS:  When horizontal ceiling joists and
rafter ties are omitted and rafters are used to create a cathedral type
ceiling (sloped or flat), rafter ends shall be supported on bearing walls,
headers, beams or ridges designed as beams.  Rafters shall be attached to
the support in accordance with Table 2304.10.1 and metal support hangers when
appropriate meeting Sections 2304.10.3 and 2308.7.3.5. Ridge beams shall be
capable of carrying the imposed roof loads and shall be supported by
structural elements that transmit the loads to the foundation. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 27 - ELECTRICAL CODE



142.   That Section 2701.1 shall read as follows:



   2701.1 ELECTRICAL SCOPE:  The provisions of this chapter shall control
design and construction of all new installations of electrical conductors,
equipment and systems in buildings or structures; and all alterations to
existing wiring systems therein to insure safety. All such installations
shall conform to the provisions of the Village’s property maintenance and
electrical codes, as amended, listed in the Village Code Title 5 Chapter 3
where reference is made in this code to an electrical code, it shall mean the
Village of Orland Park Electrical Code, as amended.



   Section 2702 of this code for Emergency Standby Power Systems shall
apply. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 28 - MECHANICAL CODE



143.   That Section 2801 and its subsections and Section 2802 shall read
as follows:



   2801.1 MECHANICAL SCOPE:  The provisions of this chapter shall control
the construction, inspection and maintenance of all mechanical equipment and
systems in respect to structural strength, fire safety and operation.



     2801.2 MECHANICAL CODE:  All mechanical equipment and systems shall
be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with this code, the
Property Maintenance Code, Fuel Gas Code and Mechanical Code, as referenced
in the Village Code Title 5 Chapters 6 and 7. Where reference is made in this
code to a mechanical code, it shall mean the Village of Orland Park
Mechanical Code, as amended. Masonry chimneys, fireplaces and barbecues shall
comply with the Village Mechanical Code and Chapter 21 (Masonry Chapter) of
this code.



      2801.2.1 HEATING EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:  All shell buildings (with
or without a proposed tenant) shall include a permanent source of heating
equipment for the entire building. When a space within a building is not
served by a central heating system, each separate space shall be designed and
able to maintain a minimum temperature of 55 degrees at an outdoor
temperature of -10 degrees with its own equipment complying with the Village
Mechanical Code. (Ord. 3910, 7-19-04)



     2801.3 MECHANICAL UNSAFE ORDERS:  All existing mechanical equipment
and systems shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the
requirements of this code, property maintenance and mechanical codes, as
amended, listed in Chapter 35. Any such equipment which does not comply with
the requirements, and the operation of which is deemed unsafe to the building
occupants, shall be altered as ordered by the code official to secure
adequate safety.



   2802 UNVENTED APPLIANCES: It shall be unlawful to install or cause to
be installed or use any and all un-vented gas, oil and solid fuel fired heat
producing appliance for use within a building, new or existing, unless
approved by the code official. See other existing mechanical code amendments
which are to be included with a revised adopted Mechanical Code 5-5-3. (These
code items apply until relocated into another section of the Village Code).
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 29 - PLUMBING CODE



   DELETE ENTIRE CHAPTER OF THE MODEL CODE AND REPLACE WITH THE FOLLOWING



144.   That Sections 2901.1, 2901.2 and 2902 revisions shall read as
follows:



   2901.1 PLUMBING SYSTEMS SCOPE:  The design and installation of
plumbing systems, including sanitary and storm drainage, sanitary facilities,
water supplies and storm water and sewage disposal in buildings, shall comply
with the requirements of this chapter, this code, the property maintenance
and plumbing codes, as amended, listed in Chapter 35. Where reference is made
in this code to a plumbing code it shall mean Village of Orland Park Plumbing
Code/The State of Illinois Plumbing Code, as amended in Title 5 Chapter 4 of
the Village Code.



   2901.2 SEWER AND WATER SUPPLY DATA:



   2901.2 PUMPS:  Pumps shall not be installed in any water piping system
unless approved by the code official.



   2902.3.5 TOILET ROOM DOOR LOCKING: Where a toilet room is provided for
the use of multiple occupants, the egress door for the room shall not be
lockable from the inside of the room. This section does not apply to family
or assisted-use toilet rooms.



   2902.3.6 PROHIBITED TOILET ROOM LOCATION: Toilet rooms shall not open
directly into a room used for the preparation or customer seating of food for
the public.



   Plumbing Systems See Title 5-4 of Village Code (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 30 ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS



      (225 ILCS 312/Elevator Safety and Regulation Act.)



      http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=2472&ChapterID
=24



      Also See JCAR which is an Administrative Code: Title 41, Chapter
II, Section 1000 At:



      http://www.ilga.gov/commission/jcar/admincode/titles.html



145.   That Chapter 30 for Elevators and Conveying Systems, shall include
subsection additions and revisions to read as follows:



   3001.3.1 ELEVATOR ADDITIONAL REFERENCED STANDARDS:  Elevators and
conveying devices and their components shall comply with The State of
Illinois "Elevator Safety Act" (225 ILCS 312/ Elevator Safety and Regulation
Act).  Existing and new elevator and conveying devices shall also conform to
the Illinois Administrative Code (JCAR), Title 41, Chapter II, Part 1000.60.



   Section 1000.60 Adoption of Nationally Recognized Safety Codes



   a)   All conveyances shall be designed, constructed, installed,
operated, inspected, tested, maintained, altered and repaired in accordance
with the following standards and safety codes:



      1)   American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Three
Park Avenue, New York NY 10016-5990



         A)   Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME
A17.1 2013/CSA B44-2013) and Performance-Based Safety Code for Elevators and
Escalators (ASME A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07);



         B)   Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators
(ASME A17.3 2005), but only as required under Section 35(h) and (i) of the
Act and subsection (d) of this Section;



         C)   Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway
Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2011);



         D)   Standard for the Qualification of Elevator
Inspectors (ASME QEI 1-2013).



   3001.4 ACCESSIBILITY:  Passenger elevator required to be accessible or
to serve as part of an accessible means of egress shall comply with the
Illinois Accessibility Code (400.310 g)).



   3002.4 ELEVATOR CAR TO ACCOMMODATE AMBULANCE STRETCHER:  In all
buildings at least one elevator shall be provided for fire district emergency
access to all floors in a building. Such elevator car shall be of such size
and arrangement to accommodate a minimum 24 inch by 84 inch (610 mm by 2088
mm) ambulance stretcher in the horizontal open position and shall be
identified by the International Symbol for emergency medical services (Star
of Life). The symbol shall not be less than 3x3 inches high and wide (76 mm x
76 mm) and shall be placed inside on both sides of the main lobby hoistway
door frame. The minimum size to be 2,500 pounds with clear inside dimensions
not be less than 7'-0" wide x4' deep with a 42" side slide door.



   3003.2 FIRE-FIGHTERS' EMERGENCY OPERATION:  Elevators shall be
provided with Phase I emergency recall operation and Phase II emergency
in-car operation in accordance with ASME A17.1/CSA B44 and NFPA 72.



   3005.1 MACHINE ROOM ACCESS:  An approved means of access shall be
provided to elevator machine rooms and overhead machinery equipment spaces.
This means is to be used as a passage way through the machine room to other
areas of the building or roof. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



146.   That Sections 3009, 3010, 3011, 3012, 3013 and 3014 shall be added
to read as follows:



   3009:  EXISTING ELEVATORS:



      3009.1 SAFETY CODE FOR EXISTING ELEVATORS:  All existing
elevators and conveying devices and their components shall comply with The
State of Illinois "Elevator Safety Act" (225 ILCS 312/ Elevator Safety and
Regulation Act) including:  (Ord. 4284, 9-4-07).



   See Illinois Administrative Code (JCAR), Title 41, Chapter II, Part
1000.60 additional subsections b), c), d), e) for existing elevators



   3010: ELEVATOR MAINTENANCE AND ACCIDENTS:



      3010.1 OWNERS RESPONSIBILITY:  The owner or the owner's legal
agent for the building in which the equipment is located shall be responsible
for the care, maintenance and safe operation of all equipment covered by this
code after the installation thereof and acceptance by such owner or agent.
Periodic tests, inspections and maintenance shall keep all equipment in a
safe operation condition as required by this code.  Testing, maintenance and
repairs shall be conducted by qualified maintenance contractors and/or
providers (licensed by the State of Illinois).  Records and  of maintenance
and repairs shall be kept readily available near the hoistway device
including specific details of actions performed on each hoistway device for
access by Village inspectors or agent.  (225 ILCS 312/20&45),(225 ILCS
312/120,c)



      3010.2 CONTRACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITY:  The person installing any
device covered by this code shall make all acceptance tests and shall be
responsible for the care and safe operation of such equipment during its
construction and until temporary or finally accepted by the Village or Orland
Park or their authorized agent for inspections.



      3010.3 MAINTENANCE ITEMS:  All operation and electrical parts
and accessory equipment or devices subject to this code shall be maintained
in a safe operating condition. The maintenance of elevators, dumbwaiters and
escalators shall conform to ASME A17.1 listed in Appendix A.



      3010.4 UNSAFE CONDITIONS:  If, upon inspection, any equipment
covered by this code is found to be in an unsafe condition, or not in
accordance with the provisions of this code, the Village of Orland Park's or
its authorized inspection agent, shall thereupon serve a written notice of
such finding upon the building owner or lessee, stating the time when
recommended repairs or changes shall be completed. After the service of such
notice, it shall be the duty of the owner to proceed within the time allowed
to make such repairs or changes as are necessary to place the equipment in a
safe condition. It shall be unlawful to operate such equipment after the date
stated in the notice unless such recommended repairs or changes have been
made and the equipment has been approved by the Village or its inspection
agent. An extension of time may be secured if permitted by the Village or its
authorized agent performing required inspections. The time durations may be
from twenty-four (24) hours, seven (7) days, fifteen (15) days or a maximum
of thirty (30) days as determined by the Building Official. Equipment
determined to be in an immediate life hazardous or unsafe condition may be
disconnected from its power source hence preventing injuries to the public
and/or employees. 



         3010.4.1 POWER TO SEAL EQUIPMENT OUT OF SERVICE:  In cases
of emergency, the Village or its authorized inspection agent shall have the
authority to seal out of service any device or equipment covered by this code
when, in the opinion of the Village or its authorized inspectors performing
this service, the condition of the device is such that the device is rendered
unsafe for operation or for willful failure to comply with the
recommendations and orders.



         3010.4.2 NOTICE OF SEALING OUT OF SERVICE:  Before sealing
any device out of service, the Village or its authorized inspection agent,
except in a case of emergency, shall serve written notice upon the building
owner or lessee stating intention to seal the equipment out of service and
the reason therefor.



         3010.4.3 UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE OUT OF SERVICE SEAL:  Any
device sealed out of service by the Village's authorized inspector, shall be
plainly marked with a sign or tag indicating the reason for such sealing. Any
tampering with, defacing or removing of the sign, tag or seal without
approval shall constitute a violation and fined as indicated in Chapter 1 of
this code or fines established by other adopted ordinances.



      3010.5 ACCIDENTS REPORTED AND RECORDED:  The owner of the
building shall immediately notify the Village of every accident involving
personal injury or damage to apparatus on, about or in connection with any
equipment covered by this code and shall afford the Village every facility
for investigating such accident. When an accident involves the failure,
breakage, damage or destruction of any part of an apparatus or mechanism, it
shall be unlawful to use such device until after an examination by the
Village or its inspection agency has approved the equipment for use. The
Village inspection staff or its authorized inspector shall make a prompt
examination into the cause of the accident and to enter a full and complete
report thereof in the records of the Building Department. Such records shall
be open for public inspection at all reasonable hours.



         3010.5.1 ACCIDENTS REQUIRED TO BE REPORTED TO THE STATE
FIRE MARSHAL:  As mandated by the 2007 Elevator Safety Act, an owner or
lessee of a conveyance must report all injuries and any damages over
$1,000,000 to the Division of Elevator Safety before the close of the next
business day. Incident Report Forms can be found at
www.state.il.us/osfm/Elevator/IncidentReporting.htm. (Ord. 4284, 9-4-07)



      3010.6 REMOVAL OF DAMAGED PARTS:  It shall be unlawful to remove
from the premises any part of the damaged construction or operating mechanism
of elevators, or other equipment subject to the provisions of this code,
until permission has been given by the Village.



   3011 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:



      3011.1 EQUIPMENT OPERATION APPROVAL BEFORE USE:  The operation
of all equipment governed by the provisions of this code and hereafter
installed, relocated or altered shall be unlawful by the persons other than
the installer until such equipment has been inspected and tested as herein
required and a final certificate of compliance has been issued by the Village.



      3011.2 POSTING CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE:  The owner or lessee
shall post the current-issued certificate of compliance in a conspicuous
place inside the elevator.



   3012 CONVEYANCE CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS AND PERMITS:



      3012.1 APPLICATION:  The application for a permit shall be
accompanied by construction documents in sufficient detail and indicating the
location of the machinery room and equipment to be installed, relocated or
altered; and all supporting structural members, including foundations. The
construction documents shall indicate all materials to be used and all loads
to be supported or conveyed. Documents are required to be reviewed and
approved before permit is issued (See Chapter 1 of these amendments). 
Elevators and Conveying Systems shall conform to the Illinois Accessibility
Code per Chapter 11 of this Code. 



      3012.2 PERMITS:  Equipment for devices subject to the provisions
of this code shall not be constructed, installed relocated or altered unless
a permit has been received by the Village and issued before work is
commenced. A copy of such permit shall be kept at the construction site at
all times while work is in progress. Fees shall be paid to the Village for
required permits and maintenance inspections as established and revised.



   3013 ELEVATOR EQUIPMENT TESTS AND INSPECTIONS:



      3013.1 TESTING AND INSPECTIONS GENERAL:  All equipment and
devices covered by the provisions of this code shall be subjected to
acceptance and maintenance tests and inspections as required herein.



      3013.2 ACCEPTANCE TESTS:  Acceptance tests and inspections shall
be required on all new, relocated and altered equipment subject to the
provision of this chapter and this code. Tests and inspections shall be of
such a nature as to determine whether the entire installation is designed,
constructed and installed in compliance with this code, and shall include all
parts of the equipment and machinery.  In addition, a Full Load Test is
required on all equipment.  All such tests shall be made in compliance with
the requirements of Section 8.10 and the in the presence of the Village, or
by an approved agency as designated by the Village and by the person
installing such equipment.



      3013.3 PERIODIC TESTS AND INSPECTIONS: Periodic tests shall be
required on all new and existing power elevators, and periodic inspections
shall be made of all new and existing equipment subject to the provisions of
this chapter. Inspections and reports shall be conducted every six (6) months
or less or no less than that required by the State of Illinois Statute. (225
ILCS 312/95).



         3013.3.1 PERIODIC TESTS:  Periodic tests shall be made by
the Village or by an approved agency, and shall be made at the expense of the
responsibility of the owner. Where such tests are not made the Village, the
approved agency shall submit a detailed report of the tests to the Village on
approved forms not more than thirty (30) days after the completions of the
tests.



         3013.3.2 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS:  Periodic inspections shall
be made by the Village or by an approved agency. Where such inspections are
not made by the Village, the approved agency shall submit a detailed report
of the inspection to the Village on approved forms not more than thirty (30)
days after the completion of the inspections.



         3013.3.3 FREQUENCY OF TESTS AND INSPECTIONS:  Tests and
inspections shall be conducted at intervals of not more than those set forth
in ASME A17.1 listed in Chapter 35 for elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters and
moving walks.



   3014 MISCELLANEOUS HOISTING AND ELEVATING EQUIPMENT:



      3014.1 MISCELLANEOUS HOISTING AND ELEVATING EQUIPMENT:  All
miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment shall be subjected to tests
and inspections as required by the Village of Orland Park to ensure safe
operation.



      3014.2 CONVEYORS:  Conveyors and related equipment shall be
inspected and tested in accordance with ASME B20.1 listed in Chapter 35.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IBC CHAPTER 31 - SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION



147.   That Section 3102.1 shall read as follows:



   3102.1  MEMBRANE STRUCTURES GENERAL:  The provisions of this section
shall apply to air-supported, air inflated, membrane-covered cable and
membrane-covered frame structures, collectively known as membrane structures,
erected for a period not more than 120 days. Those erected for a shorter
period of time shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Fire Code
listed in Chapter 35 and Sections 3103.0.



   Membrane structures covering water storage facilities, water
clarifiers, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants or similar
facilities not used for human occupancy, are required to meet only the
requirements of Sections 3102.3.1 and 3102.7. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



148.   That Sections 3103.1 and 3106.1 shall read as follows:



   3103.1 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES GENERAL:  The provisions of this section
shall apply to tents, membrane structures and other structures and shall be
erected and removed in accordance with the time limitation as specified by
Orland Park Land Development Code, as amended, listed in Chapter 35. Those
erected for a longer period of time as allowed shall comply with Section
3103.0 or with all applicable sections of this code where Section 3103.0 is
not applicable.



      3103.1.1 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES PERMIT REQUIRED: No temporary
structures shall be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without
obtaining a permit from the code official. Special permits required by this
code shall be secured from the code official. Permits for temporary
structures shall not exceed 120 days.



   3106.1 MARQUEES: Marquees are building horizontal projections over
entrances and shall be regulated by the Land Development Code for appearance.



   DELETE 3107 Signs (Land Development Code (LDC)) (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



149.   That Section 3108.1 shall read as follows:



   3108:  TELECOMMUNICATION AND BROADCAST TOWERS:



      3108.1  TOWER LOADS:  Towers shall be designed to resist wind
loads in accordance with TIA-222. Consideration shall be given to conditions
involving wind load on ice-covered sections in localities subject to
sustained freezing temperatures. Structural Design in Section 1609.1.1,
Exception #5, allows antennas and their supporting structures to use TIA-222
for design. Towers shall be designed for seismic loads; exceptions related to
seismic design listed in Section 2.7.3 of the TIA-222 shall not apply.  In
Section 2.6.6.2 of TIA-222, the horizontal extent of Topographic Category 2,
escarpments shall be sixteen (16) times the height of the escarpment.



         3108.1.1 DEAD LOAD:  Towers shall be designed for the dead
load plus the ice load in regions where ice formation occurs.



         3108.1.2 WIND LOAD: Adequate foundations and anchorage
shall be provided to resist the calculated wind load. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



150.   That Section 3109.1 shall read as follows:



   3109.1 POOLS - GENERAL:  Pools used for swimming or bathing shall
conform to the Village of Orland Park Ordinances and the Land Development
Code, as amended, listed in Chapter 35 and to the requirements of this
section provided that these regulations shall not be applicable to any such
pool less than twenty (20) inches deep or having a surface area less than two
hundred and fifty (250) square feet except where such pools are permanently
equipped with a water re-circulating system or involve structural materials.
For the purposes of this code, pools are classified as private swimming pools
or public swimming pools, as defined in the Land Development Code, as
amended, listed in Chapter 35. Materials and construction used in swimming
pools shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and the Land
Development Code, as amended, listed in Chapter 35.



   Swimming Pool General Regulations are referenced in Section 6-310.1 of
the LDC. 



   3109.2 SWIMMING POOL DEFINITION - See the Land Development Code (LDC
6-310.1)



   DELETE- Subsection 3109.3 -Public Swimming Pools. -  See LDC 6-302 #39



   DELETE- Subsection 3109.4  -See Residential Swimming Pools -    See
LDC 6-310.1



   3109.4.1 POOL BARRIER ENCLOSURE:  See Land Development Code Section
6-310, H - Section 3109.4.1.9 of the deleted IBC code section 3109.4 may be
used for intent, where the above ground pool structure is used as part of a
five (5) feet high barrier in accordance with the Land Development code
6-310-H.  (Amd .Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



151.   That Sections 3303.6, 3306.10, 3312.1 and 3313.1 shall read as
follows:



   IBC CHAPTER 33 - SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION



   3303.6 UTILITY SERVICE CONNECTIONS:  Before a structure is demolished
or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service
connections within the structure such as water, electric, gas, sewer and
other connections. A permit to demolish or remove a structure shall not be
issued until a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their
respective service connections and appurtenant equipment such as meters and
regulators have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner; and
evidence that applicable county, state and any other governing body permits
have been or are being secured from the applicable governing bodies.



   3306.10 PUBLIC ACCESS TO CONSTRUCTION SITES:  In addition to the
protection regulations set forth in this Section, construction sites exposing
possible hazards to public and right of ways require security barrier
protection as determined by the site's conditions for public safety.



   3312.1 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM DURING CONSTRUCTION:  Completion
before occupancy. In buildings where an automatic sprinkler system is
required by this code, it shall be unlawful to occupy any portion of a
building or structure until the automatic sprinkler system installation has
been tested and approved, except as provided in Section 111.3. (The Building
Code Official has authority to allow a conditional occupancy).



   3313.1 WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE PROTECTION WHERE REQUIRED:  An approved
water supply for the fire protection, either temporary or permanent shall be
made available before occupancy or as determined by the Building Code
Official. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



152.   That Section 3401.1, 3401.2 and 3401.3 shall read as follows:



   IBC CHAPTER 34 - EXISTING STRUCTURES



   3401.1 EXISTING BUILDING OR STRUCTURES:  An addition and/or alteration
to any structure shall conform to the code requirements for a new structure
and shall not result in an increase in hazard to the occupants.  Portions of
the structure not altered and not affected by the alteration are not required
to comply with the code requirements for a new structure except as regulated
by Section 102.6 of this code. 



   When existing buildings modify their originally approved Use and
Occupancy Classification(s) as regulated in Chapters 3 of this code, the
revised Uses shall also comply with a building's allowable areas, heights and
stories above grade as noted in Chapter 5 of this code.  These subjects are
used to regulate a building's Construction Type as noted in Chapter 6 of this
Code which are based on an occupancies fire and fuel load of combustibles. 



   These major subjects regulate a building's size based on specific use
hazards associated with the structures construction materials, hourly fire
resistive ratings and fire protection systems when installed. These elements
offer protection to both the building's occupants and the responding fire
service personnel in the event of fires. 



   This Chapter 34 regulates existing buildings, allowing changes from
their original designs, but also restricts the misuse of the code by
circumventing its intent of protecting the public through reduced fire
ratings due to alterations not requiring one hundred percent (100%)
compliance. 



   3401.2 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY APPROVAL:  No change of occupancy shall be
made to any structure which will subject the structure to any provisions that
would place the building in a different division of the same use group of
occupancies or in a different group of occupancies listed in Chapter 3 of
this code, unless the building is made to comply with this code for such a
division or group of occupancies. The building code official shall certify
that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing
building construction for the proposed new occupancy, and that such change of
occupancy does not result in any greater hazard to the public health, safety
or welfare. Any change of occupancy shall meet the requirements of this
Chapter and Chapter 1 of this Code.



   Occupancy changes must adequately address a building's existing hazards
and accessibility before a Use or Occupancy revision.  Design criteria must
include building subjects such as: construction types, heights, areas,
stories, exterior walls, fire hazards, exiting, accessibility, parking,
mechanical, ventilation, electrical, plumbing and energy conservation for a
Use/Occupancy change.



   EXAMPLE:  Building construction using the minimum requirements allowed
for a single family residence then converted into a restaurant (R-3 to an
A-2).   



   3401.3  ACCESSIBILITY TO EXISTING BUILDINGS: Existing public buildings
and structures shall comply with the Accessibility Code as regulated by the
State of Illinois (410/ILCS 25/1 Environmental Barriers Act as amended) (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



153.   That the following ordinances of the Village of Orland Park are
added after the WRI Standard in Chapter 35 and shall read as follows:



   IBC CHAPTER 35 - REFERENCED STANDARDS ADDED TO THE EXISTING IBC



Village of Orland Park



14700 Ravinia Avenue



Orland Park, Illinois 60462



"Land Development Code" Ordinance No. 2084 as amended includes, but is not
limited to:



-Architectural Review



-Concrete (driveway and sidewalk)



-Criteria for Historical Buildings



-Fences



-Landscape guidelines



-Satellite Dish



-Signs



-Soil erosion



-Temporary Structures



-Zoning



Bonding of Contractors, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 1 Section 6



Building and Inspection Fees, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 2



Cross Connection (Reduce Pressure Backflow), Title 5, Chapter 4



Electrical Code, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 3



Fire Code, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 5



Flood Plains, Ordinance Nos. 2028, 2084 as amended



Licensing of Certain Businesses/Contractors, Village Code, Title 7, Chapters
1 and 2



Mechanical Code, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 6



Rental Housing, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 8



Opening and Excavation in any Street, Village Code, Title 3, Chapter 3



Property Maintenance Code, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 7



Plumbing Code, Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 4, as amended (Ordinance #5002)



Swimming Pool, The Village Land Development Code 6-310 and 6-310.1



Village of Orland Park, Village Code Ordinance #2989 as amended



Water Connection Fee, Village Code, Title 4, Chapter 4



154.   That in Chapter 35 immediately after the adopted Village Ordinance,
the following referenced State of Illinois standards are added and shall read
as follows:



State of Illinois



Capital Development Board



Wm. G. Stratton Building



401 S. Spring Street, 3rd Floor



Springfield, Illinois 62706



Illinois Accessibility Code, April 24, 1997, as amended State of Illinois.



Illinois Energy Conservation Code



http://www.illinois.gov/dceo/whyillinois/KeyIndustries/Energy/Pages/IECC.aspx



Department of Public Health (IDPH)



Plumbing Program: 525 W. Jefferson Street, Springfield, Illinois 62761



Illinois Private Sewage Disposal -1996 Licensing Act and Code, as amended



Revise Chapter 35 in NFPA Standards to read:  72-13 (2013 Edition)



The following standards from Chapter 35 are DELETED:     
            



ANSI/AWC PWF - 2015 Wood Foundation Systems



ICC



-ICC Accessibility /ANSI A117.1-03  See Separate Illinois Accessibility
Standards



-IFC- 2015                  Separate adoption



-IPMC                        Property Maintenance Code - Separate
adoption



-SBCCI SSTD 11-97  Roof Clay Tiles for Wind



-IPC-2015                  Plumbing Code - Separate adoption



-IMC 2015                  Mechanical Code - Separate adoption



-IPSCD-2015              Private Sewage Disposal Code (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



   IBC APPENDICES



   DELETE- Appendix A, Section 101.4 only  Termination of Employment   



   DELETE- Appendix B BOARD OF APPEALS (See 5-1-13 Section 113 as amended
by ordinance). 



155.   That in Chapter 35 Appendix C. Section C101 shall add items 9 and
10 to read:



   APPENDIX C



   GROUP U-AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS



      SECTION C101- GENERAL:



         C101.1  SCOPE:  The provisions of this appendix shall
apply exclusively to agricultural buildings. Such buildings shall be
classified as Group U and shall include the following uses:



         1.   Livestock shelters or buildings, including shade
structures and milking barns.



         2.   Poultry buildings or shelters.



         3.   Barns.



         4.   Storage of equipment and machinery used exclusively
in agriculture.



         5.   Horticultural structures, including detached
production greenhouses and crop protection shelters.



         6.   Sheds.



         7.   Grain silos.



         8.   Stables.



         9.   A canopy structure of less than 8,000 square feet
in area that is used to cover the sales area of horticultural landscaping
plantings only; may be considered an "Agricultural Canopy" when horticultural
sales are the principal use of the property. Allowing an agricultural
building for a limited amount of retail (M use group), will not allow the
lesser restrictions of the agricultural use sections to apply were conflicts
may occur with other code requirements or amendments. Example: Allowable
Height and Area, Mixed Uses, Exiting (C102 -C104).



         10.   See ICC model Building Code and Village Code
amended Sections 202, 312.1, 501.3.2, 907.2., and The Fire Code (VC 5-5-2),
for additional regulations.  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



156.   That in Chapter 35 Appendix C, Section C105 is added to read:



   C105- AGRICULTURAL CANOPY:



      C105.1  REQUIREMENTS:  Agricultural Canopies shall meet the
following requirements:



      1.   An agricultural canopy shall be permanent.



      2.   The Village Land Development Code has a separate review
process for Tent and Canopy structures.  The Planning Division's approval is
required prior to the issuance of a building permit for agricultural canopies.



      3.   The agricultural canopy shall not be erected over any
existing public parking spaces.



      4.   An accessible route from the accessible parking area to
the agricultural canopy shall be provided with a minimum thirty-six (36")
accessible aisle inside the agricultural canopy.



      5.   Smoking shall not be permitted inside the agricultural
canopy. Approved "No Smoking" signs shall be conspicuously posted.



      6.   Open flame or other devices emitting flame, fire or heat
or any flammable or combustible liquids, gas, charcoal or other cooking
device shall not be permitted inside or located within twenty feet (20') of
the agricultural canopy.



      7.   4A60BC portable fire extinguishers shall be provided for
every 2,000 square feet inside the agricultural canopy.



      8.   No business transactions inside the canopy.



      9.   Any electrical shall be per Village Code.



      10.   Exits shall be defined with an exit sign.



      11.   No permanent signs permitted on the agricultural canopy.



      12.   Temporary signs shall be permitted per Land Development
and Village Codes.



      APPENDIX DELETIONS



      DELETE- Appendix E   -   Supplementary Accessibility
Requirements



      DELETE- Appendix F   -   Rodentproofing



      DELETE- Appendix G501   -   Manufactured Homes



      DELETE- Appendix G601   -   Flood Resistant Recreational
Vehicles



      DELETE- Appendix H   -   Signs



      DELETE- Appendix K Section 111  ICC Electrical Code - See
Village Code 5-3



5-1-14: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:



The International Residential Code (IRC) is adopted by reference, pursuant to
this Section of Village Code and referenced as 5-1-14 is amended as set forth
in this Village Code (5-1-14).  Amendments to Building construction are
incorporated into the IRC Chapters 1 through 10vv and are used for uniformity
purposes throughout the Village.  Chapters 11-43 of the IRC Code are also
adopted as amended as they relate to Energy, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing
and similar special trades.  The IRC and Village amendments attached shall
not conflict with other construction code ordinances adopted in Title 5 of
the Village Code. The following Chapter and/or section numbers used in this
Village Code section shall refer to the like numbered applications for
amended, added or deleted ("DELETE") sections of the International
Residential Code sections (IRC) as referenced. The model IRC Code Subsections
apply when no Village amendments or deletions are shown.



The Village Building Official shall interpret this Code as referenced in
Section R103 of these amendments. This ordinance may reference the amended
2018 IBC Code (5-1-13) for construction regulations which also apply to
Residential construction. Typically, any Village Code (VC) 5-1-13 residential
regulations also apply to this amended Residential Code (5-1-14) where no
specific amendments are provided herein.  The Sections and Subsections
listed below are added, amended or deleted in the following respects:



   IRC CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION



1.   That Section R101.1 be amended to read as follows:



   R101.1  TITLE:  These provisions shall be known as the Residential
Code for detached and vertically attached single family Dwellings of Village
of Orland Park and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as
"this code”.



   Adopted and applicable to detached dwellings and multiple, vertically
attached single family dwellings not more than 3-stories in height, all
buildings and structures or parts thereof and appurtenances thereof, are
those rules and regulations set forth with particularity in the booklet
entitled "International Residential Building Code/2018" first printing of
August 2017, published by International Code Council, INC. 4051 Flossmoor
Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois, as amended. 



   However, in that the following portions indicated as deleted ("DELETE")
Chapters and/or Sections of this code are not hereby adopted, or are hereby
amended or added to that code as indicated in either of Village Code Sections
5-1-13 or 5-1-14 where applicable. (Ord. 4614 - 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4786,
2-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19).



2.   That Section R101.2 shall read as follows:



   101.2  SCOPE:  These regulations shall control all matters concerning
the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than
three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Residential Code on file in the office of the Village Clerk are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in this Code.  Deleted chapters and/or sections are located
shown in the attached appropriate Sections of this Code, where applicable. 
The IRC Residential code, Section P2904 shall not apply to require the fire
sprinkler requirements in a dwelling or dwelling units unless a code
amendment is specified. (Ord. 4614, 1-17-11).



      101.2.1 APPENDICES: Provisions in the appendices shall not apply
unless specifically adopted by the Village.



   DELETE - R101.2 exceptions 1 and 2 "SCOPE: LIVE WORK UNITS AND LODGING
HOUSES" (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



3.   That Subsection R102.7.1 be amended to read as follows:



   R102.7.1 ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR REPAIRS:  Additions, alterations or
repairs to any structure shall conform to that required of a new structure
without requiring the existing structure to comply with all of the
requirements of this code.  Additions, alterations or repairs shall not
cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the
performance of the building. Any building plus new additions shall not exceed
the height, number of stories and area specified for new buildings.
Alterations or repairs to an existing structure which are structural or
adversely affect any structural member of any part of the structure having a
required fire-resistance rating shall be made with materials required for a
new structure.



   Entire structures shall be made to conform to the requirements of this
code for new buildings under any of the following conditions:



   a.   When remodeling or alterations take place in more than 50% of
its original building area.



   b.   When remodeling increases the original market value by more
than 50%.



   c.   When remodeling increases the total area of the structure by
more than 50%.



   The above conditions shall be applicable to all cumulative additions,
alterations, and repairs completed within a 36 month consecutive time period.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



4.   That Subsection R102.7.2 shall be added to Section 102.7 to as
follows:



   R102.7.2 REPAIRS TO DAMAGED STRUCTURES:  Any building or structure
which is destroyed or damaged by wind, fire or other casualty or act of God,
to an extent which reduces its market value by less than 50% may be repaired
or restored to its prior condition, if a building permit for the repair or
restoration is issued and construction is begun within six months of the date
of the damage.  If a permit is not so obtained and construction is not begun
within six months for such repair or restoration OR if a building or
structure is damaged or destroyed to an extent which reduces its market value
by more than 50%, it may be repaired or restored only if the repaired or
restored building or structure conforms to the standards of these regulations
for new construction.  Market value shall be determined by reference to the
most recent official property tax assessment rolls available in the year the
structure is destroyed or damaged.  The extent of damage or destruction
shall be determined by the code official by comparing the estimated cost of
repairs or restoration with the market value as shown on the tax assessment
rolls of the appropriate county collector or as determined by credible cost
data publications. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5.   That Sections R103.1 and 103.2 are amended to read as follows:



   R103.1 CREATION OF ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The building code official shall
have authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and
general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret
and implement the provisions of this code to secure the intent thereof and to
designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other
conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or
fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this code or of
violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety.



   R103.2 GENERAL DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING CODE  OFFICIAL:  The
building code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of
the provisions of this code and shall act on any question relative to the
mode or manner of construction and materials to be used in the erection,
addition to, alteration, repair, removal, demolition or installation of
service equipment and the location, occupancy and maintenance of all
buildings and structures.  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



6.   That Section R105.1 is amended to read as follows:



   R105.1  PERMIT REQUIRED:  It shall be unlawful for any owner, or
owner's authorized agent to construct, erect, alter, install, add to,
enlarge, repair, convert, remove, demolish, locate, or maintain any building
or structure or any part of appurtenance thereof; or change the occupancy of
a building or    structure requiring greater strength, exit or sanitary
provisions; or to change to another use of change of occupancy or to install
or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the installation of
which is regulated by this code and other codes adopted in Title 5 of the
Village Code; or to move or add a lot line which affects an existing
structure without first filing an application with the code official in
writing and obtaining the required permit therefor; except that repairs, as
defined in Section R105.2 and which do not involve any violation of this
code, shall be exempted from this provision.



   Notice shall also be given to the appropriate Fire Protection District
for any fire sprinkler and alarm system work (Orland, Mokena, or the Palos
Fire Protection Districts).



   Existing rental housing units shall be inspected for property
maintenance and life safety requirements (rental housing VC 5-8). (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



7.   That the following Section of 105.2 is amended and Subsection
R105.2.2 is deleted as follows:



   R105.2 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT Work exempted from permits shall be as
specified under Village Code 5-1-13 Section 105.2 of this ordinance. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



8.   That Section R105.3 is amended to read as follows:



   105.3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT: To obtain a permit, the applicant shall
first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the
department of building safety for that purpose. Such application shall:



   1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made.



   2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
legal description, street address or similar description that will readily
identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.



   3.   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.



   4.   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information
as required in Section R106.1.



   5.   State the valuation of the proposed work.



   6.   Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.



   7.   Give such other data and information as required by the
building official.



   8.   A list of all contractors licensed and bonded by the Village of
Orland Park.



   9.   All permit applications, business inquiries and field
inspections shall use the English language as a means of communication. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



9.   That Section R105.5 is amended and Section R105.5.1 is added to read
as follows:     



   R105.5 EXPIRATION:  Permits for new single-family detached and
attached dwellings must have work authorized by such permit completed within
365 days of issuance.  The building official is authorized to grant, in
writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days
each.  The extension shall be submitted in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.  Prior to extension being granted the permit applicant shall
schedule a progress inspection of the permitted work.



      R105.5.1  INCOMPLETE PERMIT APPLICATION INFORMATION: Permit
applications submitted without adequate information on the application form
are considered an incomplete or preliminary permit application(s). Permit
applications submitted without an adequate plan design specifications or
details needed for construction are also considered incomplete or preliminary
plans required with the permit application(s). Incomplete and preliminary
applications and/or plans shall become null and void within thirty (30) days
of the date received. When the Village completes a plan review and issues
written required corrections to the permit applicant, a thirty (30) day time
restriction also applies for re-submitting corrected forms and/or plan
specifications back to the Village for a re-review to remain an active permit
application.



   The building official is authorized to grant an extension for renewal
only with a written request of the property owner (or authorized agent) for
justifiable causes.



   Preliminary reviews shall be charged additional plan review fees as
specified in the Village Code 5-2-5-1. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



10.   That Section R105.7 is amended to read as follows:



   R105.7 PLACEMENT OF PERMIT:  The original building permit card shall
be displayed in a conspicuous location visible from the street and kept on
the site of the work until the completion of the project. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



11.   That Section R106.1 and Subsections 106.1.1.1 through 106.1.1.4 are
amended and added to read as follows:



   R106.1 SUBMITTAL OF CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:  The application for a
permit shall be accompanied by not less than two sets of construction plans
and other required supporting documents necessary to monitor compliance,
including a statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other
data necessary for code conformance. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional where required by The State of
Illinois statutes. Where special conditions exist, the building official is
authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a
registered design professional. Construction documents shall be prepared
using the English Language.



   The code official is permitted to waive the requirements for filing
construction documents when the scope of the work is of a minor nature. When
the quality of the materials is essential for conformity to the code,
specific information shall be given to establish such quality, and this code
shall not be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent used as a
substitute for specific information.



      R106.1.1 INFORMATION ON CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS:  Construction
documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic
media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building
official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate
the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that
it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations as determined by the building official. Plans submitted
for permit review shall be scaled to a minimum size of ¼ inch equal one foot
for floor plan portion unless alternate is approved by the code official.



         R106.1.1.1 PLAT OF SURVEY:  A recent sealed boundary line
survey with a legal description shall be submitted with every permit
application unless the code official indicates the survey is not required.



         R106.1.1.2 PROPOSED SURVEYS MUST SHOW (PRIOR TO BREAKING
GROUND):



         1.   Accurate foundation location and footprint



         2.   High/low foundation elevations and locations, and
building corners (U.S.G.S. datum)



         3.   Driveway, and service walk, locations and elevations



         4.   Driveway grade (must be less than 10%)



         5.   Top of curb elevations at property lines (extended)



         6.   Grading: Ground elevations at all lot corners,
summits and drainage swales, and any adjacent foundation elevations. 
Grading must be shown with contour lines



         7.   Guardrails and handrails in locations required by
code



         8.   Lot coverage calculations necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the Land Development Code.



         R106.1.1.3 AS-BUILT SURVEYS MUST SHOW (BEFORE COMMENCEMENT
OF FRAMING):



         1.   Accurate foundation location and footprint



         2.   High/low foundation elevations and locations, and
building corners (U.S.G.S. datum)



         R106.1.1.4 FINAL GRADE SURVEYS MUST SHOW (BEFORE
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY):



         1.   Accurate foundation location and footprint



         2.   High/low foundation elevations and locations, and
building corners (U.S.G.S. datum)



         3.   Driveway, and service walk, locations and elevations



         4.   Driveway grade (must be less than 10%)



         5.   Top of curb elevations at property lines (extended)



         6.   Grading: Ground elevations at all lot corners,
summits and drainage swales, and any adjacent foundation elevations. 
Grading must be shown with contour lines



         7.   All permanent exterior improvements



         8.   Lot coverage calculations necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the Land Development Code.



         General note: Remaining IRC Subsections 106.4 and 106.5 are
applicable to Section 106 of this Code.



   DELETE SECTION R106.3.3 "PHASED APPROVALS OF DOCUMENTS".



   General Note: IRC Subsections 106.4 and 106.5 are applicable to Section
106 of this Code. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



12.   That Section R106.6, 106.7 and 106.8 shall be added to Section 106
to read as follows:



   R106.6 PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING SERVICES:  The
construction documents for new construction, alteration, repairs, expansion,
addition or modification for buildings or structures shall be prepared by a
State of Illinois registered design professional. All construction documents
required for a building permit application shall be prepared by a State of
Illinois registered design professional as required by Illinois laws or Acts.
The construction documents shall include the name and address of the
registered design professional and shall be signed, sealed and dated with the
license expiration and dated by the registered design professional in
accordance with the professional registration laws of the State of Illinois.
Plans must clearly detail all structural specifications necessary to
construct and inspect all applications of the architects and/or engineers
design to meet Village Code requirements. Where structural assemblies have
not been provided for, the design professional shall submit adequate details
for a clear understanding of construction application by the installer or
trade professional.  The registered design professional shall be responsible
for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others,
including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the
design of the building.  Construction plans for pre-manufactured structure
elements must be designed by a state of Illinois licensed architect or
structural engineer. The permit plans must include that professional's
signature, seal and date of license expiration affixed to plans.



      EXCEPTIONS:  Single-story residential additions less than 600
square feet in total area or detached garages accessory to R-3 Use Group less
than 600 square feet in total area utilizing only the prescriptive
requirements of the IRC 2015 and where structural engineering is not required.



   R106.7 REVISIONS REQUIRED TO PLANS: Due to additional Village Code
municipal laws and ordinances established, plan review specialists may
require changes to be incorporated into the revised set of plans and
documents prior to the building permit approval.  Revisions submitted from
the original plans and documents are to be identified by means of clouding or
in a written format to reduce the incurred time needed in the permit approval
process.  Revised documents not clearly showing these changes may include
additional review fees per The Village Code (Section 5-2-7). 



   R106.8  PLAN SPECIFICATIONS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: An adequate
amount of construction information must be submitted with exterior structure
permit applications by homeowners or contractors. Village comments are
intended to inform the public of allowable locations, maximum areas,
specifications and the means and methods required for construction’s final
approvals. Adequate project information is intended to reduce costly building
changes by informing owners and contractors of Code approved means and
methods prior to construction. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



13.   That Section R107.5 shall be added to Section 107 to read as follows:



   R107.5 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES CONFORMANCE:  Temporary uses
shall be in conformance with the Village Land Development Code (6-304).



14.   That Sections of R108.1 and R108.2 shall be amended to read as
follows:



   R108.1 FEE SCHEDULE:  A fee for each plan examination and inspections
shall be paid in accordance with the Village of Orland Park's Village Code
5-2-4, and other applicable ordinances.



   R108.2 LICENSING AND BONDING OF CONTRACTORS:  All contractors
performing work in the Village of Orland Park shall be licensed and bonded in
accordance with the ordinances listed in Village Code 5-1-6.



15.   That Section R109.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   R109.1 TYPES AND REQUIRED INSPECTIONS:  The minimum categories and
conditions for required inspection and construction approval, shall be as
those specified in VILLAGE CODE 5-1-13 of this Code as amended(SECTION
110).  (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



16.   That Sections R110.1, and R110.2 shall be amended to read follows:



   R110.1 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND CHANGE OF USE REQUIRED: A building
or structure shall not be used or occupied, and a change in the existing use
or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof
shall not be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor as provided herein.  Issuance of a certificate of
occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the
provisions of this code or of other Village Code ordinances.  Certificates
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code
or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 



   See Village Code 5-1-13, Section 111 of this code for additional
occupancy regulations applicable to all buildings.



   R110.2 USE CHANGES IN A RESIDENCE: Construction alterations changing
the building's original design shall not begin without Village approvals. 
When/where the Use and Occupancy Classification of an existing residential
space is altered, remodeled or changed, plans must be submitted for
approval.  Typical changes may include garage, basement and/or attic space
improvements from storage spaces into living spaces.  It may also include
revising existing building interior walls to enlarge or reduce rooms sizes,
adding a bedroom or changes from its original design.  See Section 110.1
above.  Building Permit approvals are required for these major changes.



17.   That Section R112 shall be amended with regard to "BOARD OF APPEALS"
to read as follows: 



   SECTION R112 BOARD OF APPEALS



   R112.1  MEANS OF APPEAL AND REQUIRED APPLICATION: The owner of a
building or structure or any other person directly affected by a decision of
the code official refusing to grant a modification to the provisions of this
code concerning the manner of construction or materials to be used in the
erection, alteration or repairs of a building or structure may appeal to the
President and Board of Trustees. Application for an appeal may be made when
it is claimed that the true intent of this ordinance has been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this ordinance do not fully apply, or an
equally good or better form of construction can be used.



   All conditions for appeals shall include the procedures referenced in
5-1-13, Section 113.2 through 113.4.2 of this code (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



18.   That Section R113.4 shall be amended and Section R114.2 shall be
added to Section R114 to read as follows:



   SECTION R113 VIOLATIONS



   R113.4 VIOLATIONS PENALTIES: Violations and penalties shall follow the
Administrative Chapter of this Village Code 5-1-13, Section 114.4, 115.3 and
116.5, as amended. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R314 PENALTIES



   R114.2 STOP WORK ORDER NOTICE:  Notice of Stop Work shall be issued to
the building owner or authorized agent when construction work is continued
beyond that approved by the building official or Village enforcement staff. 
Notices shall use common law procedures and citation of violations for
non-conforming construction applications. Any person who continues any work
on the structure or site shall be subject to penalties as referenced in
Village Code 5-1-13 amended Section 115.3 and Title 5 Chapter 2. (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



19.   That Section R202 shall be amended to add "DEFINITIONS" to read as
follows:



   IRC CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS



   BEDROOM:  A room within a dwelling unit capable of being used for
sleeping purposes and having a closet.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES:  The corporate authorities of the Village of Orland
Park.



   BUILDING AREA: As defined in the IBC amendments of Title 5, Chapter 1.



   BUILDING CODE:  The Building Code and its Amendments as adopted by the
Village of Orland Park.



   BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL:  The officer designated by the Village of
Orland Park charged with authority to administer, enforce and interpret the
building codes.



   CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY:  The certificate issued by the code
official which permits the use of a building or tenant space in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance
with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building or
tenant space in its several parts together with any special stipulations or
conditions of the building permit.



   CHANGE OF USE:  An alteration by change of use in a building or tenant
space heretofore existing to a new use group which imposes other special
provisions of law governing building construction, equipment or means of
egress.



   CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY:  The change in purpose for which a building or
part hereof is used or intended to be used including a change in tenants or
tenant space.



   CONDOMINIUM:  A multiple tenant, commonly owned building.  For this
Code's definition, a condominium building includes residential units which
are located above ground based unit(s) and also classified as multifamily
units having a horizontal fire separation.  This Code Section (5-1-14) does
not regulate Condominium units.  See 5-1-13.



   DUPLEX:  One building consisting of two separate single-family
dwelling units attached vertically with separate means of egress to the
public right-of-way for each unit. 



   FIRE CODE OFFICIAL:  The Building Code Official for the Village of
Orland Park or an official as appointed.



   FIRE WALL:  A fire-resistance rated wall, having protected openings,
which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously from the
foundation to or through the roof with sufficient structural stability under
fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without
collapse of the wall.  Fire walls shall not be penetrated.



   HABITABLE ATTIC: A space located below roof rafters and above the
uppermost floor/ceiling joists of a residence having access from a conforming
stairway to a floor level intended for it to use either by walking or
crawling as determined by the amount of headroom. A HABITABLE ATTIC can be
partially or fully furnished. See amended Section 325.6 for “Story”
regulations of this Code.



   PORCH AND DECK: See R403.11.1.1: for more specific definitions related
to foundation regulations.



   TOWNHOUSE:  One building consisting of more than 2 separate
single-family dwelling units attached vertically with separate means of
egress to the public right-of-way for each unit. 



   USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION:  The purpose for which a building or
space is designed for its intended Use.  The Building Code has ten (10)
basic use classifications (A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R, S and U) with some having
sub-categories (22 total). See IBC Code (5-1-13) Chapter 3 for Use
definitions and other definitions applicable to this Code. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



      IRC CHAPTER 3 - BUILDING PLANNING



SECTION R301 DESIGN CRITERIA



20.   That TABLE R301.2(1)  shall be revised to read as follows:



TABLE R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA



 



GROUND SNOW LOAD
 
30 PSF Minimum a, b


WIND DESIGN SPEED
 
115 mph - 3 second gust (Vult)
90 mph - 3 second gust (Vasd)


SEISMIC CATEGORY
 
A - per Figure R301.2(2)

CALCULATED SDS SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY

SDS 0.17g  (A)


WEATHERING (Figure 301.2(4))
 
Severe


FROST LINE DEPTH
 
42"


TERMITE (Figure R301.2(7))
 
Moderate to Heavy (Section R318)


WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATE
 
-1° F (Climate Zone 5A)


ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQ'D
 
Yes (Section R905.1.2)


FLOOD HAZARDS
 
Check flood zone map


AIR FREEZING INDEX (Figure R403.3(2))
 
1508


MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE
 
49° F


RESIDENTIAL AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS (See part of this Code
5-1-13, Section 903.2.8.3)
 
Maximum areas as specified without automatic fire sprinkler protection. See
amended Table 503 of this Code (5-1-13)




 



a.   Reductions to snow load for sloped roofs are not permitted



b.   PSF = Pounds per square foot



(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



21.   That Subsections R301.2.2.7.1 and 301.9 shall be added to Section
R301 to read as follows:



   R301.2.2.7.1  MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION TYPE CLASSIFICATION: The allowable
heights and areas of residential construction types shall comply with the
Village Code 5-1-13, Table 503 and Table R302.1(1), a footnote a (as amended).



   R301.9  EXTERIOR WALLS ANCHORED BRICK VENEER: New construction shall
comply with Village requirements for exterior wall materials and construction
as specified in Section R703.8 of this Code.



   (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R302  FIRE RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION



   DELETE R302.1 EXCEPTIONS ONLY (Exterior walls for building with fire
sprinkler protection)



22.   That Table R302.1(1) and footnotes shall be revised to read as
follows:



TABLE R302.1(1) EXTERIOR WALLS FOR DETACHED AND ATTACHED DWELLINGSa



 

EXTERIOR WALL ELEMENT
 
MINIMUM FIRE-
RESISTANCE RATING
 
MINIMUM FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE "X"




WALLS (DETACHED DWELLINGS & DUPLEXES) a
 
FIRE -RESISTANCE RATED
 
2 HOUR - PER ASTM E119 OR UL 263, RATED FOR EXPOSURE BOTH SIDES
 
< 3 FEET


FIRE -RESISTANCE RATED
 
1 HOUR - PER ASTM E119 OR UL 263, RATED FOR EXPOSURE BOTH SIDES
 
3 FEET  X < 7 FEET


NOT -RATED
 
0 HOURS
 
7 FEET


WALLS (ATTACHED DWELLINGS / TOWNHOMES) a, b
 
FIRE-RESISTAN CE RATED
 
2 HOURS - PER ASTM E119 OR UL 263, RATED FOR EXPOSURE BOTH SIDES
 
<5 FEET


FIRE-RESISTAN CE RATED
 
1 HOUR - PER ASTM E119 OR UL 263, RATED FOR EXPOSURE BOTH SIDES
 
5 FEET = x < 15 FEET


NOT RATED
 
0 HOURS
 
= 15 FEET


PROJECTIONS (DETACHED DWELLINGS)
 
NOT ALLOWED
 
N/A
 
< 3 FEET


FIRE-RESISTAN CE RATED
 
1 HOUR ON UNDERSIDE
 
3 FEET  x < 7 FEET


NOT -RATED
 
0 HOURS
 
7 FEET


PROJECTIONS (ATTACHED DWELLINGS)
 
NOT ALLOWED
 
N/A
 
< 5 FEET


FIRE-RESISTAN CE RATED
 
1 HOUR ON UNDERSIDE
 
5 FEET  x < 15 FEET


NOT -RATED
 
0 HOURS
 
15 FEET


OPENINGS (DETACHED DWELLINGS)
 
NOT ALLOWED
 
N/A
 
< 3 FEET


15% MAX. WALL AREA
 
0 HOURS
 
3 FEET  X < 7 FEET


UNLIMITED
 
0 HOURS
 
7 FEET


OPENINGS (ATTACHED DWELLINGS)
 
NOT ALLOWED
 
N/A
 
<5 FEET


15% MAX. WALL AREA
 
0 HOURS
 
5 FEET  x < 15 FEET


UNLIMITED
 
0 HOURS
 
15 FEET


PENETRATIONS   
 
ALL
 
PER SECTION R302.4
 
< 3 FEET


NONE REQUIRED
 
3 FEET




 



   a.   Detached and attached dwellings are limited to 7,000 square
feet in horizontal projection area per story, and are limited to 2 stories
maximum height if using Type 5B construction type (5-1-13 Table 503).  For
townhomes the area is the cumulative projection area of the entire building
without regard for demising fire walls.  A one story increase (3 stories
total) will be allowed if using Type 5A construction type as defined in the
International Building Code and amended in VC 5-1-13 or if using an automatic
fire sprinkler system installed per NFPA 13D.  Area increases to the base
7,000 square feet will be allowed for automatic sprinkler system and street
frontage per Chapter 5 of the International Building Code as amended in VC
5-1-13. 



   b.   See section R302.2 for townhomes and duplexes demising fire
wall requirements.



   DELETE- Table R302.1(2) EXTERIOR WALLS-DWELLINGS WITH FIRE SPRINKLERS



   (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



23.   That Subsections R302.2 through R302.3.1 shall be revised to read as
follows:



   R302.2 TOWNHOMES:  Townhomes (vertically attached) shall be separated
by a masonry wall or three (3) wall system with the center wall having a two
(2) hours fire resistance rating and shall be continuous from the foundation
to the underside to the fire retardant roof sheathing installed per Sections
705, 706 and 708 of IBC and as required further by this code. The two (2)
hour fire resistance rated wall shall not be penetrated.



      R302.2.1 TOWNHOMES IN PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:  Planned Unit
Developments (P. U. D's) of single family vertically attached townhouse units
(R-3), may use a two (2) hour fire rated non-combustible wall assembly when
located on a lot line between units. Exterior walls when located on or near
lot lines and open to a separate non-buildable lot of at least 30' in width
used as a common yard or open to a public way (street), may have zero (0)
hours fire rating when located within the same P. U. D.



   R302.3 TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS (DUPLEXES):  Vertically attached dwelling
units in two-family dwellings shall be separated by a masonry wall or three
(3) wall system, same as required for Townhomes in section R302.2 above. 
Stacked (horizontally attached) two-family dwelling units must comply with
the requirements of IBC as amended in VC-5-1-13. 



24.   That Table R302.6  shall be revised to read as follows:



TABLE R302.6 DWELLING GARAGE SEPARATION



 

SEPARATION
 
MATERIAL


FROM RESIDENCE AND ATTICS
 
NOT LESS THAN 5/8" TYPE X GYPSUM BOARD OR EQUIVALENT APPLIED TO THE GARAGE
SIDE


FROM HABITABLE ROOMS ABOVE GARAGE
 
NOT LESS THAN 5/8" TYPE X GYPSUM BOARD OR EQUIVALENT APPLIED TO THE GARAGE
SIDE


STRUCTURE SUPPORTING FLOOR/CEILING USED FOR SEPARATION REQUIRED BY THIS
SECTION
 
NOT LESS THAN 5/8" TYPE X GYPSUM BOARD OR EQUIVALENT APPLIED TO THE GARAGE
SIDE


DETACHED/PARTIALLY DETACHED GARAGES LOCATED LESS THAN 10 FEET FROM DWELLING
UNIT ON SAME LOT
 
NOT LESS THAN 5/8" GYPSUM BOARD APPLIED TO THE INTERIOR SIDE  OF GARAGE



 



25.   That Section R302.13.1 shall be added to Section R302.13 to read as
follows:



   R302.13.1  FLOOR FRAMING PROTECTION ALTERNATIVES: Where floor framing
is exposed in buildings without fire sprinkler protection per NFPA 13D, the
building official has the authority to determine the means of fire resistance
protection required to protect engineered wood structural panels and/or solid
lumber framing of less than two (2) inch by ten (10) inch nominal dimensions.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R303 LIGHT AND VENTILATION



26.   That Subsection R303.1.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R303.1.1 BASEMENT NATURAL LIGHT AND VENTILATION:  A minimum natural
lighting and ventilation of two percent (2%) of the floor areas is required
for basements. Habitable spaces in finished basements must follow section
R303.1.



      Exception:  Portions of basements only housing mechanical
equipment not exceeding 200 square are not required to meet the two percent
(2%) natural light requirement.



         (Ventilation Amendments from 5-1-13) are shown for
residential review purposes)



         1202.2.3  ALTERNATIVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION: Enclosed
attic, rafter, and crawl spaces may be equipped with a mechanical ventilation
system conforming to the requirements of the Mechanical Code listed in this
Chapter.



         1202.5.4 RECIRCULATION: Recirculation of air supplied to
kitchens, toilet rooms, bathrooms, restrooms, locker rooms, storage areas,
laboratories, garages and similar rooms shall not be permitted.



         1202.5.5  NON HABITABLE BASEMENT VENTILATION: Basements
used primarily for low hazardous storage are allowed to reduce the required
ventilation rate of two percent (2%) of the floor areas served.



         1202.6.1  BATHROOMS, TOILET ROOMS AND KITCHENS: Every
bathroom, toilet and powder room and kitchen shall be provided with
mechanical exhaust ventilation. Mechanical ventilation shall be provided in
accordance with the Mechanical Code as referenced in Title 5, Chapter 6 of
the Village Code. (Ord. 4694, 12-19-11). Residential kitchen range hood and
exhaust duct must be of a smooth hard non-combustible material such as
galvanized sheet metal, stainless steel, aluminum or copper. All range hood
exhaust shall be vented to the exterior with the joints sealed using a
material that is suitable for a long time exposure. Backdraft dampers are
required to prevent infiltration of outdoor air when the exhaust system is
not operating. Commercial range hoods and exhaust are required for any use
group that is not of a typical single family residential use group. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



27.   That Section R303.3 be revised to read as follows:



   R303.3 BATHROOMS:  Bathrooms, water closet compartments and other
similar rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area in windows of not
less than three (3) square feet (0.3 m2), and with mechanical ventilation
with minimum local exhaust rates determined in accordance with the Village
Mechanical Code. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly to
the outdoors. A minimum of 50 cfm is permitted for small toilet rooms.



      Exception:  The glazed areas shall not be required where
artificial light is provided per section R303.1. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



28.   That Section R303.11 shall be added to read as follows:



   R303.11 SOUND TRANSMISSION:



      R303.11.1 AIR-BORNE NOISE:  Walls, partitions and floor/ceiling
assemblies, separating dwelling units from each other or from public or
service areas shall have a sound transmission class (STC) of not less than 50
for air-borne noise when tested in accordance with ASTM E90. This requirement
shall not apply to dwelling unit entrance doors; however, such doors shall be
tight fitting to the frame and sill.  Masonry walls shall be calculated in
accordance with TMS 0302 or as determined by through testing in accordance
with ASTM E 492.  A reduction is allowed to be reduced to an STC of 45 when
the assembly is field tested by approved methods.



      R303.11.2 STRUCTURE BORNE SOUND:  Floor/ceiling assemblies
between dwelling units or between a dwelling unit and a public or service
area within the structure shall have an impact insulation class (IIC) rating
of not less than 50 when tested in accordance with ASTM E492.



      A reduction is allowed to be reduced to an IIC of 45 when the
assembly is field tested by approved methods. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R304 BUILDING AND ROOM AREAS



29.   That Section R304.4 and its Subsections shall be added to Section
R304 to read as follows:



   R304.4 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLINGS:  The minimum floor area above
grade for single and multi-family dwellings, excluding the garages, based on
the appropriate zoning district shall be as required in Sections R304.4.1
through R304.4.5.



      R304.4.1 DISTRICT E-1 (SINGLE FAMILY):



      1.   One story and split level type to contain 2000 square
feet.



      2.   One story raised ranch main floor area to contain 2000
square feet.



      3.   Two story to contain 2600 square feet with a minimum of
1400 square feet of said floor area to be on the first floor.



      R304.4.2 DISTRICT R-1 (SINGLE FAMILY):



      1.   One story and split level type to contain 1,800 square
feet.



      2.   One story raised ranch main floor area to contain 1,800
square feet.



      3.   Two story to contain 2,400 square feet with a minimum of
1,200 square feet of said floor area to be on the first floor.



      R304.4.3 DISTRICT R-2 (SINGLE FAMILY):



      1.   One story and split level type to contain 1,600 square
feet.



      2.   One story raised ranch main floor to contain 1,600 square
feet.



      3.   Two story to contain 2,200 square feet with a minimum of
1,100 squre feet of said floor area to be on the first floor.



      R304.4.4  DISTRICT R-3 (SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED AND ATTACHED):



      1.   Detached:



         a.   One story and split level type to contain 1,400
square feet.



         b.   One story raised ranch main floor to contain 1,400
square feet.



         c.   Two story to contain 2,000 square feet with a
minimum of 1,000 square feet of said floor area to be on the first floor.



      2.   Attached vertically (Duplex and Townhouses):



         a.   One story and split level type to contain 1,000
square feet.



         b.   One story raised ranch main floor to contain 1,000
square feet.



         c.   Two story to contain 1,400 square feet with a
minimum of 800 square feet of said floor area to be on the first floor.



      R304.4.5  DISTRICT R-4 (SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED AND DETACHED AND
MULTI-FAMILY):



      1.   Detached:



         a.   See Section R304.4.4



      2.   Attached (Duplex):



         a.   See Section R304.4.4



      3.   Attached (Townhomes):



         a.   One story and split level type to contain 1,000
square feet.



         b.   One story raised ranch main floor to contain 1,000
square feet.



         c.   Two story to contain 1,400 square feet with a
minimum of 800 square feet of said floor area to be on the first floor. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R305 CEILING HEIGHT



30.   That Section R305.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R305.1 MINIMUM CEILING HEIGHT: Corridors, occupiable and habitable
spaces (living, sleeping, eating or dining) shall have a minimum clear
ceiling height of 8'-0" above the finished floor (AFF). Bathrooms, toilet
rooms, kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height
of not less than 7'-0". Residential basements shall allow 7'-0" ceilings
having a minimum amount of projections for beams, girders and ducts but in no
case shall any projections be less than 6"-4" AFF.



   See the Model IBC Code Section 1207.2 “Exceptions” for these
minimum residential heights (5-1-13). (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R309  GARAGES AND CARPORTS



31.   That Section R309.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   GARAGE AND CARPORTS SIZE AND FLOOR SURFACE



   R309.1 MAXIMUM GARAGE SIZE:



   1.   Attached garages shall not exceed 50% of first floor gross area
of the entire building including the garage, with the maximum size of the
garage not to exceed 1,500 square feet.



   2.   Detached garages shall also be limited in size based on zoning
district as follows:



      a.   In Zoning Districts R4, R3, R2, detached garage shall not
exceed 720 square feet.



      b.   In Zoning District R1, detached garage shall not exceed
800 square feet.



      c.   In Zoning District E1, detached garage shall not exceed
1,000 square feet.



   R309.1.1 FLOOR SURFACE:  Garage floor shall be constructed of concrete
5" thick with welded wire mesh or fiber reinforcement, and sloped to
facilitate movement of liquids towards garage entry door.



   DELETE SECTION R309.5 - (for residential fire sprinkler required)



   DELETE SECTION R310.5 EXCEPTION 1 ONLY - (basement addition exception
for emergency escape)



   DELETE SECTION R310.6 - (ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS)



32.   That Section R311.7.10.1.1 shall be added to Section R311.7.10 to
reads as follows:



   R311.7.19.1.1  SPIRAL STAIRWAY USED AS AN ONLY MEANS OF EGRESS: For
information purposes, this Subsection has been added to reference additional
residential regulations in this ordinance (5-1-13 Section 1011.10) as
adopted. This referenced Section (1011.10) limits the use of residential
spiral stairways as an only means of egress from spaces more than 250 square
feet in area. A building’s plan submittal must include this design feature.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



33.   That Section R312.1.1.1 shall be added to Section 312.1.1 to read as
follows:



   R312.1.1.1 EXTERIOR WINDOW WELL FALL PROTECTION: Protection shall be
provided at open window wells (or similar) having a fall of more than 30".
See Village Code 5-1-13 Section 1015.9 for a scope of guard regulations which
are applicable to fall protection.



   DELETE SECTION R313 - (required fire sprinkler protection) (Amd. Ord.
5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R314 SMOKE AND HEAT ALARMS



34.   That Section R314.8 shall be added to Section 314 to read as follows:



   R314.8  HEAT ALARMS AND LOCATIONS: Heat alarms shall be installed
within attached garages when accessory to residential occupancies. Alarms
installed shall detect heat temperatures between 175 to 250 degrees
Fahrenheit and shall be interconnected with dwelling unit smoke detectors as
referenced in Section R314.4 of this code.



      R3214.8.1  HEAT ALARM LISTINGS: Heat alarms shall be tested and
listed in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72 for approval. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R318  PROTECTION AGAINST SUBTERRANEAN TERMITES



35.   That Section R318.1 shall revise the referenced Table indicated as
follows:



   R318.1 SUBTERRANEAN TERMITE CONTROL METHODS: Comment- Due to an error
in this publication, maintain this entire section’s wording and only revise
the referenced Table from R301.2(1) to the corrected Table R301.2(7). This
map references Illinois to be “Moderate to Heavy” Termite Probability.
(Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R320 ACCESSIBILITY



36.   That Section R320 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R320 ACCESSIBILITY:  Buildings and Facilities shall be designed and
constructed to meet the Illinois Accessibility Code.



SECTION R325  MEZZANINES



37.   That Section R325.6 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R325.6  HABITABLE ATTICS:



      R325.6.1  GENERAL: Habitable attics shall comply with this
section.



      R325.6.2 DEFINITION: Habitable attics shall comply with the
amended definition in Section R202. In addition, for a habitable attic to not
be considered a story, all of the following conditions shall be satisfied:



      a.   Outside perimeter of the habitable attic must be composed
entirely of attic knee walls extending from the floor/ceiling level below to
the bottom of roof/ceiling assembly. Attic knee walls shall not be on the
same plane as the exterior walls below without at least being offset a
minimum of 2'-0" inside of the exterior wall line below, (similar to dormers
offsets noted in item b. below). Exception: Attic gable end walls may be of
full height when in line with the wall below when the total exterior wall
lengths do not exceed 33% of the attic room’s perimeter.



      b.   Dormers and similar projections through the roof must
have any exterior walls not coplanar with any exterior walls of the
floor/story below, and must be inset at least two (2) feet to the interior to
allow for a continuous roof eve on all sides of the habitable attic.



      R325.6.3 MAXIMUM AREA: The aggregate area of the habitable attic
shall not exceed more than 1/3 of floor area of the floor directly below.



      R325.6.4 EGRESS: Each contiguous habitable attic area shall be
served by at least one (1) stairway compliant with Section R11.



      R325.6.5 EMERGENCY EGRESS: Each contiguous habitable attic area
shall have an emergency egress window compliant with Section R310. If
habitable attic contains one (1) sleeping room, only one (1) emergency egress
window is required and it shall be located in the room. If habitable attic
contains more than one (1) sleeping room, then each sleeping room must have
an emergency egress window in addition to any common area(s).



   DELETE SECTION R326 (swimming pools and hot tubs, See Land Development
Code)



   (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IRC CHAPTER 4 - FOUNDATIONS



   DELETE SECTION R402.1 - ("WOOD FOUNDATIONS" in its entirety). 
   Also referenced in 5-1-13 Chapter 18



   DELETE SECTION R402.4 - ("MASONRY FOUNDATIONS" in its entirety).  Also
referenced in 5-1-13 Chapter 18



SECTION R403 FOOTINGS



38.   That Section of R403.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R403.1 FOOTINGS - GENERAL:  All exterior walls shall be supported on
continuous solid concrete footings, or other approved structural system which
shall be of sufficient design to accommodate loads according to Section R301
and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as
determined from the character of the soil.  Footings shall be supported on
undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill.



      R403.1.1 PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS FOR LIGHT FRAME CONSTRUCTION: 
Footings supporting light frame construction shall be 20" wide and 10" thick
minimum, with soil bearing capacity 3000 psf or greater.  Footings placed on
soil with bearing capacity of less than 3000 psf shall be engineered and
designed by a registered design professional and plans submitted for review
to the building official.  All basement walls shall be designed by a
licensed design professional.



   DELETE TABLES R403.1(1) through Table R403.1(3) for "MINIMUM WIDTH AND
THICKNESS FOR CONCRETE FOOTINGS".  (See revised Sections 403.1 as noted)



      R403.1.1.1: PORCH, DECK ADDITION FOUNDATION EXCEPTION: 



      Trench Foundations: are allowed for small, less than 400 square
foot, 1-story additions which may include enclosed Porches (see definitions
below).  Concrete walls are required to be ten (10) inches for supporting
exterior walls which may include glass and/or brick veneer.  A foundation's
frost depth is to be at least 42 inches below exterior grade level.  Trench
foundations must be flared or belled at the bottom to a minimum width of
twelve (12) inches and connected to the existing foundation walls with re-bar
pins of 5/8-inch diameter to form a continuous foundation.  These pins are
to be placed twelve (12) inches from the top and twelve (12) inches from the
bottom of the new foundation.



      Post Foundations: Are permitted for open decks and porches. 
Minimum diameter piers shall be 8" for decks and 12" for roofed over decks,
at least 42 inches below grade.  Pier foundations shall not be located
within the existing foundation's over-dig unless adequate bearing is achieved
for soil bearing needs.



   Definitions - Additions:



   Porch:  An exterior Porch is a roofed over deck or patio attached to
the dwelling and is open or screened as an exterior accessory use.  An
exterior porch may have exterior walls no higher than eighteen (18) inches
above the floor, with the remainder of the perimeter open.  Open porches are
exterior structures allowing the use of concrete piers and posts sized to
support the deck, roof and uplift loads only.  When windows, glass and doors
are placed in exterior walls, the porch is classified as an enclosed interior
addition for the purpose of foundation design regulations. 



   Interior (Enclosed) Additions: An enclosed porch is classified an
interior addition (such as sunrooms, 3-season room, cold porch etc.) and
requires a footing/foundation to be continuous for perimeter walls. Smaller
single story additions allow the use of a trenched or formed foundation when
additions are considered an enclosed structure (see Trench Foundation
below).  Note: glass installation is governed as part of exterior walls. 



   Open decks: are level floor surface structures built-up above the
ground levels having no roof or walls for enclosures. Decks typically include
guardrails around open perimeter of the deck surface and steps leading to
grade.  Decks with more than 30 inches in height above grade require
guardrails, which shall be at least 36 inches in height measured vertically
above the walking surface. Guardrail opening must have spacing such that a 4
inch sphere cannot pass (B 1021.2 & 1021.3).  Open porch/decks are an
exterior structure allowing the use of concrete piers and posts sized to
support deck, roof loads and uplift only.



   Patios:  are classified as exterior finished ground walking surfaces
without walls or a roofed over structure and do not require foundation
walls.  Patios typically are paved with brick, tiles or even stone and open
to the sky.  Patios are ground coverings for the purposes of lot coverage. A
roof covered patio would be classified as a Porch when attached to a
residence or Gazebo when detached.  Gazebos are limited to 200 square feet.



39.   That Subsection R403.1.4 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R403.1.4  FOOTINGS - MINIMUM DEPTH BELOW GRADE:  Exterior footings,
foundation walls, piers, and other permanent supports of buildings and
structures shall be protected from frost by placement at not less than 42
inches below the undisturbed ground surface. 



   Exceptions:



   1.   Detached garages less than 720 square feet in area, not
exceeding thirteen (13) feet to mean height of roof may use monolithic pour
downturned footing, extending 12" below grade, 8" wide, with 5" thick welded
wire reinforced concrete slab.



   2.   Detached storage sheds not exceeding 200 square feet may be
erected on floating concrete slab. See Land Development Code for maximum
areas due to lot sizes.



   3.   Foundation erected on solid rock.



   DELETE SECTION R403.2 in its entirety ("FOOTINGS FOR WOOD FOUNDATIONS")



   DELETE SECTION R403.3 in its entirety ("FROST PROTECTED SHALLOW
FOUNDATIONS")



   DELETE SECTION R404.1.2 in its entirety ("DESIGN OF MASONRY FOUNDATION
WALLS")



   DELETE SECTION R404.1.5.3 in its entirety ("PIER AND CURTAIN WALL
FOUNDATIONS")



   DELETE SECTION R404.2 in its entirety ("WOOD FOUNDATION WALLS")



SECTION R408  UNDER-FLOOR SPACE



40.   That Section R408.4 shall be replaced to read as follows:



   R408.4  CRAWLSPACE ACCESS:  Access shall be provided to crawl spaces
by a minimum opening size of 24 inches by 24 inches, but a clear opening
sized not less than what would be required to remove and install any
equipment taken out. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IRC CHAPTER 5 - FLOORS



SECTION R502 WOOD FLOOR FRAMING



41.   That Section R502.7.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R502.7.1 LATERAL BRIDGING:  In all floor framing having lumber of 2" x
10" or larger, there shall not be less than one line of bridging for each
eight (8) feet of span. The bridging shall consist of not less than 1-inch by
3-inch lumber, double-nailed at each end, or of equivalent metal bracing of
equal rigidity. A line of solid bridging shall also be required at supports
where adequate lateral support is not otherwise provided.  Attic ceiling
joists and roof framing shall include bridging for each eight (8) feet of
span. See joist framing examples shown in the IRC diagrams. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



SECTION R506 CONCRETE FLOORS (ON GROUND)



42.   That Section R506.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R506.1 CONCRETE FLOORS ON GROUND - GENERAL:  Concrete slab-on-ground
floors shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of
this section or ACI 332.  Floors shall be a minimum 4 inches thick except
for crawl space floors which are allowed to be 2 inches minimum (for
expansive soils, see Section R403.1.8). The specified compressive strength of
concrete shall be as set forth in Section R402. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



SECTION R508 SIZE OF EXTERIOR DECKS



43.   That Section R508.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   R508.1 SIZE OF DECKS PERSCRIPTIVE: Decks which are more than 500 square
feet, or measure more than 9 feet in height from finished grade to the deck
level shall be designed by a licensed architect or structural engineer/design
professional. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IRC CHAPTER 6 - WALL CONSTRUCTION



44.   That Subsection R602.1.8.1 shall be added to Subsection R602.1.8 to
read as follows:



   R602.1.8.1 WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS: Exterior wall sheathing shall be
7/16" thick min.



45.   That Table R602.3(5) shall add the following footnote to read as
follows:



   Table R602.3(5) "SIZE, HEIGHT, AND SPACING OF WOOD STUDS" footnote "d":



   d.   Stud spacing exceeding 16" O.C. shall utilize 2x6 studs minimum.



   IRC CHAPTER 7 - WALL COVERING



46.   That Section R703.2  shall be revised to read as follows:



   R703.2 WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER: One layer of No. 15 asphalt felt, free
from holes and breaks, complying with ASTM D 226 for Type 1 felt or other
approved water-resistive barrier shall be applied over sheathing of all
exterior walls. Such felt or material shall be applied horizontally, with the
upper layer lapped over the lower layer not less than two (2) inches (51 mm).
Where joints occur, felt shall be lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm). The
felt or other approved material shall be continuous to the top of walls and
terminated at penetrations and building appendages in a manner to meet the
requirements of the exterior wall envelope as described in Section R703.1.



47.   That Section R703.3 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R703.3 NOMINAL THICKNESS AND ATTACHMENTS FOR EXTERIOR COVERINGS:  The
nominal thickness and attachment of exterior wall coverings shall be in
accordance with Table R703.3(1), the wall covering material requirements of
this section, and the wall covering manufacturer's installation instructions.
Cladding attachment over foam sheathing shall comply with the additional
requirements and limitations of Sections R703.15 through R703.17. Nominal
material thicknesses in Table R703.3(1) are based on a maximum stud spacing
of sixteen (16) inches (406 mm) on center. Where specified by the siding
manufacturer's instructions and supported by a test report or other
documentation, attachment to studs with greater spacing is permitted.
Fasteners for exterior wall coverings attached to wood framing shall be in
accordance with Section R703.3.2 and Table R703.3(1).  Exterior wall
coverings shall be attached to cold-formed steel light frame construction in
accordance with the cladding manufacturer's installation instructions, the
requirements of Table R703.3(1) using screw fasteners substituted for the
nails specified in accordance with Table R703.3(2), or an approved design. 
All types of veneers shall have a backing surface unless approved by the
building code official.



   See Village Code 5-1-13 Chapter 14 for Exterior Wall amendments
applicable to Section R703.3 and Table R703.3(1). (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



48.   That Section R703.8 shall be revised to read as follows:



   R703.8 ANCHORED STONE AND MASONRY VENEER:  All single family attached
and detached residences shall contain anchored brick, stone or masonry
veneer, with a minimum 2.625" thickness on a minimum of 90% of their first
floor and walk out area/ground level elevations, and a minimum of 50% of all
elevations. Any other material exceeding the 10% for the remaining ground
level wall surfaces shall be approved by the code official.



      EXCEPTIONS:



      Existing residential developments constructed where original
buildings were of non-masonry exterior finishes may permit the use of other
code approved materials under the following conditions:



      a.   Where the building's total floor area is not being
increased by more than 50% of the existing building's floor area.



      b.   Where the building's 50% floor area allowance is regarded
as the total combined floor areas of all additions made to the residence
within a 36 month consecutive time period.



      c.   As may be permitted per the Land Development code for the
Historic Preservation Standards.



49.   That Subsection R703.9.2.1 shall be added to Section R703.9.1 to
read as follows: 



   R703.9.2.1 EIFS WITH DRAINAGE:  Special inspection shall be required
for any EIFS installations having a total area greater than 1,000 square feet.



   IRC CHAPTER 8 - ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION:



50.   That Section R803.2.4 shall be added to Section R803.2 to read as
follows:



   R803.2.4 MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR ROOF SHEATHING:  Roof sheathing shall
be at least 7/16" thick and shall have permanent grade mark specifying grade
and performance category.  Roof sheathing spans shall not exceed values set
forth in Table R503.2.1.1(1).



   IRC CHAPTER 9 - ROOF ASSEMBLIES



51.   That Section R903.4.24 shall be added to Section R903.4 to read as
follows:



   R903.4.2  GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS: Gutters and downspouts, exterior or
interior, are required on all buildings and shall be constructed of approved
corrosion resistant non-combustible or schedule 40 plastic pipe materials.
All gutters and downspout material shall have a permanent color finish. Any
alternative building drainage system(s) design, shall be approved by the
building official with the intent of designated roof drainage locations,
property maintenance and weather protection to the building. (Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)



   IRC CHAPTER 10 - CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 11 - ENERGY EFFICIENCY



52.   That Chapter 11 of the International Residential Code/2018 shall be
revised in its entirety to read as follows:



   N1101.1 SCOPE:  Buildings shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code (Climate Zone
5A), and as regulated by the State of Illinois with the following Village of
Orland Park amendments. 



   This amended Code Section (above) includes the text of the added
“Note” explaining the use of the International Energy Conservation Code
as part of the International Residential Code (IRC).



   N1101.2 MANDATORY MINIMUM R-VALUES: The building thermal envelope shall
meet the prescriptive requirements of Table N1101.2 (R402.1.2 IECC) as
amended below.  Simulated Performance Alternative method of compliance is
not permitted in lieu of minimum R-values for specific components listed in
the amended Table R1101.2



TABLE N1101.2 (IECC R402.1.2)



INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT a.



 

FENEST-
RATION U-FACTOR
 
SKYLIGHT
U-FACTOR
 
CEILING R-
VALUE
 
WOOD FRAME WALL  R-
VALUE
 
MASS WALL R-
VALUE
 
FLOOR R-
VALUE
 
BASEMENT WALL R-VALUE
 
SLAB R-VALUE & DEPTH
 
CRAWL SPACE WALL  R-
VALUE


0.32  b.
 
0.55  b.
 
49
 
20  or 13+5CI  h.
 
13/17 i.
 
30  g.
 
15/19  c.
 
10/2 ft.  d.
 
15/19  c.



 



   a.   R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. When
insulation is installed in a cavity which is less than the label or design
   thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value of the insulation
shall not be less than the R-value specified in the table.



   b.   The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC
column applies to all glazed fenestration. Exception: Skylights may be
excluded from glazed fenestration SHGC requirements in climate zones 1
through 3 where the SHGC for such skylights does not exceed 0.30.



   c.   "15/19" means R-15 continuous insulation on the interior or
exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior of the
basement wall. "15/19" shall be permitted to be met with R-13 cavity
insulation on the interior of the basement wall plus R-5 continuous
insulation on the interior or exterior of the home.  "10/13" means R-10
continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity
insulation at the interior of the basement wall.



   d.   R-5 insulation shall be provided under the full slab area of a
heated slab in addition to the required R-value for slabs. The slab edge
insulation for heated slabs shall not be required to extend below the slab.



   e.   There are no SHGC requirements in the Marine Zone.  (Not
Applicable)



   f.   Basement wall insulation is not required in warm-humid
locations as defined by Figure R301.1 and Table R301.1.  (Not Applicable)



   g.   Or insulation sufficient to fill the framing cavity, R-19
minimum.



   h.   The first value is cavity insulation, the second value is
continuous insulation, so "13+5" means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5
continuous insulation.



   i.   Mass walls shall be in accordance with Section R402.2.5. The
second R-value applies when more than half the insulation is on the interior
of the mass wall. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IRC CHAPTER 12 - MECHANICAL ADMINISTRATION



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 13 - GENERAL MECHANICAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS



53.   That Section M1309.1 is added to Chapter M13 to read as follows:



   M1309.1 UNVENTED APPLIANCES:  It shall be unlawful to install or cause
to be installed or use any and all un-vented gas, oil and solid fuel fired
heat producing appliance for use within a building, new or existing, unless
approved by the code official. 



   IRC CHAPTER 14 - HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCES



   See Village Code 5-1-13 Chapter 28 for Mechanical amendments. (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 15 - EXHAUST SYSTEMS



54.   That Sections M1503.3 and M1505.2 are revised to read as follows:



   M1503.3 KITCHEN EXHAUST:



   Kitchen shall be provided with mechanical exhaust ventilation. 
Mechanical ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the mechanical
code as referenced in Title 5, Chapter 6 of the Village Code. Residential
kitchen range hood and exhaust duct must be of a smooth hard non-combustible
material such as galvanized sheet metal, stainless steel, aluminum or
copper.  All range hood exhaust shall be vented to the exterior with the
joints sealed using a material that is suitable for a long time exposure. 
Backdraft dampers are required to prevent infiltration of outdoor air when
the exhaust system is not operating.  Kitchen exhaust duct shall not
terminate within the building. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



55.   That Section M1507.2 is revised to read as follows: 



   M1505.2 MECHANICAL VENTILATION AND THE RECIRCULATION OF AIR: 
Recirculation of air from kitchens, toilet rooms, bathrooms, restrooms,
locker rooms, storage areas, laboratories, garages and similar rooms shall
not be permitted. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IRC CHAPTER 16 - DUCT SYSTEMS



   DELETE ITEMS #5 AND #7 OF SUBSECTION M1601.1.1:  (Illinois Energy Code
does not permit gypsum board and building cavities to be used as part of the
ductwork system)



   IRC CHAPTER 17 - COMBUSTION AIR



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 18 - CHIMNEYS AND VENTS



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 19 - SPECIAL APPLIANCES, EQUIPMENT, AND SYSTEMS



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 20 - BOILERS AND WATER HEATERS



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 21 - HYDRONIC PIPING



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 22 - SPECIAL PIPING AND STORAGE SYSTEMS



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 23 - SOLAR THERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS



   (NO CHANGES)



   IRC CHAPTER 24 - FUEL GAS



56.   That Section G2422.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   G2422.1 APPLIANCE CONNECTIONS:  Appliances shall be connected to the
piping system by one of the following:



   1.   Rigid metallic pipe and fittings Corrugated stainless steel
tubing (CSST), where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and by an approved installer. 



   2.   Listed and labeled appliance connectors in compliance with ANSI
Z21.24 installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
Appliance connectors are only allowed for appliances requiring the flexible
connection for installation, servicing, or removal of the appliance. 
Appliance connectors are not allowed for permanent appliances such as water
heaters, furnaces, boilers, fireplaces.



   3.   Listed and labeled outdoor appliance connectors in compliance
with ANSI Z21.75/CSA 6.27 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.



   DELETE SECTION G2425.8 Appliances Not Required to be Vented - ITEMS #1,
2, 3 and 4 ONLY These four (4) items (rooms), are required to be vented (Amd.
Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   DELETE SECTION G2445 IN ITS ENTIRTEY ("UNVENTED ROOM HEATERS").



   IRC CHAPTERS 25-32 - PLUMBING CODE



57.   That ICC Chapters 25-32 are deleted (ICC - PLUMBING CODE) and
Section added to read as follows:



   P2505.1 VILLAGE PLUMBING CODE: The design and installation of plumbing
systems, including sanitary and storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water
supplies and storm water and sewage disposal in buildings, shall comply with
the requirements of the 2014 Illinois Plumbing Code as amended  by the
Village of Orland Park in section 5-1-4 of Village Code. (Ordinance 5002)



   IRC CHAPTER 33 - STORM DRAINAGE



58.   That Section P3301.2, P3302.1 and Subsection P3303.1.2 shall be
added to Chapter 33 and read as follows:



   P3301.2 SITE ENGINEERING: Prior to requesting a final inspection for
occupancy, site drainage and grade elevations shall be as approved by the
Village of Orland Park’s Engineering Division.



   P3302.1 SUBSOIL DRAINS:  Subsoil drains shall discharge no closer than
ten (10) feet from any property line, and shall not create a nuisance to
adjacent properties or the public right of way. 



   P3303.1.2 SUMP PIT:  Sump pit shall be 30" deep and top of sump pit
shall extend 2" above adjacent floor finish. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



   IRC CHAPTERS 34-43- ELECTRICAL CODE



59.   That ICC Chapters 34-43 are deleted with revised Sections to read as
follows:



   R3401.1 ELECTRICAL CODE:  The design and installation of electrical
systems and equipment, including services, power distribution systems,
fixtures, appliances, devices and appurtenances, shall comply with the
requirements of the 2014 National Electrical Code as amended by the Village
of Orland Park in section 5-1-3 of Village Code.



      R3401.1.1 ELECTRICAL SUBJECTS SCOPE: The building official and
Electrical Inspector may use the IRC Electrical Chapters for the explanation
of subject matters to convey terms where needed to express compliance with
the Village Electrical Code. (Amd. Ord. 5418, 7-1-19)



5-1-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:



   Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct,
alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the code official, or a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties and fines as described
in the Village Code, Title 1, Chapter 4 or penalties as identified by more
specific ordinances.



   Work Begun Without a Proper Permit: When work has begun or is completed
without a proper permit having been obtained, the fee for required
inspections and plan reviews shall be as set forth in the Village Code, Title
5, Chapter 2, Section 14 ("WORK BEGUN WITHOUT A PERMIT").



   Unlawful Continuance and Stop Work Order: Any person who shall continue
any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable and subject to the maximum
penalty as described in the Village Code, Title 1, Chapter 4, in addition to
penalties specified in other code sections or as specified by other adopted
ordinances.



   Work Continued Beyond a Foundation Permit: When a permit has been
issued for the foundation portion of a building only and construction has
proceeded above the foundation (or ground level of the building) prior to the
full building permit being issued, a penalty shall be charged for each day
work has continued before the permit has been approved and issued by the
building official as listed below:



   1st offense: "Stop Work" order and a fee of $500.00 with the allowance
to remove any hazardous work conditions for that workday.



   Additional offenses: "Stop Work" order and a fee of $1,000.00 with the
allowance to remove any hazardous work conditions for that workday.



   Building or Tenant Spaces Occupied Without Approval: As referenced in
Title 5, Chapter 1, Section 4 of this code (5-1-4) any building owner or
tenant who violates and/or occupies a building, structure or a part thereof
prior to an approval by the building official shall pay a fine according to
the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.  Each day of
non-conforming occupancy without an approval by the building official shall
constitute a separate violation.  (See VC 1-4 and 5-2-14 referencing other
fines and penalties.)



   Severability: In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction may
declare that any provision or part of a provision of this Ordinance is void
or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions and parts of provisions not
ruled void or unconstitutional shall continue in full force and effect.



   Construction Not Completed: Inspection requests submitted to the
Village prior to stages of work being completed by the owner, agent, builder,
or contractor are subject to re-inspection fees (5-2-7-5).  Construction
field management is not performed by Village Staff.



   Execution: The provisions of this ordinance shall at all times be the
duty of the building's owner, agent and/or contractors to regularly request
inspections of the construction activities for code conformance and to see
the same are being conducted and operated in accordance with the requirements
of all Village laws and ordinances applicable thereto.



   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or
fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt
the offender from compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.



(Entire Chapter redone - Ord. 3723, 1-20-03; Amd. Ord. 4223, 2-19-07; Amd.
Ord. 4342, 3-3-08; Amd. Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4786, 2-4-13; Amd. Ord.
4820, 6-3-13; Amd. Ord. 4978, 4-6-15; Amd. Ord. 4987, 5-4-15; Amd. Ord. 5032,
11-2-15; Amd. Ord. 5105, 6-20-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5418,
7-1-19)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES



SECTION:



5-2-1:   Permit Required



5-2-2:   Application for Permits



5-2-3:   Plans and Specifications



5-2-4:   Permit and Inspection Fees Required



5-2-5:   Plan Review Fees



5-2-5-1:   Preliminary Plan Review



5-2-5-2:   Final Plan Review Fees



5-2-5-3:   Re-review Fees



5-2-5-4:   Applicable Plan



5-2-5-5:   Additional and/or Exceptional Plan Reviews



5-2-6:   Zoning Permit Fees



5-2-7:   Building Permit and Inspection Fees



5-2-7-1:   Fixed Fee Permits (small improvements)



5-2-7-2:   Fees for Repair or Remodeling by an existing tenant (deleted by
5293, 4-16-18)



5-2-7-3:   Building Inspection Fees for Construction, Additions and
Alterations of Residential or Commercial Buildings or Structures



5-2-7-4:   State Of Illinois Mandated Code Inspection Fees



5-2-7-5:   Additional Fees



5-2-7-6:   Electrical Inspection Fees



5-2-7-7:   Plumbing Inspections Fees



5-2-7-8:   Mechanical Inspection Fees



5-2-7-9:   Health Inspection Fees



5-2-7-10:   Miscellaneous Fees



5-2-8:   Water and Sewer Tap-on Fees



5-2-8-1:   Water Fees



5-2-8-2:   Sewer Fees



5-2-9:   Certificate of Occupancy Fees



5-2-10:   Refunds



5-2-11:   Compliance to Permit



5-2-12:   Termination of Permits



5-2-13:   Renewal of Permits



5-2-14:   Work Begun Without a Permit



5-2-1:  PERMIT REQUIRED:



   No person shall construct, erect, alter, install, add to, enlarge,
repair, convert, remove, demolish, use, locate, occupy or maintain a building
or structure or any part or appurtenance thereof, or alter the use of any
building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof, on any real estate
within the limits of the Village without first obtaining a separate building
permit for each such building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof
from the Development Services Department.  (Ord. 1084, 3-9-81)



5-2-2:  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:



   The owner or his agent of said real estate shall make application to
the Development Services Department for said permit as above set forth and
shall file with the Building Director a written application on a form
furnished by said Development Services Department showing the name of the
owner of the real estate, or his agent, the name of the contractor or
contractors, if any, the location of the proposed building or buildings to be
constructed, erected, altered, installed, added to, enlarged, repaired,
converted, removed or demolished, the nature of the proposed construction,
alteration or repairs.  Said application shall also contain an undertaking
by the owner or his agent or the contractor that if the permit is granted,
the work will be done in accordance with the plans and specifications, the
provisions of the permit and all pertinent ordinances of the Village.  The
application, except for repairs to demolish or removal of a building, shall
be accompanied by a plat of survey made by a registered land surveyor.  It
shall show the location of the proposed building or structure or the proposed
alteration on the real estate and complete plans and specifications for said
construction shall be furnished with the application.  The Development
Services Department shall examine the application, along with a survey, if
any, all plans and specifications and in the event that the said proposed
construction, direction, ordinance, installation, addition, enlargement,
conversion, repair, removal or demolition of said building or any part
thereof conforms to all requirements of those pertinent ordinances of the
Village, shall approve the issuance of a building permit for said building. 
If, after the Development Services Department shall issue said building
permit a contractor and/or subcontractor, shall be employed in the
construction of said building whose name is different than that furnished on
said application, the owner and/or his agent shall provide the Development
Services Department with the name of that newly employed contractor and/or
subcontractor.  (Ord. 932, 3-26-79; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09)



   In those instances where the request for a building permit relates to a
business, commercial or industrial use for all or part of the real estate
described in the permit application, the building permit shall not be issued
until the Development Services Department shall approve the site plan and
utilities.  (Ord. 764, 5-23-77; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09)



5-2-3:  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:



   Plans and specifications filed with an application shall be filed in
duplicate.  Plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth inch
(1/8") to the foot, except that for sheds or private garages not more than
twelve feet (12') high and of not more than two hundred fifty (250) square
feet in area and for ordinary alterations and repairs, scale drawings shall
not be required.  The plans shall show the location of all sources of water
and sewage disposal facilities, the location, character and connection of
plumbing and electrical fixtures, the location and dimensions of the
foundation, basement or cellar, and of all floors and of the roof, and also
show the elevation.  Said plans shall also show the means by which storm
water shall be drained from said real estate.



   All plans and specifications shall be approved by the Building Director
and each sheet thereof shall be so stamped before a permit is issued in
connection therewith.



   No plans and specifications shall be approved for a permit unless such
plans are signed and sealed either by an architect licensed to practice
architecture by the Illinois Architectural Act or by a structural engineer
licensed to practice structural engineering by the Illinois Structural
Engineering Act.  (225 ILCS 305/1 et seq. and 225 ILCS 340/1 et seq.) 
(Ord. 330, 7-25-66; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09)



   All fire protection system plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
Development Services Department. See Section 5-2-5-2).  (Ord. 4491,
6-15-09)   



5-2-4:  PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES REQUIRED:



   Every applicant for a permit from the Village of Orland Park
Development Services Department shall, prior to receiving a permit, pay such
of the following fees as are applicable to said permit. (Ord. 4491, 6-15-09)



5-2-5:  PLAN REVIEW FEES:



5-2-5-1:  PRELIMINARY PLAN REVIEW:



   May be performed when requested for fees herein established for full
and final plan review.  Fees paid for preliminary review will not be
credited toward the cost of final plan review. Preliminary Plan Review
results will not be transmitted to the submitter of the plans until the
required fee has been paid.  (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03)



5-2-5-2:  FINAL PLAN REVIEW FEES SHALL BE AS FOLLOWS: 



   a.   New Single Family Residence
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------$420.00



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   b.   New Single Family Residential energy reviews required per
Illinois Code ----------------------------------------------------$75.00



(Ord. 4614, 1-17-11)



   c.   Single Family Additions and remodeling, when adding less than
50% to the floor area of the residence -------------------- $150.00



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   c.   1.   Plan reviews for interior alteration to single family,
attached single family and multifamily residential units with alterations /
renovation area < 200 sq.ft. total
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------$7
5.00



Note: All required plumbing, mechanical, electrical and building inspection
fees remain as scheduled in this chapter.



(Amd. Ord. 5293, 4-16-18)



   d.   Single Family Addition energy reviews per state of Illinois
Code ---------------------------------------------------------------- $75.00



(Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   e.   Commercial construction, including remodeling for tenant
spaces. (see note):



 




Volume (cubic feet)

 

Basic Review




0 through  20,000

 

$220.00




20,001 - - - -  40,000

 

$318.00




40,001 - - - -  60,000

 

$420.00




60,001 - - - -  80,000

 

$528.00




80,001 - - - -  100,000

 

$630.00




100,001 - - -  150,000

 

$732.00




150,001 - - -  200,000

 

$912.00




Over 200,000 - - - -

 
$912.00 plus $15.00 per each 10,000 cu. ft Over 200,000 cu. ft.




 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd.
Ord. 5293, 4-16-18)



   Note:



   •   Assembly, Institutional and Mall building reviews are 1.5
times the base fee schedule.



   •   Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, Energy, Accessibility,
Health and Fire Code (Table f.) review fees (when required) are each 30% of a
building plan review fee but not less than $125.00 each.



   •   Minimum plan review fee for commercial permits/projects
submitted not requiring plans shall be min. $180.00.



(Ord. 3450, 12-4-00; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4614, 1/17/11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5293, 4-16-18; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



   f.   Fire Sprinkler Plan Review Fee:



 


Number of Sprinkler Heads

 

Review Fees




0 - 25

 

$150.00




25 - 50

 

$200.00




51 - 100

 

$350.00




Over 100

 

$1.00/sprinkler head over 100 heads




Fire Pumps

 

$90.00 per pump




Standpipe systems

 

$90.00 per each vertical or horizontal standpipe




 



(Ord. 4614, 1/17/11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5293, 4-16-18)



   f1.    Fire Alarm Plan Review Fee:



 


Square Feet

 

Review Fees




0 - 10,000

 

$250.00




For ea. additional 10,000 sq. ft.

 

$150.00




 



(Ord. 4614, 1/17/11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   f2.   Kitchen Hood, Duct and Suppression Plan Review Fee
----------------------------- $200.00 per system



   or 12' of hood length.



   f3.   High Piled Rack Storage with a product height over twelve feet
(12')



      Plan Review Fee
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------- $200.00



   f4.   Hazardous Materials Plan Review Fee
----------------------------------------------------------- $200.00



   f4.1   Hazardous Material Inspection Fee
--------------------------------------------------------------- $90.00



   f5.   Miscellaneous Fire Plan Review Fee:  (Includes Spray Booths
and



      Clean Agent Systems)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- $200.00



   f6.   Field Inspections, Maintenance and Acceptance Testing of Fire
protection Systems shall be by the appropriate Fire Protection District.



   f7.   LP-gas containers awaiting use or resale Plan Review Fee:
-------------------------------- $90.00



   f7.1   LP-gas containers awaiting use or resale Inspection Fee:
----------------------------------- $90.00



   f7.2   Annual permit required for LP-gas containers/ or lockers use
or resale: ------------ $90.00/container



(Ord. 4491, 6-15-09; Amd. Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd.
Ord. 5293, 4-16-18)



5-2-5-3:  RE-REVIEW FEES:



   Re-review fees after the second review are based on $60.00 for
residential 1 and 2 family reviews per hour or fractions thereof. Commercial
re-review fees after the second review are based on $90.00. (Ord. 3819,
10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09; Amd. Ord. 5247,
12-4-17)



5-2-5-4:  APPLICABLE PLAN:



   Applicable plan review fees shall be paid whether or not a permit is
issued, and even when a permit request is withdrawn, if the review has been
performed.



5-2-5-5:  ADDITIONAL AND/OR EXCEPTIONAL PLAN REVIEWS:



   When additional and/or exceptional plan reviews are required which are
not performed by Village personnel, those review expenses shall also be paid
by the applicant, including the cost of sending plans to an outside plan
review service.  A 10% fee shall be added to an outside plan review service
fee for Village staff processing.  (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03)



5-2-6:  ZONING PERMIT FEES: 



   A fee of $75.00 to verify zoning compliance shall be required for (1)
all residential new construction; (2) all non-residential new construction,
alteration or repair of existing buildings, change of use or occupancy; and
(3) any change of use from residential to commercial.  (Ord. 4491, 6-15-09;
Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



5-2-7:  BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:



5-2-7-1:  FIXED FEE PERMITS (small improvements): 



   For installation of an approved rain detection devise on an existing
lawn sprinkler system without such a device, a permit must be obtained, but
there shall be no permit fee.  For miscellaneous construction as listed
below, the fee shall be $75.00 or as listed.  (Ord. 3704, 11-4-02; Amd. Ord.
3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord.
5247, 12-4-17)



   Fixed Fees Table



 

 

Inspection Type

 

# Inspections

 

Fee

 

Plan Review

 

Total






1

 
Concrete & brick patios, stoops, steps (installation and repair)
 

2 (pre-pour & final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 

N.A.

 

$150.00




2

 
Deck (proposed & replace)
 

3



(pre-pour, rough & final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 

$125.00

 

$350.00




3

 
Deck (Repair) (gaurdrails, decking only)
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




3.1

 
Deck (Repair) (Joist, girders, columns)
 

2 (rough & final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 

N.A.

 

$150.00




4

 
Shed
 

2 (pre-pour & final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 

N.A.

 

$150.00




5.1

 
Install above ground pool
 

1 (final)

 

$100.00

 

N.A.

 

$100.00




5.2

 
If electric heater added
 

2 (underground, final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 


 

$175.00




5.3

 
Demolition of existing pools (above grade)
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




5.4

 
Demolition of existing pools (below grade)
 

1 (final)

 

$90.00

 

N.A.

 

$90.00




6

 
Fence
 

1 (final)

 

$100.00

 

N.A.

 

$100.00




7

 
Driveway
 

1 (final) & (base)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$150.00




8

 
Roof (New or reroof)
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




Note

 
Village inspectors provide final inspection only. IBC section 110.1 does not
require roof installation inspections in terms of attachment or fasteners.



9

 
HVAC equipment

(individual dwelling units)
 





9.1

 
Furnace (including multifamily)
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




9.2

 
Air conditioner (including multifamily)
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




9.3

 
Furnace & Air conditioner (same permit) (including multifamily)
 

1 (final)

 

$125.00

 

N.A.

 

$125.00




9.4

 
Duct extensions & modifications
 

1 (rough)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




10

 
Security alarms (Wired)
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




11

 
Water Heater
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




12

 
Windows & Doors
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




13

 
Siding / Exterior finishes
 

1 (final)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




14

 
Private sidewalks
 

1 (prepour)

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




14.1

 
Commercial sidewalks
 

1 (prepour)

 

$1.00/ linear foot

 

N.A.

 

Computed




15

 
Gazebo, trellis, pergola
 

2 (Rough & final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 

$125.00

 

$275.0 0




Note a

 
If foundation / piers added
 

1 pre-pour

 

$75.00

 

-----

 

$75.00




Note b

 
If light framed stick built (non pre-assembled)
 

3 (prepour, rough, final)

 

$75.00 each

 

$125.00

 

$350.00




16

 
Plumbing fixture no plans-commercial
 

2

 

$90.00 ea.

 

-----

 

$180.00




16.1

 
Plumbing fixture no plans - residential
 

2

 

$75.00 ea.

 

-----

 

$150.0 0




16.2

 
Commercial hot water heaters
 

1

 

90.00

 

-----

 

$90.00




17

 
Retaining wall
 

2 (pre-pour & final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 

N.A.

 

$150.00




17.1

 
> 3' in height (engineering plans required)
 

2 (pre-pour & final)

 

$75.00 ea.

 

$125.00

 

$275.00




18

 
Subsurface drain tile
 

1

 

$75.00

 

N.A.

 

$75.00




18.1

 
Subsurface drain tile ties to Village infrastructure
 

2 (Rough & Final)

 

$150.00

 

N.A.

 

$150.00




19.0

 
Commercial building reviews (No plans)
 

1

 

$90.00

 

$90.00

 

$180.00





 



   a.   Concrete patio, stoop, steps - - installation or repair;



   b.   Deck;



   c.   Shed;



   d.   Above-ground pool;  (See 5-2-7-10 (I.) for In-Ground Pools)
(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03)



   e.   Fence;



   f.   Single-family residential driveway;



   g.   Roof shingle replacement;



   h.   Temporary structures, i.e. tents (these may also require health
inspections, where food preparation will be involved.  Additional health
fees shown in 5-2-7-9 shall also apply to tent permits). 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5293, 4- 16-18; Amd.
Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



5-2-7-2:  FEES FOR REPAIR OR REMODELING BY AN EXISTING TENANT:



   (deleted by Ord. 5293, 4-16-18)



5-2-7-3:  BUILDING INSPECTION FEES FOR CONSTRUCTION, ADDITIONS AND
ALTERATIONS OF RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:



   For the construction, erection or installation of any new residential
or commercial building or structure, including additions to existing
residential buildings and all commercial expansion, remodeling for a change
of use or tenant, the permit fee shall be $3.25 per 100 cubic feet but not
less than $90.00. (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord.
4491, 6-15-09; Amd. Ord. 4614, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



5-2-7-4:  STATE OF ILLINOIS MANDATED CODE INSPECTION FEES:



1.   Energy Conservation Code Required Inspections as of 1/28/2010:



   a.   Building exterior envelope insulation:   
-------------------------------------------------------------$200.00



         Includes: Basement, Slabs, Crawl, Exterior Walls, Ceilings,
Attics and



         Verify certificate at electrical panel at final



   b.   Windows/Glazing, Door openings u-factors: ----
------------------------------------------------------$75.00



         Units to be labeled and inspected for adequate seals 



   c.   Air
Leakage:-----------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------$200.0 0



         Includes: exterior barriers, films or solid material,
caulking, gaskets, weather-stripping for doors, windows, utility
penetrations, Knee walls, wall above garages, tubs and showers, attic
openings, rim joist, sill plates, fireplaces, combustion air, recessed
lighting, plumbing and electric penetrations, duct joints and seams sealant,
ductwork testing etc.



   d.   Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical
Equipment:--------------------------------------------------$200.00



         Heating and cooling equipment, sizing and efficiency, heat
pump controls, duct insulation, piping insulation, intake and exhaust
automatic gravity dampers, programmable thermostat, snow melt controls,
electrical fixtures and high-efficiency lamps



   e.   Pools and
Equipment:---------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------$75.00



         Pool heaters, time switches, pool covers



   f.   An approved 3rd party inspection agency may be required or
allowed to perform required energy and air leakage inspections as determined
by the Building Official.  Required inspections shall be paid by the permit
applicant, building or land owner.  A service agreement is required before
permit issuance.



   g.    Fees may be adjusted due to building size and amount of
inspections required.



2.   Illinois Accessibility Code Public Act 84-948 (410 ILCS 25/)
Environmental Barriers Act.



      Commercial Buildings



         Common Shell Areas and
site--------------------------------------------------------------------$125.00



         Tenant
Spaces-------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------$125.00 each



      Residential Multi-Family Buildings



         Common Shell
Areas--------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----$125.00



         20% of the Residential
Units------------------------------------------------------------------$125.00 
each



(Ord. 4616, 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



5-2-7-5:  ADDITIONAL FEES:



   In addition to the permit fees enumerated in subsections 1, 2, 3 and 4,
the inspection and miscellaneous fees enumerated in the sections which follow
this section shall also be charged when applicable.  Notwithstanding the
fees stated unless other minimum amounts are specified, the minimum
inspection fee for any required inspection shall be $90.00 and the minimum
reinspection fee, when reinspection is required, due to incorrect or
inaccurate information or construction, shall be $90.00.  A re-inspection
fee shall be paid prior to the reinspection.  (Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord.
4614, 1/17/11)



5-2-7-6:  ELECTRICAL INSPECTION FEES: 



   a.   For the inspection of electrical work in a single-family home
or townhome, the fees shall be:



      For each circuit, regardless of amperes ----------------------
$  10.00



      For each service, regardless of size ---------------------------
$110.00



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   b.   For all uses other than single-family homes and townhomes, the
fees shall be:



      1.   Circuits



         For each normal 15 and 20 ampere two wire circuit:



         1 to 75 circuits
-------------------------------------------   $15.00 each 



         76 or more circuits
--------------------------------------   $10.00 each 



         For each 30 or more ampere circuit
----------------   $18.00 each 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



      2.   Services



         100 AMP ---------- $110.00   1200 AMP --------- $200.00



         200 AMP ---------- $120.00   1600 AMP --------- $250.00



         400 AMP ---------- $135.00   2000 AMP --------- $275.00



         600 AMP ---------- $150.00   3000 AMP --------- $400.00



         800 AMP ---------- $170.00   4000 AMP --------- $520.00



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   c.   Low Voltage
Outlets   --------------------------------------------------------------
$1.50 per line 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   d.   Electrical testing for “Supervising Electrician”
---------------------------------- $250.00 (Electrical Ord.)



      (Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 5184,
5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   e.   A minimum electric permit fee shall
be------------------------------------------ $  90.00



(Ord 4614. 1-17-11)



5-2-7-7:  PLUMBING INSPECTION FEES: 



   For all buildings or structures the fees shall be $30.00 per fixture. 
(Individual plumbing fixtures shall include but not be limited to bathtubs,
lavatories, drinking fountains, showers, sinks, water heaters, laundry tubs,
floor  drains, sump pumps, backflow preventers, etc.)  A minimum plumbing
permit fee shall be------------- $180.00



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



   Sewer Repair and Replacement Permits:  All sewer repair and
replacement for existing building, both within the building and between the
building and the Village main sewer, shall have a minimum permit inspection
fee of $200.00.  This fee would allow for two inspections.  Where more than
two inspections are required, fees as set out in 5-2-7-5 for re-inspections,
shall be charged and collected. 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



5-2-7-8:  MECHANICAL INSPECTION FEES: 



   All buildings or structures which include mechanical equipment
installation or alteration shall be charged a mechanical permit fee as
follows: 



 



 
 
New Heating Equipment
 
New Cooling Equipment


Single Family    -------------
 
$75.00 per unit
 
$75.00 per unit


Residential (including multifamily)
 
 
 
 


Heating & cooling under same permit
 
$125.00 total
 
 


Commercial, industrial -----
 
$90.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.
 
$90.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.


Residential common areas
 
 
 
 


 
 
Minimum $125.00
 
Minimum $125.00


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Alterations for Heating Equipment
 
Alterations for Cooling Equipment


Residential Alteration ------
 
$75.00
 
$75.00


Other Use Alterations ------
 
$125.00 min.
 
$125.00 min.


Commercial replacement -
 
$90.00 per unit
 
$90.00 per unit


Commercial Hoods
 
Type 1 hood  ------- $270.00


 
 
Type 2 hoods -------$180.00


See "Additional Fees" when applicable




 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord 4614. 1-17-11; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5293, 4-16-18; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



5-2-7-9:  HEALTH INSPECTION FEES:



   Minimum Health inspection fees shall be charged when a building permit
is required for construction within a food service use, including temporary
uses, and whenever an inspection is called for under Section 7-3-2 of this
Code.  Health inspection fees are in addition to other permit and inspection
fees required. 



   a.   The fee for required new business health inspections shall be
$350.00. This fee is based on preliminary consultations and the required
health inspections prior to occupancy, not including the re-inspections noted
in item (b), below.  Additional fees may apply depending on the volume of
work involved with a permit. (Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09;
Amd. Ord. 4614, 1/17/11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   b.   In the event an establishment fails to complete all corrections
required by initial and re-inspections, additional fees will be assessed and
a date for completion established. If the establishment has completed all
corrections by that re-inspection, no additional fee will be charged.  In
the event that further re-inspections are required, charges will be assessed
as follows:    This applies to any required inspection(s).  (Ord. 3911,
7-19-04)



            Second re-inspection         $200



            Third re-inspection         $300



            Fourth re-inspection         $400



            Fifth and higher re-inspection   $500



   c.   When a restaurant or mercantile food establishment is placed on
an increased inspection schedule, each inspection so scheduled shall be
billed at $115.00.  If any such scheduled inspections require
re-inspections, they shall be billed as identified in (b) above.  (Ord.
3911, 7-19-04)



5-2-7-10:  MISCELLANEOUS FEES: 



   a.   Construction Water Fee: for the use of water when water is
connected during construction:



         Residential ------ $50.00      Commercial ------
$125.00



(Ord. 4491, 6-15-09; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



   b.   Demolition Permit Fee: for the demolition or removal of a
building or structure or a part thereof:



         Residential ------ $90.00      Non-Residential ------
$90.00 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09)



      An additional $90.00 fee shall be charged for each Plumbing,
Mechanical and Electrical  inspection required for:



         1.   Gas, Sewer and water service piping disconnection
with capping at approved location.



         2.   To verify the removal of live electrical service
wires from the supplying transformers.



           3.   Interior commercial demolition shall be $200.00
for each permit.



(Ord. 4614, 1/17/11; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   c.   Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters Fees:



         1.   A review of Shop Drawing plans and specifications
for each new elevator, escalator, dumbwaiter or similar device shall be One
Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($150.00) per device.



            a.   Review of Architectural Drawings when
required One Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($150.00).



         2.   The inspection of each new device shall be One
Hundred and Ten Dollars ($110.00).



         3.   Semi-annual and/or any reinspection of a device
shall be Fifty-five Dollars ($55.00).



         4.   Required pressure test witnessing fees by a
qualified elevator inspector shall be not less than the contracted inspection
agreement with the Village.



         5.   Certificates of Compliance when required are
included as part of inspection fees.



         6.   Other inspection services not listed in this
subsection, shall be charged the rate as noted in item “n” of this
subsection.



         7.   If the fees specified above are not paid within
thirty (30) days of the Village issuance of an invoice for the services
performed, a late fee of Seventy-five Dollars ($75.00) shall be added to the
amount due.  If the fees are not paid within forty-five (45) days of
issuance of the invoice, a late fee of One Hundred Twenty-five Dollars
($125.00) shall be added.



      (Ord. 4369, 6-2-08; Amd. Ord. 4614; 1-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4860,
12-2-13; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   d.   Driveways other than Single-Family Residential:



      This fee includes the installation of paving bricks when
allowed. 



      1.   The fee for a non-residential driveway permit shall be
$90.00 per curb cut.  When a driveway(s) serves parking for garage spaces
within a building an additional fee of $25.00 per 1000 square feet of garage
area shall apply.  (Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



      2.   The permit for new private driveways for multi-family
residential units, condominiums, and townhome-type complexes shall be a
minimum of $90.00.  When a driveway serves more than 3 parking spaces within
a building (garage), an additional $20.00 shall be charged for each space. 
(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



   e.   Water Tests and Auxiliary Taps:



      e-1. Fire Hydrant Flow Testing Fees:



      A base fee of $200 for fire hydrant flow testing shall be charged
of each applicant for a building permit for construction, expansion or major
remodeling of a building of 8,000 sq. ft. or larger.  This fee shall cover a
total of three (3) tests per corporate, commercial, industrial or residential
location.  Additional tests at the location will warrant additional fees of
$50 per test.  The fees shall be the same whether the Village, the Fire
Protection District or the property owner/manager requests the test.  (Ord.
3609, 3-4-02)



      e-2. Fire Pump Flow Testing Fees: 



      A fee of $75 per hook-up nozzle shall be charged for flow testing
at locations with interior fire pumping systems.  The fee shall be the same
whether the Village, the Fire Protection District or the property
owner/manager requests the test.  (Ord. 3376, 7-3-00; Amd. Ord. 4491,
6-15-09)



      e-3. Water Taps From an Existing Water Line to Supply Auxiliary
System Uses (Includes lawn sprinkler systems, ornamental fountains. Backflow
prevention required.)



      A fee of $90 per inspected water supply line.  (Ord. 4614,
1-17-11) 



      Note:  Water lines to be taken from retention or detention ponds
for the supply of lawn sprinkler systems (or similar uses) must obtain a
permit from the Public Works Department before installation.  (Ord. 4159,
8-7-06)   



   f.   Opening or Excavating a Village Street:



      •   Opening in street or alley constructed of asphalt
surfacing or concrete and having curb and
gutter-------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------ ---$500.00 deposit



      •   Opening in street or alley constructed of asphalt
surfacing or concrete and not having curb and
gutter-------------------------------------------------------------------------
------ ----$500.00 deposit



      •   For tunneling a street or alley----------
------------------------------------------------$500.00 deposit



      •   Inspection fees in each instance shall
be---------------------------------------- ---$ 25.00.



      In the event more than one inspection shall be necessary to
assure compliance, each inspection shall be $25.00.  Inspection fees shall
be deducted from the $500.00 deposit required above or as otherwise approved
by the Village.



   g.   Satellite Dish Permit Fee: 



      The application, review and inspection fees shall be as follows:



         1.   Building Permit 
--------------------------------   $90.00



         2.   Electrical Permit
--------------------------------   $40.00



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04)



   h.   Sidewalk Construction Permit Fees:



      This fee may include the installation of paving bricks where
allowed. 



      The application, review and inspection fees shall be as follows:



      1.   New and replaced public/private sidewalks on commercial
construction



         and multi-family dwellings
------------------------------   $1.00/lineal foot but not less than $90.00



      2.   Private sidewalks for single-family residences and



         duplexes
-----------------------------------------------------     $90.00/inspection



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd.
Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



   i.   Sign Permit Fees:



      New wall signs and ground-mounted signs shall be $9.00 per lineal
foot (measuring the perimeter) but not less than $90.00.



      1.   Temporary signs and pennants, per event, shall be $90.00
(not subject to $60.00 minimum) (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04;
Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



   j.   Storage Tanks - Gas, Oil, Etc. Fees:



      Every tank installation shall be $60.00 per tank, $60.00 minimum
per inspection regardless of size.  State Fire Marshall Permit and Orland
Fire Protection District Permit or proof thereof are required to be submitted
prior to issuance of Building Permit.  (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911,
7-19-04)



   k.   In-Ground Swimming Pools - Permit Fees: At the time of
application, the applicant shall pay the following:



      1.   Plan Review
-----------------------------------------   $125.00



      2.   Building Inspection
---------------------------------   $150.00



      3.   Electrical Inspection
-------------------------------   $90.00



      4.   Plumbing Inspection
-------------------------------   $90.00



      5.   Zoning Permit
---------------------------------------   $75.00



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



   l.   Grading Permit Fees:



      For work involving the addition, removal or relocation of more
than 1 cubic yard of soil, the permit fee shall be $30.00 plus other fees as
required for engineering review. (Ord. 3911, 7-19-04)



   m.   Event, Tent/Canopy or Carnival Permit Fees:



      A $90.00 inspection fee shall be charged for each type of
inspection performed by the Village. Health, Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical
and/or Fire inspection fees shall also be paid as shown in this or other
Village ordinances. (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord.
4614, 1-17-11)



   n.   Special Inspection and Services Performed: 



      Any persons requesting special or non-emergency services
performed by the Village during or after normal business hours, including
inspection, evaluation and/or a review shall pay fees as shown below:



      1.   A $300.00 2-hour minimum fee plus $90.00 for each
additional hour or portion thereof for each type of inspection service. The
fee may include the additional time needed for consulting and recording of
operations performed.  Fees are based on all costs involved to the Village
including an overtime wage rate for staff employee(s).



      2.   Independent services that are performed by other than
Village personnel, shall be paid for by the person(s) requesting such
service(s).  In addition to the independent service fee, the Village shall
collect an additional 10% of that special service fee for the village's
administrative review, management and record keeping operations.



(Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



   o.   Antennas:



      1.   Structure Building
Permit-------------------------------------------$ 90.00



      2.   The application for each separate reception device



         on an antenna shall be
----------------------------------------------$ 40.00



      3.   Electrical Permit
----------------------------------------------------- $ 40.00 per
receptor   



   p.   Commerical and multi-family asphalt or concrete paved parking
lots including re-stripping:



      1.   Projects $90,000 or less min. fee
------------------------------- $180.00



      2.   Projects exceeding $90,000
-------------------------------------- $ .002/$ 1.00 construction cost not to
exceed $500.00



   q.   Commercial replaced flat roof structures including insulation
replacement:



      1.   Projects $90,000 or less min. fee
------------------------------- $180.00



      2.   Projects exceeding $90,000
-------------------------------------- $ .002/$1.00 construction cost not to
exceed $500.00



         Replacement or partial replacement of room insulation =
$90.00



         Note: Cost of construction shall be based on signed
proposal or subject to latest edition of comparable cost index.



(Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



5-2-8:  WATER AND SEWER TAP-ON FEES:



5-2-8-1:  WATER FEES:



   Each applicant shall pay the following fees to the Village at the time
of application for a permit, if water and



   sewer service connections are required and shall be a part of the
construction proposed: 



   a.   Each dwelling unit, single or multi-family, shall have a 1 inch
meter and fittings -------------------------------------  $397.00  (Ord.
3819, 10-6-03)



      This fee may be adjusted due to Village costs of meters by
suppliers.



   b.   Water meter costs larger than 1 inch shall be as provided by
the Water Department.          (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03)



   c.   Water connection (tap-ons) shall be as follows: 



 

Tap Size
 
Fire Demand Factors*
 
Tap Fee
 
Meter Size
 
Meter Demand  Factors**
 
Meter Fee Per Meter




3/4"
 
1.6
 
$              363
 
3/4"
 
1.0
 
$          3,537


1"
 
2.6
 
$              590
 
1"
 
2.5
 
$          5,109


1 1/2"
 
2.9
 
$              658
 
1 1/2"
 
5.0
 
$        10,218


2"
 
6.19
 
$          1,406
 
2"
 
8.0
 
$        16,348


3"
 
17.98
 
$          4,083
 
3"
 
16.0
 
$        32,697


4"
 
38.32
 
$          8,701
 
4"
 
25.0
 
$        51,089


6"
 
111.31
 
$        25,274
 
 
 
 
 


8" or over
 
237.21
 
$        53,861
 
 
 
 
 




 



*Fire Demand Factors - AWWA Manual M1 Table 30-5 page 224



**Meter Demand Factors - AWWA Manual M1 Table 28-2 page 202



(Ord. 4378, 6-16-08)



   For tap sizes over six inches (6"), the connection charge shall be
negotiated and  agreed upon between the applicant and the Board of Trustees,
but it shall not be less than the minimum charge for a six inch (6") tap and
one inch (1") meter set.  The Village Engineer shall make a recommendation
as per the Village Water Purveyor.



   d.   If a larger meter set is added after the initial permit is
issued, the difference between the smaller and larger meter shall be due upon
installation of the larger meter.



(See Ord. 3587 Sec. 9, 1-21-02 - above paragraph and item 6 are not to be
deleted)



   e.   An applicant for a permit for a new water tap or to modify an
existing lawn irrigation water system that was installed and for which a
permit was issued prior to January 1, 2017, in order for the new system to
operate independently from the existing system, shall not be required to pay
the above scheduled Meter Fee Per Meter fee.  (Ord. 5160, 1-16-17)



5-2-8-2:  SEWER FEES:



Sewer fees will be charged when a water tap fee is not included.



   a.   Each sewer tap shall be -----------------------------  $ 200.00



   b.   Inspection for each tap shall be -------------------- $  50.00



(Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17)



5-2-9:  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FEES:



The fee for the processing and issuing of the Certificate of Occupancy or
duplicate thereof shall be as follows:



 

1. Single Family Residence - Certificate of Occupancy
 
$75.00


2. Single Family Residence Addition - Certificate of Occupancy
 
$30.00


3. Multiple Family Apartments and Condo's - Certificate of Occupancy
 
$50.00


4. Commercial with Construction - Certificate of Occupancy
 
$200.00


5. Commercial with no Construction - Certificate of Occupancy
 
$200.00


6. Certificate of completion (projects still occupied during construction)
 
$150.00


7. Commercial Food Service Establishment - Certificate of Occupancy
(Additional Fee)
 
$50.00



 



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 4491, 6-15-09; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



5-2-10:  REFUNDS:



   Except for Plan Review Fees, when fees have been paid pursuant to the
above sections, and a permit is canceled, the permit applicant will be
entitled to a refund of such fees that are in excess of any charges or
expenses (including manpower costs) incurred by the Village prior to
cancellation.



5-2-11:  COMPLIANCE TO PERMIT:



   All work performed under a permit issued hereunder shall conform to the
approved application and plans, and any approved amendments thereto.  It
shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, architect, structural engineer,
contractor or builder engaged in erecting, altering or repairing any building
to make any departure from the drawings or plans as approved by the Building
Commissioner, of a nature which involves any violation of the provisions of
this Chapter on which the permit has been issued.  Any such departure from
the approved drawings or plans involving a violation of requirements shall
operate to annul the permit which has been issued for such work and shall
render the same void.



5-2-12:  TERMINATION OF PERMITS:



   Every permit issued hereunder shall expire six (6) months after its
date  unless work has been commenced under it within said six (6) month time
period, and may be revoked or canceled by the Building Director, on notice,
at any time after abandonment or discontinuance of the work for a continuous
period of six (6) months. If a permit expires before any work is done, all
fees and deposits made in connection therewith shall be returned, less a
service fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which shall be retained by
the Village in addition to any charges received for plan reviews performed. 
If a permit is terminated because of abandonment after work has commenced,
the permittee shall restore the site to its condition prior to the beginning
of the work, and if he fails to do so within a reasonable time, the Village
may so restore the site at the permittee's expense and any representative of
the Village may enter upon the real estate for that purpose.  In such case,
the Village shall reimburse itself, for any expenses incurred, from the
amount received for fees and deposits on issuance of the permit, and the
balance, if any, shall be returned to the permittee, less a service charge of
fifty dollars ($50.00) which shall be retained by the Village.  If the
expense incurred by the Village is more than the fees deposited, the
permittee shall pay the excess to the Village on demand.



(Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd.
Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



5-2-13:  RENEWAL OF PERMITS:



   A permit which has expired or has been revoked or canceled may be
renewed, if the work thereby authorized is permitted by ordinances in force
at the time of renewal, upon filing an application for such renewal and upon
the payment of all amounts remaining due for fees and deposits upon the
original permit, and a renewal fee of  two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 



(Ord. 330, 7-25-66; Amd. Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord. 3911, 7-19-04; Amd.
Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5342, 10-15-18)



5-2-14:  WORK BEGUN WITHOUT A PERMIT:



   When work has begun or is completed without a permit having been
obtained, the fee for required inspections and plan reviews shall be doubled
for the first one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the basic building permit
fee.  Any permit with basic fees of over $1,000.00 shall be charged an
additional 35% of the remaining portion of basic permit fees above
$1,000.00.  (See Building Code Sec. 117.1.1) (Ord. 3819, 10-6-03; Amd. Ord.
5247, 12-4-17)



   See Village Code Title 5 Chapter 1 for references to violations and
penalties, which may be applicable due to code updates.  (Ord. 3911, 7-19-04)



Additionally, residential & commercial permits issued for work that has begun
or is completed without a permit having been obtained, shall have additional
fees of the following:



   1.   Owner filed permits:            $150.00 + standard
and penalty permit fees pursuant to 5-2-14.



   2.   Contractor performed work permits:      $750.00 +
standard and penalty permit fees pursuant to 5-2-14.



Note: Penalty fees shall be subject to the building official interpretation
based on provided information and investigation.



(Amd. Ord. 5247, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5293, 4-16-18)



CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE



SECTION:



5-3-1:   Electrical Inspection Regulations



5-3-2:   Electrical Commission Created



5-3-3:   (Reserved)



5-3-4:   Permits Required



5-3-5:   Adoption



5-3-6:   Deletions



5-3-7:   Amendments



5-3-8:   Limitation



5-3-9:   Penalty and Enforcement



5-3-1:  ELECTRICAL INSPECTION REGULATIONS:



   The Electrical Code regulated in this Chapter shall be enforced by the
Development Services Department through qualified personnel as determined by
the Department Director. The Department shall inspect all electrical
equipment installed or altered in the Village, and shall require that it
conform to the standards and specifications applicable and adopted as
provided by the laws and ordinances appertaining thereto.  (Ord. 4692,
12-19-11; Amd. Ord. 5184, 5-1-17)



5-3-2:  ELECTRICAL COMMISSION CREATED:



   Established.  There is an electrical commission established, as set
forth in Title 2, Chapter 4 of the Village Code.  (Amd. Ord. 5066, 3-7-16;
Amd. Ord. 5184, 5-1-17)



5-3-3:  (RESERVED)



5-3-4:  PERMITS REQUIRED: 



   No electrical equipment as defined in this Chapter shall be installed
or altered in the Village except upon a permit first being issued by the
Development Services Department.  (Ord. 331, 8-8-66; Amd. Ord. 4692,
12-19-11; Amd. Ord. 5184, 5-1-17)



5-3-5:  ADOPTION:



   A certain document entitled “National Electrical Code 2017 edition,
published by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park,
Quincy, Massachusetts,” be and hereby is adopted as the “Electrical Code
for the Village of Orland Park,” for regulating the installation, repair,
replacement and alteration of electrical systems in the Village of Orland
Park as provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said “National Electrical Code 2017" are adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Code with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in this Chapter.  (Ord. 4068,
9-6-05; Amd. Ord. 4692, 12-19-11; Amd. Ord. 5066, 3-7-16; Amd. Ord. 5184,
5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5380, 2-4-19)



   A copy of the rules and regulations of the “National Electrical Code
2017" printed in book form was on file in the office of the Village Clerk for
more than thirty (30) days prior to the enactment of this Code, and has been
and is available for inspection.  Reference in this Chapter to “this
Code” is a reference to the “National Electrical Code 2017" (sometimes
referred to as “NEC 2017") and such reference includes that document and
any amendments, or supplements thereto whether adopted concurrently or
subsequently.  References in this Code to “the building code” shall mean
the Village's Building Code as set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title 5, as may
be amended from time to time.  (Ord. 4068, 9-6-05; Amd. Ord. 4692, 12-19-11;
Amd. Ord. 5066, 3-7-16; Amd. Ord. 5184, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5380, 2-4-19)



5-3-6:  DELETIONS:



The following articles of the NEC 2017 are hereby deleted:  320, 322, 324,
326, 328, 330, 334, 338, 340, 362, 604, and 706.135 (I) Non Concealed Spaces.
(Ord. 4068, 9-6-05; Amd. Ord. 4692, 12-19-11; Amd. Ord. 5066, 3-7-16; Amd.
Ord. 5184, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5380, 2-4-19)



5-3-7:  AMENDMENTS:



The adopted NEC 2017 is hereby amended as follows:



   1.   ARTICLE 90 - INTRODUCTION of the NEC 2017 is amended to add the
following:



      90.9 Licensing/Registration of Electrical Contractors



      (a)   General.  All persons desiring to engage in the
business of Electrical Contractor within the Village of Orland Park shall
apply for licensing to the Development Services Department on forms provided
by the Department.



      (b)   Supervising.  All licensed/registered Electrical
Contractors shall appoint or employ a person, who may be himself or some
other person, who shall be known as a Supervising Electrician. A Supervising
Electrician so appointed or employed shall perform the work or supervise and
direct the installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of electrical
equipment.  A Supervising Electrician shall be at least twenty-one (21)
years of age, and shall have had at least four (4) years experience in the
installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of electrical equipment, or
an experience equivalent thereto. 



      (c)   Examination.  Any person who has been appointed or
employed as a Supervising Electrician for a licensed/registered Electrical
Contractor shall be required to take an examination to qualify as a
Supervising Electrician. Applications for the examination shall be filed with
the Development Services Department. The applicant shall furnish, on
application forms provided by the Development Services Department, the name
and addresses of former employers, the periods of time employed by each and a
brief description of the work performed for such employers.  In addition,
the applicant shall provide such other information as may be required by the
Development Services Department.  A two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) fee
for each examination shall be paid at the time an application is filed.  It
shall be the responsibility of the Electrical Commission of the Village of
Orland Park to prepare and administer the examination given to Supervising
Electricians. The Electrical Commission shall prepare as many different
examinations as are necessary to adequately provide for the number of
applicants.  Each applicant shall be required to answer a reasonable number
of questions in writing to indicate that he has sufficient knowledge and
technical training to perform the work or to supervise the installation,
alteration, repair or maintenance of electrical equipment. Examinations shall
be administered within a reasonable time after the approval of an
application. All applicants shall be notified in writing by the Electrical
Commission of the results within ten (10) days of an examination. The
applicant shall be required to wait a period of six (6) months or until the
next examination date before taking a second exam.  When an applicant shall
have successfully completed the examination required in this Section, the
Development Services Department shall certify such a person as a Supervising
Electrician.



         After passing the examination, the applicant is required to
register with the Village of Orland Park as a Supervising Electrician. Fee
for the registration is $200.00. Supervising Electrician Registrations expire
each year on December 31st.  The annual renewal fee is $200.00.



      90.10 Permit Required



         (a)   General.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
install, alter or repair any electrical equipment within the Village of
Orland Park without the issuance of a permit for such work by the Development
Services Department of the Village of Orland Park.  Procedures and
regulations concerning such permits shall be administered by the Development
Services Department in accordance with all codes and ordinances of the
Village of Orland Park regulating the issuance of such permits.  The
Electrical Inspector, as required, shall assist the Development Services
Department in administering all permit regulations.



         (b)   Suspension of Permit.  In the event any
registered Electrical Contractor fails to correct any defect, error or
deficiency in any electrical equipment installed, altered or repaired
pursuant to a permit issued by the Development Services Department within
fifteen (15) days after inspection and written notification thereof of such
defect, error or deficiency by the Electrical Inspector, such failure may, at
the discretion of the Development Services Department, result in the
suspension of the issuance of any permits to such registered Electrical
Contractor to perform work within the Village of Orland Park.  In addition
thereto, the penalties provided in this Code may be enforced.



         (c)   Temporary Permit.  A Temporary Permit for the use
of designated portions or the entirety of installed, altered or repaired
electrical equipment may be granted by the Development Services Department. 
Provided, however, that the portion of electrical equipment comprising the
service entrance equipment and wiring, the meter and meter connection cabinet
and the meter wiring, up to but not beyond the disconnecting switch or other
disconnecting device, may be made electrically alive prior to the issuance of
a Temporary Permit. In such case, the Electrical Contractor shall notify the
Electrical Inspector of his intention to make such portion of the electrical
equipment electrically alive.  In addition, the disconnecting switch or
other disconnecting device shall be sealed in the “off” position and
tagged with a warning notice reading as follows:



               “It is unlawful for any person to place this
switch in the 'on' or 'closed' position or to use electricity on any wiring
beyond this switch previous to the issuance by the Development Services
Department of a Temporary Permit authorizing the use of current on this
installation.”



      90.11 Inspection Of Electrical Equipment



         (a)   Inspection Required.  The Development Services
Department shall inspect all electrical equipment installed, altered, or
repaired within the Village of Orland Park and shall require that it conform
to the electrical regulations of this Code hereinafter established.  Except
as otherwise provided in Section 90-10c of this Code, whenever any electrical
equipment has been installed, altered or repaired, no electrical current
shall be used on such equipment prior to the inspection of such equipment by
the Development Services Department and the issuance of a Temporary Permit
therefrom authorizing the use of current on such equipment.  The Development
Services Department and only the Development Services Department is
authorized to attach to electrical cabinets and equipment any official notice
or seal to prevent the use of electricity.  Any person other than
Development Services Department personnel who shall attach such a notice or
who shall in any way tamper with a notice or seal attached by the Development
Services Department shall be in violation of this Code.  The amount of all
fees for inspection required under this Code and the procedures for the
collection thereof shall be in accordance with all applicable provisions of
the Municipal Code of the Village of Orland Park.



         (b)   Re-inspection.  The Development Services
Department is authorized to re-inspect any electrical equipment previously
approved to assure its continued compliance with the regulations of this
Code. In the event such electrical equipment is found to be unsafe and
dangerous to life or property, the Electrical Inspector shall notify in
writing the person(s) responsible for such electrical equipment in order to
advise such person(s) to place the electrical equipment in a safe and secure
condition in compliance with the electrical regulations of this Code.  The
written notice shall also inform such person(s) of a reasonable and fair time
within which the improper electrical equipment shall be brought in compliance
with this Code. In no event, however, shall this time exceed fifteen (15)
days from the date of such notice. Refusal to comply with the requirements of
such notice, shall subject the person(s) responsible for the electrical
equipment to the penalties provided for in this Code.



         (c)   Waiver of Electrical Regulations.  The electrical
regulations of this Code may be modified or waived when, in the judgment of
the Electrical Inspector, such modification or waiver is advisable in a
particular case or when an advancement in the technology of electricity makes
such modification or waiver in the best interests of the residents of Orland
Park. Any modification or waiver shall be based upon good
engineer/architect's standards or construction practice. Any modifications or
waivers from the regulations of this Code shall be obtained from the
Development Services Department in writing prior to the commencement of the
particular work involved.



         (d)   Right of Entry.  In the discharge of its duties,
the Development Services Department shall have the authority to enter, at any
reasonable hour, any building, structure or premises within the Village of
Orland Park to enforce the regulations of this Code.  The authority to enter
shall be that permitted by law and such entry shall be affected only by
lawful means respecting the rights of all persons involved.  The assistance
and cooperation of the police, fire and health departments and all other
Village Officials shall be available to the Electrical Inspector as required
in the performance of said Inspector's duties to inspect and to regulate the
electrical equipment under this Code, and as permitted by law.



         (e)   Conflict.  In the event of a conflict between the
provisions of this Code and the requirements of any other Village of Orland
Park Code or ordinance, the more stringent requirement shall apply.



   2.   Section 210.12 shall be amended to include the following
therein:



         This regulation applies to Dwelling Units only.



      (A)   Dwelling Units: All 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20
ampere branch circuits supplying outlets in dwelling unit family rooms,
dining rooms, living rooms, parlors, libraries, dens, bedrooms, closets,
hallways, or similar room or areas shall be protected by listed arc-fault
circuit interrupter, combination combination-type, installed to provide
protection of the branch circuit.



   3.   Section 210.13 is added to Article 210 and shall read as
follows:



      210.13 GROUND FAULT PROTECTION REQUIRED: This regulation applies
to single family dwelling units only.



      (A)   Ground Fault Circuit protection shall not be required in
single family residences for sump pumps. A single receptacle is required for
all sump pump installations in single family residences.



      (B)   Separate dedicated circuit and receptacle required for
each sump pump. Circuit shall be a 20 amp dedicated circuit. (Amd. Ord. 5246,
12-4-17)



   4.   Section 210-52(c) is hereby amended to read as follows:



      210.52 DWELLING UNIT RECEPTACLE OUTLETS: this regulation applies
to single and multi-family dwelling units.



      (C)   In kitchens and dining areas of dwelling units, a
receptacle outlet shall be installed at each counter space wider than 12
inches (305 mm).  Receptacles shall be installed so that no point along the
wall line is more than 24 inches (610 mm), measured horizontally from a
receptacle outlet in that space. Island counter tops 12 inches (305 mm) or
wider shall have at least one receptacle for each four (4) feet (1.22 m)
counter top. Counter top spaces separated by range tops, refrigerators, or
sinks shall be considered as separate counter top spaces. Receptacles
rendered inaccessible by appliances fastened in place or appliances occupying
dedicated space shall not be considered as these required outlets.



         Island/peninsula counter tops shall have one receptacle per
the listed island lengths and configurations listed below.



            a.   48 inches or less = 1 receptacle;



            b.   49 inches to 96 inches = 2 receptacles;



            c.   97 inches to 120 inches = 3 receptacles;



            d.   Island/peninsula greater than 120 inches
subject to building official approval;



            e.   Any island non-rectangular or with turns in
direction shall have at minimum one receptacle for every 48 inches length of
counter.



         Receptacles shall not be in the upright position and shall
be readily accessible.



      (D)   Bathrooms:



         (1)   All gfi receptacles shall be installed on separate
dedicated circuits and shall not allow fans, luminaries or equipment tied to
such circuit.



         (2)   Each individual lavatory bowl shall have a
dedicated 20 ampere circuit and receptacle. Ground fault protection can be at
circuit or at receptacle. (Amd. Ord. 5246, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5380, 2-4-19)



   5.   Article 230 is hereby amended to add section 230.23(D) to read
as follows:



      230.23(D) Min. Service Size Single Family Dwellings:



      All services to single family dwellings exceeding 4,500 square
feet of occupied Area shall be required to have a 400 ampere single phase
service.



      Exception: Garages shall not be included in the gross area
calculations of the single family dwellings for the sole purpose of
calculation of electrical demand. (Ord. 5380, 2-4-19)



   6.   Section 230.31(D) is added to article 230 and shall read as
follows:



      230.31(D) MIN SERVICE SIZE SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS: All services
to single family dwelling exceeding 4,500 square feet occupied area shall be
required to have a 400 ampere single phase service.



      Note: Occupied areas shall be defined as areas within the
enclosed walls of dwelling unit including basements and garages. (Ord. 5246,
12-4-17)



   7.   Section 230.70(D) is added to Article 230 and shall read as
follows:



         230-70(D).  Service Location.  The location of the
underground service meter for new subdivisions shall be approved by the
Electrical Inspector prior to installation.



   8.   Section 310.1(A) hereby is added to Section 310.1 to read as
follows:



         310.1(A) Type of Conductor Materials Allowed



            (1)   Copper Material.  Conductors in this
article shall be of copper only, except for utility installation.



            (2)   Aluminum Material.  Aluminum feeders
(cables) may only be used for switchboards, panelboards and equipment feeders
for 100 or larger amp wire.



   9.   Section 310.106(B) is hereby amended to delete the words
“Aluminum, copper-clad aluminum,” so that it reads as follows:



         310.106(B) Conductor Materials.  Conductors in this
article shall be of copper unless otherwise specified.



   10.   The title of Article 352 is hereby amended as follows:



      ARTICLE 352 - RIGID NONMETALLIC CONDUIT (RNC) FOR UNDERGROUND AND
SPECIAL LOCATION APPLICATIONS USES ONLY.



   11.   Section 352.10 shall be amended to read as follows:



            352.10 Uses Permitted.  The use of RNC shall be
permitted under the following conditions:



               For Public Knowledge (FPN):  Extreme cold may
cause some nonmetallic conduits to become brittle and therefore more
susceptible to damage from physical contact.



         (A)   Concealed.  In walls, floors, and ceilings.



         (B)   Corrosive Influences.  In locations subject to
severe corrosive influences as covered in 300.6 and where subject to
chemicals for which the materials are specifically approved.



         (C)   Cinders.  In cinder fill.



         (D)   Wet Locations.  In portions of dairies,
laundries, canneries, or other wet locations and in locations where walls are
frequently washed, the entire conduit system including boxes and fittings
used therewith shall be installed and equipped so as to prevent water from
entering the conduit.  All supports, bolts, straps, screws and so forth,
shall be of  corrosion-resistant materials or be protected against corrosion
by approved corrosion-resistant materials.



         (E)   Dry and Damp Locations.  In dry and damp
locations not prohibited by 352.12



         (F)   Exposed.  For exposed work where not subject to
physical damage if identified for such use.



         (G)   Underground Installations.  For underground
installations, see 300.5 and 300.50.  Conduits listed for the purpose shall
be permitted to be installed underground in continuous lengths from a reel.



         (H)   Support of Conduit Bodies.  Rigid nonmetallic
conduit shall be permitted to support nonmetallic conduit bodies not larger
than the largest trade size of an entering raceway.  The conduit bodies
shall not contain devices or support luminaries (fixtures) or other equipment.



   12.    Section 358.10(D) is amended and Section 358.10(E) is added
to Section 358.10 and shall read as follows:



         358(D) TUBING FOR WATER METER READERS: Electrical metallic
tubing shall be installed to contain low voltage wiring for water meter
readers located adjacent to gas meters.



         358.10 (E) SUPPLEMENTAL CONDUIT. Minimum of one inch (1")
electro metallic tubing (E.M.T.) is required for all satellite low voltage
cables in all multistory, multifamily and single family residences. This
conduit shall be installed on the interior of the building.



   13.   Section 410.10(G) is added to Section 410.10 and shall read as
follows:



         (G)   Luminaires in Closets Requirements: The
requirement for lights in closets may be waived if the closet has an area of
less than five square feet and if there is a closely adjacent fixed light so
placed to illuminate the contents of the closet. Wardrobe closets are not
exempt from this provision.  Closet lights shall be permanently installed
lighting fixtures.  Drop cords are not allowed.



   14.    Section 450.21 shall be amended to read as follows:



         450.21 Dry-type Transformers Installed Indoors.



            (A)   Mounting Height: All dry-type transformers
shall be installed at a minimum of seven (7) feet above a finished floor, and
at a minimum of one (1) foot from the walls.



            (B)   Not over 112-1/2 kVA.  Dry-type
transformers installed indoors and rated 112-1/2 kVA or less shall have a
separation of at least 12 inches (305mm) from combustible material.



                  Exception No. 1: Where separated from the
combustible material by a fire-resistant heat-insulating barrier.



                  Exception No. 2: Transformers 600 volts,
nominal, or less completely enclosed, with or without ventilating openings.



            (C)   Over 112-1/2 kVA.  Individual dry-type
transformers of more than 112-1/2 kVA rating shall be installed in a
transformer room of fire-resistant construction.



                  Exception No. 1: Transformers with 80oC
rise or higher ratings and separated from combustible material by a
fire-resistant, heat-insulating barrier or by not less than 6 feet (1.83m)
horizontally and 12 feet (3.66 m) vertically.



                  Exception No. 2: Transformers with 80oC
rise or higher ratings and completely enclosed except for ventilating
openings.



            (D)   Over 35,000 Volts.  Dry-type transformers
rated over 35,000 volts shall be installed in a vault complying with Part C
of this article.



   15.   Section 725.1(A) is added to Section 725.1 and shall read as
follows:



         725.1(A) ADDITIONAL PHYSICAL PROTECTION



            Where the Electrical Inspector determines that damage
to remote-control circuits of water meter equipment may occur, all conductors
of such remote-control circuits shall be installed in rigid metal conduit,
intermediate metal conduit, rigid nonmetallic conduit or electrical metal
tubing.  Tubing shall terminate six (6) inches from the water meter location
and the building gas meter.  (Ord. 3656, 7-1-02)



   16.   A new Article 726 shall be added to this code, which shall
read as follows:



         726 Emergency Knox Box Shunt Switch (Commercial Buildings
Only) 



            Any Electrical Service with 800 amps or more will
require a Knox Box Shunt Switch.  If there is a door within 5 feet of the
main distribution panel, a shunt switch will not be required.  (Ord. 4068,
9-6-05; Amd. Ord. 4692, 12-19-11; Amd. Ord. 5066, 3-7-16; Amd. Ord. 5184,
5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5246, 12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5380, 2-4-19)



5-3-8:  LIMITATION:



   Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit, deny or limit the provisions of
any other ordinances of the Village which specifically regulate electrical
equipment.  In particular, this Chapter shall not prohibit, deny or limit
those requirements of the Land Development Code of the Village of Orland
Park, which pertain to the installation, alteration and use of electrical
equipment in swimming and other pools.  (Amd. Ord. 5184, 5-1-17)



5-3-9:  PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:



   1.   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of
the provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to
the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



   2.   In the event any electrical equipment is installed, altered,
repaired or maintained in violation of this Chapter, the Village, in addition
to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings 1) to
prevent the unlawful installation, repair or maintenance, 2) to prevent the
occupancy of any unsafe building, structure or land, 3) to prevent any
illegal act conduct, business or use in or about the premises, or 4) to
restrain, correct or abate the violation. 



(Ord. 3217, 1-4-99; Amd. Ord. 5066, 3-7-16; Amd. Ord. 5184, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord.
5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 4
PLUMBING CODE



5-4-1:   Village Plumbing Code Adopted



5-4-1-1:   Deletions



5-4-1-2:   Modifications



5-4-1-3:   Additions



5-4-2:   Plumbing Permit Required



5-4-3   Local Orland Park Water Sanitary Sewer and Storm Sewer and
Appurtenance Regulations



5-4-4:   Violations



5-4-1:  VILLAGE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:



   The following rules and regulations, printed in book, or pamphlet form,
with at least one (1) copy of which was on file in the office of the Village
Clerk prior to the enactment of this Section, shall be applicable for minimum
requirements.  The Village Plumbing Code regulations, are available for
inspection by the public and are electronically accessible through the
Village of Orland Park's website, <http://www.orland-park.il.us/>, are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter for the installation and
maintenance of and work on plumbing and drainage systems, new and existing,
in the Village.  Plumbing contractor registration and penalties shall be as
regulated by the Illinois Administrative Code referenced below:



TITLE 68: PROFESSIONS AND OCCUPATIONS



CHAPTER IV: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH



PART 750 PLUMBERS LICENSING CODE



SECTION 750.1000 CIVIL PENALTIES FOR UNLICENSED PLUMBERS



   Where, in this Code, there is a reference to the Plumbing Code that
will also mean the Village Amendments to the Plumbing Code, enumerated below
as deletions, modifications and additions.



   Adopted and applicable to the installation and maintenance of and work
on plumbing and drainage systems, new and existing, in the Village, are those
rules and regulations set forth in the State of Illinois Compiled Statutes
225 ILCS 320 and The State of Illinois Plumbing Code, also identified as
Title 77 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Public Health, Chapter 1,
Subchapter r, Water and Sewage, Part 890, et seq., including appendices and
tables, with the modifications set forth below. (Ord. 5002, 7-6-15)



5-4-1-1:  DELETIONS:



The following Sections or Subsections are not adopted and are specifically
excluded in their entirety, unless otherwise specified:



   1.   Section 890.320(1) (2) Joints and Fittings in Plastic Pipe for
potable water.



   2.   Section 890. Appendix A, Table A, Approved Building
Drainage/Vent Pipe, Item 12 reference to  Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe with
Cellular Core only and footnote 4.



   3.   Section 890, Appendix A, Table A, Approved Materials for Water
Service Pipe, Items 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.



   4.   Section 890, Appendix A, Table A, Approved Materials for Water
Distribution Pipe, Items 2, 5, 7, 8 and 9. (Ord. 5002, 7-6-15)



5-4-1-2:  MODIFICATIONS:



The following Sections shall be amended in the following respects:



   1.   Section 890.310 shall be amended to add at the end of the
section the following words: "All copper water tubing, when installed
underground shall be a minimum of Type K, and when above grade shall be a
minimum of Type L."



   2.   Section 890.330(c) shall be amended to delete the reference to
CPVC for potable water applications.



   3.   Section 890.340 f) Copper water tube is to be amended to add
the following language at the end of the subsection:



      a.   Flared joint adapter shall be required at all water
service supply lines two (2) inch or less with full port ball valve upstream
of water meter.



      b.   Soldered and/or braised fittings shall not be installed
below grade. (Ord. 5002, 7-6-15)



5-4-1-3:  SECTION ADDITIONS:



The following new Sections or Subsections shall be added at the appropriate
location in their entirety:



   1.    Section 890.420 (a) (6) Pipe Cleanouts



      On multiple units with slab on grade construction a cleanout
shall be extended to the exterior of foundation at end of building drain
run(s) where feasible.



   2.   Section 890.1360 - Sanitary wastes below sewer:  b) Design:
add at end subsection no sump or ejector basin shall be less than 30" deep
with minimum 14" sump below inlet pipe invert or of approved design specified
by the manufacturer. (Ord. 5002, 7-6-15)



5-4-2:  PLUMBING PERMIT REQUIRED:



   1.   WORK PERMIT:



      a.   No plumbing work whether new construction or alteration
shall be undertaken by any person, firm or corporation unless a permit has
been issued therefor. The plumbing permit may be included on the Village
Building Permit.



      b.   A plumbing permit shall only be issued to a licensed
plumbing contractor, except as specified in (3), below.



      c.   In the case of a single family residence, a plumbing
permit may be issued to the owner/occupant or lessee/occupant of said
residence. Further, such owner/occupant or lessee/occupant shall only employ
a licensed plumber.



   2.   APPLICATION:



      Application for a plumbing permit shall be made on the forms
provided by the Village Building Department. Said application shall be
accompanied by the fees established by Ordinance.



   3.   ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:



      No plumbing permit shall be issued until after plans and
specifications showing the proposed plumbing work have been submitted,
reviewed and approved by the Village Building Department. If a plumbing
permit is denied, the applicant shall submit revised plans and
specifications. When it is found necessary to make any change in the plumbing
from the plans and specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended
plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Village Building
Department for approval prior to actual making of any change in the plumbing
system. (Ord. 5002, 7-6-15)



5-4-3:  LOCAL ORLAND PARK WATER, SANITARY SEWER AND STORM SEWER AND
APPURTENANCE REGULATIONS:



   1.   LAWN SPRINKLERS:



      Any lawn sprinkler controls, piping or appendages placed in
public rights-of- way shall be located not less than three (3) feet from any
existing or planned public street curb and gutter line. In addition, all lawn
sprinkler systems shall be equipped with an approved rain detection device.
The Village shall not be responsible for the maintenance of private lawn
sprinkler systems within the public rights-of-way. The adjacent property
owner assumes all risk involved in choosing to place lawn sprinkler
components in the public rights-of-way. Furthermore, the Village of Orland
Park shall not be responsible for the restoration or repair of private
sprinkler systems within the public rights-of-way.



   2.   WATER CONSERVATION:



      Pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3730.307 4) and subject to the
Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation
Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code
892), all new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after
the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label ( as
designed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program),
when such labeled features are available.



   3.   HEALTH AND SITE DRAINAGE REGULATIONS:



      See Village Code for local regulations



      Building Code 5-1-13, Chapters 1, 12 and 29



      Energy Code 5-1-13, Chapter 13, Energy Efficiency



      Health Code 6-1-1-5



(Ord. 5002, 7-6-15)



5-4-4:  VIOLATIONS:



   1.   STATE OF ILLINOIS: Any person, firm or corporation who fails or
refuses to comply with the rules and regulations contained within the Village
of Orland Park's adopted Plumbing Code shall be reported to the Illinois
Department of Public Health.



      Stop Work orders can be enforced until subjects are resolved.



   2.    VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK: Re inspections and changes to the
approved plans which cause additional site inspection visits and plan review
shall follow the required Plumbing Permit Inspection Fees referenced in Title
5, Chapter 2 of the Village Code.  The Village Code can be electronically
accessed at: <http://www.orland park.il.us/>.



      See Village Code for other items referenced in 5-4-3, Item #3,
not regulated in the State of Illinois Plumbing Code for Health and site
drainage concerns. (Ord. 5002, 7-6-15)



CHAPTER 5
FIRE CODE



SECTION:



5-5-1:   Adoption



5-5-2:   Amendment



5-5-3:   Smoke Detectors in Residential Units



5-5-4:   Penalty



5-5-1:  ADOPTION:



   A certain document entitled “International Fire Code 2012", 1st
printing May 2011, published by International Code Council Inc., 4051 West
Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois, 60478-5795 be and hereby is
adopted as the “Fire Code for the Village of Orland Park,” for the
control of buildings and structures as provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said “ICC
International Fire Code 2012" are adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this Code with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed in this Chapter. 



   A copy of the rules and regulations of the “ICC International Fire
Code 2012" printed in book form was on file in the office of the Village
Clerk for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this Code, and
has been and is available for inspection.  Reference in this Chapter to
“this Code” is a reference to the “ICC International Fire Code 2012"
and such reference includes that document and any amendments, or supplements
thereto.  References in this Code to “the building code” shall mean the
Village's Building Code as set forth in Chapter 1 of this Title 5.



5-5-2 AMENDMENTS:



The above Code is amended and changed as follows:



Section 100 shall read as follows:



   101.1 TITLE:  These regulations shall be known as the “Fire Code of
the Village of Orland Park” and hereinafter referred to as “this code”.



Section 101.2 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   101.2 SCOPE:  The purpose and intent of this code is to prescribe
minimum requirements to safeguard life, property, and public welfare from the
hazard of fire and explosion as they directly relate to the Village of Orland
Park Development Services Department's enforcement of the Building Code,
Existing Structures Code and other Codes and Ordinances within the Village
authority of regulation.



Section 101.5.1 is added to read as follows:



   101.5.1 CONFLICTING CODE INFORMATION:  In the event this code or any
portion thereof shall be in conflict with the Village of Orland Park, Village
Code, Ordinance 2989, the Village of Orland Park, Village Code, Ordinance
2989 shall apply. 



Section 102.1 is revised to read as follows:



   102.1 APPLICABILITY OF CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN PROVISIONS:  The
construction and design provisions of this code shall apply to:



      1.    Structures and facilities constructed after the adoption
of this code.



      2.    Existing structures and facilities when required by the
building code listed in Title 5,  Chapter 1, Section 13 of the Village Code.



      3.    Existing structures and facilities which in the opinion
of the Fire Code Official, a distinct or immediate hazard to life or property.



Section-103.1 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   103.1 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:  It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the Fire Protection District of the applicable taxing boundary to inspect and
enforce sections and provisions of this code under the authority of the Fire
Code Official, for structures located within the Village limits.  Where a
Fire District will not enforce the provisions of this Code, the Village will
administer this function.



Section-103.2 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   103.2 APPOINTMENT:  The Fire Code Official shall be appointed by the
Village of Orland Park and the Fire Code Official shall not be removed from
office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific
and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority. The Village Fire
Code Official may designate code enforcement operations to any Fire District
located within the Village limits.



Section 105.1.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   105.1.1 PERMITS REQUIRED Permits required.  Permits required by this
code shall be obtained from the Fire Code Official.  Permit fees per Village
Code Title 5 Chapter 2, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. 
Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times
and shall be readily available for inspection by the Fire Code Official.



   105.1.1.1 Permit Plans:  Fire protection plans shall be submitted
prior to any construction or alterations of fire protection systems. 
Construction plans shall be approved by the Village of Orland Park.  (Ord.
4490, 6-15-09)



Section 106.5 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows:



   106.5 COORDINATED INSPECTION:  The Fire Code Official shall coordinate
to the extent possible, fire prevention inspections with the fire districts
located within the Village during rough and final inspections and business
license inspections for the purpose of not subjecting owners and occupants of
structures to numerous visits by inspectors with multiple or conflicting
orders.



Section 108.3 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   108.3 MEMBERS OF BOARD:  The Board of Appeals shall consist of five
members appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the
Village Board of Trustees. The Board members shall be qualified by experience
and training to rule on matters pertaining to building construction. The
Chair shall be a Village Trustee, two members shall be from the Village
Building Department and two members shall be from the Fire Prevention Bureau.
They shall serve staggered terms.



Section 109.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



   109.3 VIOLATION PENALTIES:  Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a fire protection system in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to
the penalty as described in this code (5-5-4) or as specified by other
adopted ordinances.



      109.3.1 Abatement of violation.  In addition to the imposition
of the penalties herein described, the Fire Code Official is authorized to
institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure
or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a
structure on or about any premises.



Section 111.4 shall be revised to read as follows:



   Stop Work Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable for a fine as stated in Section 5-5-4 of this code.  Where
conflicts exist within the Village Code regarding fines, the more specific
shall apply.



Section 201.4 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   201.4 TERMS NOT DEFINED:  Where terms are not defined in this code and
are defined in the building, mechanical, plumbing or reference standards
(Chapter 45), such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those
codes.



Section 202 shall include or revise the following definitions:



   202.0: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:  Shall be amended and added with the
following revisions:



      Fire District            The Orland, Mokena, Palos,
Tinley or Oak Forest Fire Protection Districts.



      Fire Code Official         The Code Official of the
Village of Orland Park.



      Fire Prevention Code Official      The Official of the Fire
District designated to perform inspections, testing and maintenance
operations as regulated under this code.



      Fire District Official         The highest ranking
officer of the Fire District on duty at any time.



      Fire Prevention Bureau      The division of the Fire
District which implements inspection and enforcement pursuant to this code.



      The Village            Shall mean the Village of
Orland Park, Illinois.



Section 307.1 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   307.1 OPEN BURNING GENERAL:  A person shall not cause or allow open
burning except as provided for in sections 307.2 and 307.2.2; except that the
burning or organic horticultural landscape waste shall be controlled by Title
6, Chapter 5 of the Village Code.



Section 307.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.2 OPEN BURNING-PERMIT REQUIRED:  Open burning shall be allowed
after obtaining a permit from the Village or the Fire Protection District.
Open Burning Permits shall be granted pursuant to meeting the Fire Safety
requirement of this Code and as allowed by the Fire Code Official and the
Fire Prevention Code Official.



   Exceptions:



      1.   Small residential recreational fires are permitted in
approved containers that are not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a
structure, lot line, trees, landscaping or types of combustibles.



      2.   Small open residential recreational fires are allowed
with a minimum required distance from a structure of at least 25 feet (7620
mm) where the pile size is 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet
(610 mm) or less in height. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread
within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to
ignition. Open burning permits shall not violate any other provisions of the
Village Code.



      3.   Single Family residential barbeque cooking equipment is
permitted when clearance to combustibles are maintained as required by the
appliance manufacturer.



Section 307.2.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.2.2 OPEN BURNING-NO PERMIT REQUIRED:  Open burning shall be
allowed without prior notification to the Fire Code Official for highway
flares, smudge pots and similar occupational needs.



Section 307.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.4 LOCATION:  The location of any open burning shall not be less
than 1,000 feet from any structure and provisions shall be made to prevent
the fire from spreading to within 1,000 feet of any structure for Dutch Elm
Disease Control, silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices,
prevention or control of disease or pests



   Exceptions:



      1.   Fires in approved non-combustible containers and no
larger than a 55 gallon drum are permitted when located at least 20 feet from
a structure. This clearance includes any overhanging limbs.



      2.   When open pile sizes are less than 3 feet in diameter and
2 feet or less in height, open burning is permitted when at least 25 feet
from a structure or other combustible landscape.  This clearance includes
any overhanging limbs.



Section 310.9 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows:



   310.9 NO SMOKING ORDINANCE:  The Village of Orland Park “No Smoking
Ordinance -Title 6, Chapter 2-2-2-12 shall be followed as amended.



Section 502 the following definition shall be added:



   Authorized Emergency Vehicle:  Authorized emergency vehicles shall be
restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the laws of the
State of Illinois.



Section 503.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   503.1 FIRE LANES WHERE REQUIRED:  In commercial buildings, an
emergency access lane shall be provided of at least 12 feet in width and
available for use by emergency vehicles.  See Village Code Title 9, Chapter
7, Sections 5 and 10 for additional regulations.  The Village Building Code
Title 5, Chapter 1, shall also apply where applicable.



Section 503.7 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows and Sections
503.7.1 and 503.7.2 are added:



   503.7 FIRE LANE DESIGNATION:  The Fire Code Official shall require and
designate public and private fire lanes as deemed necessary for effective and
efficient operation of fire apparatus. Fire lanes shall have a minimum width
of 18 feet. Turn arounds shall be provided at the ends of all dead end fire
lanes that exceed 150 feet. All cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum diameter of
90 feet if parking is allowed.  Center islands with raised curbs (as
required by the Land Development Code), shall be limited and sized to permit
fire truck access.



   503.7.1 PAVED FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:  Fire lanes on private
property, devoted to public use, shall be provided so that the first
responding fire district pumper unit will be able to be so located that all
points of the interior of the building may be reached by 150 feet of initial
attack hose.  EXCEPTION: Where the size or height or location of the
building does not allow this regulation to be met, an interior standpipe
system, equipped with fire department hose connections approved by the Fire
Prevention Bureau shall be required.  The standpipe system shall be
connected to a public water system, and shall have a fire department
connection installed per NFPA 13 as listed in Chapter 45.



   503.7.2 FIRE LANE PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ACCESS FOR FIRE APPARATUS:  Public
or private access shall be provided for fire apparatus when the building is
three (3) stories or higher.  The fire lane access for an aerial ladder
and/or mechanically elevated mechanism shall be provided to cover 3/4 (75%)
of all exterior building walls.  Fire Lanes shall also be designed using the
requirements of the Village Code Title 9-7-10 and items listed below.



      1)   Width of Paved Fire Lanes: The minimum width of fire
lanes shall be 18 feet, and an inside radius of 45 feet shall be provided to
accommodate vehicles when turning. The fire lanes shall be placed 25 feet
from the building to the edge of the fire lane, or 35 feet to the center of
the fire lane to the building. Public parking areas used as fire lanes shall
have 25 feet to the rear of parking spaces from the building, and 24 feet of
open area to the rear of the parking spaces.



      2)   Paved Fire lane Turn-Arounds: Fire lane turn-arounds
shall have an inside radius of 45 feet and shall have a driving area width of
27 feet in order to accommodate vehicles.



      3)    Weight Load of a Paved Fire Lane: The weight load that a
fire lane shall support is a minimum of 72,000 lbs.



Section 505.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   505.1 ADDRESS NUMBERS:  New and existing building address numbers
shall be placed on the front of all buildings (facing the street right of
way) conforming with the requirements of the Village Building Code 5-1-13
Section 512.1.  Buildings with the same address shall identify all exterior
exit doors with a designation number below the address number as required by
the Fire Code Official.  Example A, B, C, D.  Also see Section 6812 of this
Code.



Section 506.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   506.1 KEY BOXES WHERE REQUIRED:  A keyed knox-box shall be installed
on all commercial buildings as required by the Village Building Code 5 1-13
as amended (901.8.1 & 901.9).  IFC Subsections 506.1.1, 506.1.2 and 506.2
for locks and keys shall not be deleted from this code.



Section 507.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   507.1 REQUIRED WATER SUPPLY:  The Fire Prevention Bureau shall work in
conjunction with the Official of the Village on the location or relocation of
new or existing fire hydrants and the placement of water mains or replacement
of inadequate water mains located upon public property; deemed necessary to
provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern.



      1)   This section applies to newly constructed buildings and
structures and to those having the area of height of the building or
structure enlarged.



      2)   All buildings or structures shall be served by a public
water supply system meeting these criteria. This system shall be under
pressure with an average static pressure of not less than 35 pounds per
square inch (psi). Flow tests shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291
listed in Chapter 44. Flow tests shall be calculated at 20 psi residual
pressure. The supplies shall be available for a four hour duration.



      3)   No part of any building or structure shall be over 300
feet from at least one public fire hydrant.



Section 507.5.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   507.5.1 FIRE HYDRANTS WHERE REQUIRED:  All new and existing oil
storage, lumber yards, amusement or exhibition parks, and educational or
institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire
or life hazards, and which are located more than 150 feet from a public
street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the
public water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire
hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as
required by the Fire Code Official and shall be connected to a water system
in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The Fire Code Official
shall designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The
Fire Code Official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and
equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the
establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires
such measures. The Village Land Development Code 6-410 B. 6 "Fire Hydrant
Spacing", shall apply for location regulations of Village Fire Hydrants.



      1)   Fire hydrants should be located along public streets so
that no portion of the building or structure will be over 300 feet from a
single fire hydrant. Where this is not possible, additional hydrants should
be located on the premises accessible to motorized fire apparatus.



      2)   One hydrant shall be located at each intersection and
intermediate hydrants where distance between intersections exceeds 400 feet.



      3)   Where streets or parking lots dead end, hydrants shall be
placed along the access route.



      4)   At least one fire hydrant shall be located within 300
feet of the building.



      5)   Additional fire hydrants shall be provided within 500
feet of the building so that the fire flow required divided by 1000 will
equal the number of hydrants available.



      6)   Hydrants should be so located that:



         a)   Hydrants will be located approximately ten (10)
feet from all weather roadways.  If this cannot be done, the closest part of
the hydrant shall be set back at least two (2) feet from the curb line;



         b)   No fire hydrants may be installed on underground
building water service lines; and



         c)   Access to fire hydrants shall be by all-weather
roadways adequate in width, clearance and strength for firefighting purposes.
Such routes shall be maintained accessible during all seasons of the year.



      7)   Fire hydrants used in conjunction with water supplies
shall meet the standards of the American Water Works Association Standard No.
C-502, and shall have two 2 1/2 inch and one 4 1/2 inch outlets with
auxiliary gate valves on the hydrant branch line. Threads shall be American
National Standard. Four and one-half (4 1/2) inch outlets shall face roadways.



      8)   All new and existing fire hydrants shall be color coded
in accordance with NFPA 291 (Chapter 3) listed in Chapter 44. Hydrants rated
at less than 20 psi shall have the rated pressure stenciled in black on the
hydrant cap.



Section 605.5 shall be amended to read in its entirety:



   605.5 EXTENSION CORDS:  Extension cords and flexible cords shall not
be a substitute for permanent wiring.  Extension cords and flexible cords
shall not be affixed to structures; extended through walls, ceilings or
floors, or under doors or floor coverings, nor shall such cords be subject to
environmental damage or physical impact.  Type USE, SA and SJ cords shall be
limited to a maximum length of six (6) feet.



   Existing Model Code Subsections 605.5.1 through 605.5.4 remain
applicable to this section. 



Section 609.1 shall be amended to read in its entirety:



   609.1 COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOODS - GENERAL:  Commercial kitchen exhaust
hoods shall comply with the requirements of the ICC® International
Mechanical Code and NFPA 96. 



Section 901.1.1 shall be added to read:



   901.1.1 BUILDING CODE CONFORMANCE:  The sections and subsections of
this Chapter 9 shall not conflict with any of the building code requirements
shown in the Village Code 5-1-13.



   Where similar specification items are regulated the Building Code shall
apply as determined by the Fire Code Official.



Section 901.3.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   901.3.1 FIRE SPRINKLER AND ALARM PLANS:  Fire protection system plans
shall be submitted to the Village of Orland Park for review and approval
prior to any construction of new or change to existing equipment systems. 
Completion letters are required from the installer per NFPA 72 and NFPA 13
standards prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.



Section 901.4.8 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows:



   901.4.8 FIRE SPRINKLER INSTALLERS:  A copy of the Fire Sprinkler
Contractor's License shall be submitted with the plans. The Office of the
Illinois State Fire Marshal requires any person, partnership, corporation or
other business entity that installs or repairs any fire sprinkler system in
Illinois to be licensed. The Fire Sprinkler Contractor Licensing Act [225
ILCS 317/1 et seq.] establishes the minimum standards for licensure of fire
sprinkler installation contractors for the purpose of protecting the public
health and general welfare of the citizens of Illinois.



Sections 901.7.7 and 907.7.8 shall be added:



   901.7.7 FIRE WATCH:  The Fire District or the Village may require a
fire watch upon any premises on which dangerous or hazardous conditions
exist.  Conditions that may require a fire watch shall include, but are not
limited to, the following circumstances:



      1.   Newly constructed building opened for occupancy prior to
completion of the fire safety equipment and supervision.



      2.   Building in which the fire safety equipment and
supervision is placed out of service and will not be restored within one (1)
hour.



      3.   At special times when a building(s) occupancy is greater
than the posted numbers.



      4.   Special programs or events where there will be space for
standing room over the seating area and the exits will handle both seated and
standing people.



      5.   Situations where the fire load is greater than normal day
to day operation.



   901.7.8 NUMBER OF INSPECTORS:  The Fire Code Official shall determine
the number of personnel required for the fire watch.  The owner or occupant
shall be charged for the fire watch when applicable.



Sections 903.2 and 903.3 shall be revised to read as follows:



   903.2 and 903.3 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS REQUIRED:  These
sections shall comply with the Village Building Code Title 5-1-13. Items not
referenced in the Building Code shall be reviewed by the Fire Code Official
for applicability.



Section 904.3 shall be amended to read in its entirety:



   904.3 AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM INSTALLATION:  Automatic
fire-extinguishing systems shall be installed in accordance with this section
904.3.1 through 904.3.5.  All new kitchen hood automatic fire-extinguishing
suppression systems (904.11) and alternative automatic fire-extinguishing
systems (904) shall be supervised by the building fire alarm system.



Section 905.12 shall be added to read as follows:



   905.12 STANDPIPE SYSTEM:  See Section 503.7.1 and allowed exceptions
in NFPA 14.  Standpipes are required per Section 905.4 of the Fire Code.



Section 906.1 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   906.1 PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS WHERE REQUIRED:  All tenant spaces
and buildings except Use Groups R-3 and R-4 shall have a minimum of one (1)
fire extinguisher located within five (5) feet of each exit door.  All other
areas shall have extinguishers installed in accordance with NFPA 10 listed in
Chapter 80.  All locations shall be approved by the Fire Code Official. 
906.1, Fire Code items 2 - 6 shall apply in addition to Table 906.1 for
locations of required portable extinguishers.



Section 906.2 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   906.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS: The minimum size fire extinguisher shall
have a 4A 60BC rating.  Subsection 906.2.1 shall apply to this Section 906.2



Section 906.3 shall be deleted.



Table 906.3(1) and Table 906.3(2) shall be deleted.



Section 906.4 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   906.4 COOKING GREASE FIRES:  All areas with a wet-chemical
extinguishing system shall have a six-liter wet chemical potassium based fire
extinguisher installed within the area in addition to other required fire
extinguishers.  Additional extinguishers may be required by the Fire Code
Official.  See Section 904.11.5 for requirements for portable fire
extinguishers for commercial cooking equipment.



Section 907.1.4 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows:



   FIRE ALARM PANEL LOCATION:  All new fire alarm control units shall be
located at the main entrance / exit.



Sections 907.6.5 and 907.6.5.1 are amended to read in their entirety as
follows:



   907.6.5 EXISTING FIRE PROTECTIVE SIGNALING SYSTEM:  All Fire
Protective Signaling shall have an approved signaling and monitoring system.



   907.6.5.1 FIRE ALARM MONITORING AND SUPERVISION:



   1.   All new fire detection and protective signaling systems
installed within the Village of Orland Park shall be monitored by a remote
supervisory station as designated by the Village of Orland Park as the
Authority Having Jurisdiction in accordance with NFPA 72-13 (2013 Edition) as
listed in Chapter 80.



   2.   All existing fire suppression, detection and protective
signaling systems installed within the Village of Orland Park shall be
monitored by a remote supervisory station as designated by the Village of
Orland Park as the Authority Having Jurisdiction in accordance with NFPA
72-13 (2013 Edition) as listed in Chapter 80.



Section 907.8 is amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   907.8 INSPECTION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE FOR FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION
SYSTEMS:  The maintenance and testing schedules and procedures for all new
and existing fire alarm and detection systems shall be in accordance with
this section and Chapter 10 of NFPA 72. 



   (Remaining Subsections 907.8.1 and 907.8.2 of this Section shall be
applicable)



Section 912.7 shall be added to read as follows:



   912.7 FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS FROM HYDANTS:  Fire hydrants shall
be placed within 100 feet of all fire sprinkler systems and or standpipe
connections provided on buildings unless otherwise directed by the Fire Code
Official.



Section 1001.1.1 shall be added to read:



   1001.1.1 BUILDING CODE CONFORMANCE:  The sections and subsections of
this Chapter 10 shall not conflict with any of the building code requirements
shown in the Village Code 5-1-13.  Where similar specification items are
regulated, the Building Code shall apply as determined by the Building/Fire
Code Official.



Section 1021.1 shall be amended to read:



   1021.1 NUMBER OF EXITS:  The number of exits required for a building,
floor or space shall conform with the Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 1. 



Section 1103.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   1103.1 REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS:  Existing
buildings shall comply with the minimum requirements as regulated by the
adopted Building Code as referenced in the Village Code (VC) Title 5, Chapter
1.  This adopted Building Code includes deletions and revisions to the IBC
Model Code language as amended. 



Chapter 11 -Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings:



   The following Sections shall be deleted:



   Section 1103.2 shall be deleted - Emergency responder radio coverage in
Existing buildings



   Section 1103.3 shall be deleted - Existing Elevator Operation,
Emergency fire-fighting operation



   Section 1103.6 shall be deleted - Existing Standpipes



   Section 1103.7.1 to 7.7 shall be deleted - Existing Fire alarm systems



Section 1103.9 shall be amended to read as follows: 



   1103.9 CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS IN EXISTING I AND R USE GROUPS.



   See the Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act, 430 ILCS 135/1 et seq., for
required carbon monoxide detectors and a building owner's responsibility for
existing buildings.  State laws are enforced through the Attorney General's
Office



Section 2301.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   2301.1 Automotive and Garage Uses Scope. Automotive motor
fuel-dispensing facilities, marine motor fuel-dispensing facilities, fleet
vehicle motor fuel-dispensing facilities and repair garages shall be in
accordance with this chapter and the International Building Code,
International Fuel Gas Code and the International Mechanical Code. Such
operations shall include both operations that are accessible to the public
and private operations. Title 5 Chapter 1 "Building Code" Section 13
amendments shall apply wherever conflicts occur between this code and the
Building Code.



Section 3101.1 shall be revised to read as follows:



   SECTION 3101



   TENTS AND OTHER MEMBRANE STRUCTURES GENERAL



   3101.1 SCOPE.  Tents, canopies and membrane structures shall comply
with this chapter. The provisions of Section 3103 are applicable only to
temporary membrane structures. The provisions of Section 3104 are applicable
to temporary and permanent membrane structures.



3101.1.1 shall be added:



   3101.1.1 CANOPY FOR AGRICULTURAL USE:  The regulations for a
"Agricultural Canopy" to be allowed for an Agricultural Use, shall follow
this code and the requirements of the Building Code as amended (5-1-13
Sections 202, 312.1, 501.3.2, 907.2 and Chapter 35 Appendix C).



   3101.2. VILLAGE CODE REGULATIONS:  Requirements of the Land
Development Code or other Village Codes amendments/restrictions shall apply
to these types of structures.



Section 5003.4 shall be amended with additions to read as follows:



   5003.4 MATERIALS SAFETY DATA SHEETS:  All buildings, and/or tenant
spaces containing hazardous materials shall provide a Knox box document
storage cabinet for placement of the MSDS sheets. The box shall be large
enough to accommodate all information.



Sections 5003.4.1 through 5003.4.2 shall be added to read in their entirety
as follows:



   5003.4.1 HAZ-MAT KNOX BOX LOCATION:  The location of the "Knox Box"
shall be by the main entrance unless an alternate location is approved in
writing by the Fire District.



   5003.4.2 HAZ-MAT KNOX BOX MOUNTING HEIGHT:  The "Knox Box" shall be
mounted between a minimum of 48 inches to a maximum height of six (6) feet
above the immediate surrounding grade in which a person can stand on without
any assistance.



   5003.4.3 KNOX BOX:  All buildings, structures or tenant spaces to be
supervised as required by this code shall provide a "Knox Box" for placement
of keys for access to the building, structure or tenant space for fire
district use in case of an emergency. Tenants in a shopping center and
multi-story office building may share a "Knox Box" with other tenants.
However, verification in writing from the fire district is required. There
shall be a maximum of seven (7) tenants per box.



   5003.4.4 BUILDING ACCESS KEYS:  Building or tenant space access keys
shall be provided to the Fire District to be placed in the building knox box
prior to occupancy.



   5003.4.5 KNOX BOX LOCATION:  The location of the "Knox Box" shall be
by the main entrance unless an alternate location is approved in writing by
the Fire District.



   5003.4.6 KNOX BOX MOUNTING HEIGHT:  The "Knox Box" shall be mounted
between a minimum of 48 inches to a maximum height of six (6) feet above the
immediate surrounding grade in which a person can stand on without any
assistance.



   5003.4.7 KNOX BOX SUPERVISION:  All "Knox Boxes" shall be supervised
in the "trouble mode" of the fire alarm system.



Section 5601.1 and 5601.2.2 shall be amended to read in its entirety as
follows:



   5601.1 SCOPE-FIREWORKS:  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership, or any corporation to offer
for sale, display for sale, sell at retail, provide storage for, use or
possess, manufacture fireworks or explode any fireworks within the Village of
Orland Park, provided, however, the Board of Trustees of the Orland Fire
Protection District shall have the right to issue a permit for the supervised
public displays of fireworks, provided the applicant for such permit shall
comply with the regulation hereinafter established for the issuance of such
permit, in accordance with applicable state law and intergovernmental
agreements entered into with underlying municipalities.



   EXCEPTION:  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prohibit
the use of fire works by railroads, public utilities, public or private
carriers, or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or
illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges, for show or theater, or
for the signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by
veteran or military organizations.



   5601.2.2 SALE AND RETAIL DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS:  This subsection shall
be deleted.



Section 5601.3 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   5601.3 PROHIBITED EXPLOSIVES:  The storage of explosives and blasting
agents is prohibited.



Sections 5601.7 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   5601.7 SEIZURE:  The Village Police Department shall seize, take,
remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, all stocks of
fireworks or explosives offered or exposed for display or sale, stored or
held in violation of this article.



Section 5605 Manufacture, Assembly and Testing of Explosives, Explosive
Material and Fireworks:  This entire Section shall be deleted.



Section 5608.1 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   5608.1 FIREWORKS DISPLAY RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR APPROVAL:



      1. The supervised public display of fireworks may be permitted
under the following requirements:



         A.   The person in charge of a public fireworks display
shall be at the site and have a copy of the permit in his possession at all
times during the set-up and display.



         B.   Due to the hazardous nature of materials involved
no fireworks should be stored on location prior to set up and show time.



         C.   Persons setting up and shooting the fireworks
display should be experienced and professional shooters.



         D.   Sufficient security should be provided to keep all
persons except company employees at least five hundred feet from display area
during setup and firing.



      2.   The supplier of the fireworks should have a current State
of Illinois permit number.



      3.   There shall be no trees or utility poles or any type of
obstruction within fifty (50) feet of the firing area or range and the site
shall be no less than two hundred (200) feet from railroads, highways,
general public, or any other structures, nor less than six hundred (600) feet
from any hospital, asylum or infirmary.



      4.   Wet the grass down around mortar continuously for a
minimum of eight (8) hours before firing or to the satisfaction of the Fire
Code Official. There shall be one mortar loader for each six (6) mortars.



      5.   The Fire District shall be at the site of the firing with
a minimum of one (1) engine that is properly staffed.



      6.   Mortar holes to be drilled in a minimum three quarters
(3/4) of the length of the mortar and dirt to be packed around the mortar.



      7.   Mortars shall be two (2) feet apart with the minimum
distance of six (6) feet between mortars of different sizes.



      8.   Loader and shooter shall wear tight fitting
non-combustible clothing and shall not have been under the influence of
alcoholic beverages or drugs or controlled substances for twelve (12) hours
before firing.



      9.   No firing shall take place if the wind is twenty (20)
miles per hour or above.



      10.   All aerial displays shall be kept in wooden boxes with
self closing covers: maximum size of thirty-six (36) inches by twenty-four
(24) inches by twenty-four (24) and two (2) inches off the ground, and boxes
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the mortars.



Section 5608.2 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   5608.2 PERMIT APPLICATION:  The application for permit for supervised
display of fireworks shall be made directly to the Fire District. Each
application for a permit shall be made at least fifteen (15) days in advance
of the date of the display and action on such application shall be taken
forty-eight (48) hours after such application is received by the appropriate
Fire District officials. The Village Code Title 8 (Police Department) Chapter
6 Section 10 (as amended) shall apply to Fireworks regulations.



Sections 5608.11 through 5608.11.5 FIREWORKS shall be added to read in their
entirety as follows:



   5608.11 INFORMATION:  Each applicant shall supply the Fire District
with sufficient information so that the Fire District may file with the State
Fire Marshal's Office notice relative to public display of fireworks.



   5608.11.1 LIMITATION:  After a permit has been issued under these
rules and regulations, the possession, sale, use and detonation of fireworks
for such display shall be limited for that purpose only.



   5608.11.2 TRANSFER:  No permit granted hereunder shall be transferred
to any other person, organization or location.



   5608.11.3 NOT FIRED FIREWORKS:  The supplier of the fireworks shall be
solely responsible for the recovery of all fireworks, and aerial displays
that have not fired and shall not transfer same to any unlicensed person or
organization



   5608.11.4 RECOVERY:  Recovery or the search for un-fired displays
shall start immediately, or not later than sunrise. The area of a misfire
shell shall be guarded by the display company at their cost from the time of
the firing until the discovery and removal of the shell.



   5608.11.5 COST:  The cost of recovering the shells shall be solely the
responsibility of the fireworks supplier and/or dealer.



Section 5703.6.12 and its Subsections shall be added to read in their
entirety as follows:



   5703.6.12 FUEL DISPENSING SYSTEMS:  Above ground tanks are permitted
to be used to store motor fuels on premises generally not accessible to the
general public when they are installed in a special enclosure constructed in
accordance with NFPA 30 listed in Chapter 80, or are protected by a listed
and approved tank enclosure assembly which provides fire resistance
protection of not less than 2 hours from exposure to a flammable liquid pool
fire provided that specific approvals is obtained from the Fire District. 
See vaults required for all tanks per Section 5704.2.8.  Above ground tanks
shall conform with Section 5704.2.9.5 when allowed inside buildings and
5704.9.6 for tanks outside of buildings.



   5703.6.12.1 BARRIER PROTECTION:  Physical barriers complying with
Sections 5704.2.8.6, 5704.2.7.5, 5704.4.5 and 312 shall be provided to
protect the area where tanks are located.



   5703.6.12.2 ACCESS:  Each tank and each special enclosure shall be
surrounded by a clear accessible space not less than 3 feet in width to allow
for maintenance and inspection.  All tanks require vaults per 5704.2.8. 
See Section 5704.2.8.4 for intent.



   5703.6.12.3 CAPACITY LIMITS:  Tanks containing motor fuels shall not
exceed 2,500 gallons individual, or 5,000 gallons aggregate capacity.
Installations having the maximum allowable aggregate capacity shall be
separated from other such installations by not less than 100 feet.



   5703.6.12.4 SHUT-OFFS:  Tanks shall be provided with automatic fuel
shut-off devices capable of stopping the delivery of fuel into the storage
tank at 90 percent tank capacity.  See Sections 5704.2.7.5.8 and
5704.2.9.7.6 for "Overfill Protection".



   5703.6.12.5 FUEL DELIVERY:  Motor fuels shall be transferred from
tanks by means of fixed pumps so designed and equipped as to allow control of
the flow and to prevent leakage or accidental discharge. Dispensing devices
are permitted to be installed on top of special enclosures.  See Section
5705.2 for "Liquid Transfer" for container filling.



   5703.6.12.6 TANK OPENINGS AND CONNECTIONS:  Tank and tank enclosure
openings for inspection and for piping and vent connections shall be through
the top only. Approved anti-siphon devices shall be installed at each
connection of piping to a tank when such tank piping extends below the level
of the top of such tank.



   5703.6.12.7 SEPARATION DISTANCES:  Each tank and each special
enclosure shall be separated from buildings, lot lines, and public ways by
not less than that shown in Table 5704.4.2 and in no case less than 5 feet
for Types II & III liquids.



   5703.6.12.8 DIKING:  Sufficient concrete diking to handle a full load
of the largest tank shall be provided as noted in Section 5704.2.10 and per
NFPA 30 listed in Chapter 80.



Section 5704.2.11.5 shall amend 5704.2.11.5.2 and add Sub-Section
5704.2.11.5.3 to read:



   5704.2.11.5.2 UNDERGROUND TANKS DISCHARGE LINE LEAK DETECTORS:  An
approved discharge line lead detector shall be installed on all discharge
lines from the underground storage tanks that utilize a submergible pump for
pressurization of the discharge line system.



   5704.2.11.5.3 LIQUID SUMP:  For the purpose of monitoring the
possibility of an underground leak of product from an underground storage
tank, a ten inch (10") minimum diameter galvanized steel culvert sump shall
be installed as close as possible to underground storage tanks used for the
storage of flammable, combustible and/or hazardous liquids. The culvert sump
shall extend upward from a minimum of one foot (1') below the bottom of the
lowest tank in the area. The culvert shall be perforated with a reasonable
number of large holes from its lowest level upward to allow any liquid in the
ground to flow into the sump. The steel culvert sump shall be surrounded with
Number Two (#2) Stone for a minimum of twenty-four inches (24") in diameter.
The top of the culvert sump shall be housed in a metal vault enclosure with a
removable cap for ease of inspection and maintenance. The location, design
and installation shall be approved by the fire district.



Section 5704.2.12.3 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows:



   5704.2.12.3 RETESTING:  All tanks and piping shall be retested every
five (5) years when less than 15 years of age, and every two (2) years
thereafter. Testing shall be performed by a certified testing agency and
results forwarded to the applicable Fire District.



Section 5704.2.14 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows:



   5704.2.14 REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF TANKS:  Removal and disposal of
tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.14.1  and 5704.2.14.2 and shall
require permit(s) from the Village of Orland Park.



Section 5706.6.2 shall be amended to read in its entirety as follows:



   3406.6.2 5706.6.2 TANK VEHICLE PARKING AND GARAGES:  No tank vehicle
shall be left unattended on any lot, street, highway, avenue, alley or any
other location within the Village of Orland Park, public or private.



Delete Section 5706.6.2.1 in its entirety.  (Parking of Tanks near Res.
Educ. Inst & High Risk areas) 



Delete Section 5706.6.2.2 in its entirety.  (Parking of Tanks on
Thoroughfares) 



Delete Section 5706.6.2.3 in its entirety.  (Parking of Tanks for Durations
exceeding 1-hour) 



Delete Section 5706.6.3 in its entirety.    (Parking of Tanks in Garaged
buildings) 



Sections 6109.16 shall be added to read in its entirety:



   6109.16 LP-GAS ABOVE GROUND STORAGE:  The above ground storage of
liquefied petroleum gas requires a separate permit application for approval
by The Village of Orland Park.



Delete Sections 6111.1, 6111.2 in their entirety (Parking and Garaging of
LP-Tank Vehicles)



Section 6111.3 shall be added to read in its entirety as follows:



   6111.3 PARKING AND GARAGING:  The parking and garaging of tank
vehicles used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases shall be in
accordance with NFPA 58 listed in Chapter 45. No tank vehicle shall be left
unattended on any lot, street, highway, avenue, alley or any other location
within the Village of Orland Park, public or private.



Chapter 68: BASIC FIRE CONTROL MEASURES Shall be added to read as follows:



   Section 6801 SCOPE:  Adoption of fire control measures and
regulations. There has been adopted by the Orland Fire Protection District
fire control measures and regulations as herein set forth for the purposes of
controlling conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression
forces.



   Section 6802 AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND OTHER EMERGENCIES:  The Fire
District Official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at
the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and
property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to
extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other
hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in
the reasonable performance of their duty.



   The Village Police Department may prohibit any person, vehicle or
object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from
the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with
the operations of the fire department. The Village Police Department may
remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous
areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately
and shall not re-enter the area until authorized to do so by the Village
Police Department.



   Section 6803 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DISTRICT OPERATIONS:  It shall be
unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere
with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel of any
fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt
to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire
department operation.



   Section 6804 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS:  A person shall not willfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire
District Official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of another
individual.



   Section  6805 VEHICLES CROSSING FIRE HOSE:  A vehicle shall not be
driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire district when
laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular
roadway without the consent of the fire prevention code official in command
of said operation



   Section 6806 DEFINITION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE:  Authorized
emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and
authorized under the laws of the State of Illinois.



   Section 6807 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY
VEHICLES:  Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving
audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall
immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to
the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any
intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by
the Village Police Department officer(s).



   Section 6808 VEHICLES FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:  It shall be unlawful
for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to
follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to
a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



   Section 6809 UNLAWFUL BOARDING OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE DISTRICT
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT:  A person shall not without proper authorization from
the Fire District Official in charge of said fire district emergency
equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing
upon any fire district emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at
rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon,
or to manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any
levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment.



   Section 6810 DAMAGE, INJURY-FIRE DEPARTMENT-EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL  It
shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire
to damage or deface, any fire district emergency vehicle at any time or to
injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire district personnel while
performing departmental duties.



   Section 6811 BLOCKING FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE DISTRICT CONNECTIONS:  It
shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict
the access to any fire hydrant or any fire district connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire
department connections located on public or private streets and access lanes
or on private property. All vehicles blocking fire hydrants and fire
department connections shall be moved immediately.



   Section 6812 BUILDING ADDRESS NUMBERS:  New and existing buildings
shall have approved address numbers placed in a location that shall be
plainly visible from the street. The location of the address numbers shall be
approved by the Fire Code Official. Address numbers shall be a minimum of 6
inches (6") high with a minimum stroke width of one-quarter (1/4) inches
wide. Address numbers on glass doors, windows, or store fronts shall be white
in color. Address numbers meeting the above requirements shall be affixed to
the rear and all of each tenant space exterior doors in multi-tenant
occupancies. (Ord. 3343, 3-6-00). Residential Address numbers are allowed to
be reduced to 4 inches in height.



Chapter 80: REFERENCED STANDARDS: Shall be amended to add, change or delete
the following standards.



   (A)   Add or Revise the Following Standards:



      NFPA 13-2013 Installation of Fire Sprinklers



      NFPA 14-2013 Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems



      NFPA 70-2011 National Electric Code



      NFPA 72-2013 National Fire Alarm Code



      NFPA 96-2011 Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection
of Commercial Cooking Operations as referenced in the ICC 2012 Mechanical Code



      NFPA-291-2007 Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and
Marking of Hydrants



   (B)   Delete the following sections from the NFPA 70-2011 National
Electrical Code Standard as referenced in the Village Code 5-5, the following
Articles of the NEC 2011 are hereby deleted:



      320 Armored Cable: Type AC



      330 Metal Clad Cable: Type MC



      334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, and NMS



      338 Service Entrance Cable: Types SE and USE 



      362 Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing: Type ENT



      604 Manufactured Wiring Systems



5-5-3:  SMOKE DETECTORS IN RESIDENTIAL UNITS:



   See Village Code 5-1-11 (Building Code) requirements for required
placement of single station smoke alarms in all R (Residential) and I-1
(Assisted Residential) occupancies.  This includes all sleeping rooms and
every room in the path of the means of egress from the unit.



5-5-4  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Ord. 4254, 6-18-07; Amd. Ord. 4342, 3-3-08; Amd. Ord. 4807, 4-1-13; Amd.
Ord. 4978, 4- 6-15; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 6
MECHANICAL CODE



SECTION:



5-6-1:   Adoption



5-6-2:   Deletions



5-6-3:   Amendments



5-6-1:  ADOPTION:



   ADOPTION: A certain document entitled “The International Mechanical
Code/2018 edition, First Printing, 2017” as published by the International
Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois, be and
hereby is adopted as the “Mechanical Code” for the Village of Orland
Park, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the
Village of Orland Park as provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said “International
Mechanical Code/2018" are adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out
in this Code with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed
in this Chapter.



A copy of the rules and regulations of the “International Mechanical
Code/2018" printed in book form was on file in the office of the Village
Clerk for more than thirty (30) days prior to the enactment of this Code, and
has been and is available for inspection.  Reference in this Chapter to
“this Code” is a reference to the “International Mechanical Code/2018"
and such reference includes that document and any amendments, or supplements
thereto whether adopted concurrently or subsequently.  References in this
Code to “the mechanical code” shall mean the Village’s Mechanical Code
as set forth in Chapter 6 of this Title 5, as may be amended from time to
time. (Ord. 4820, 6-3-13; Amd. Ord. 5182, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5435, 10-7-19)



5-6-2:  DELETIONS:



   None.



(Ord. 4820, 6-3-13; Amd. Ord. 5182, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5435, 10-7-19)



5-6-3:  AMENDMENTS:



The following Sections and Subsections are amended in the following respects:



   Chapter 1 – SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION



1.   Section 101.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of
Orland Park, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."



2.   Section 106.5.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   106.5.2: Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as
indicated in Title 5 Chapter 2 of the Village Code



3.   Section 106.5.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



   106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of
fees as follows.



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 75% (percent) of the permit fee paid when
no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Plan reviews completed shall be charged the full fee
designated in Title 5 Chapter 2 of the Village Code for work that has been
canceled.



      The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee
paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not
later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.



4.   Section 108.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   108.4: Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a Village Code offense, punishable by a fine of not more as
specified in the Village Code. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Mechanical work
started or completed without 1st obtaining a mechanical permit shall be
charged double the normal permit fees referenced in Title 5 Chapter 2 of the
Village Code.



5.   Section 109.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   109.2: Means of Appeal and Membership. The board of appeals shall
consist of the Board of Village Trustees. The Building Official and
consulting architects and/or engineers shall advise the Board of Trustees on
appeals to the Mechanical Code.



6.   Section 109.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



   109.3: Notice of Meeting. The Village Development Services Committee
and Board of Trustees shall meet on periodic monthly schedules for the review
of appeals upon notification from Building Code Official.



   Chapter 2 – DEFINITIONS



7.   Section 202 shall be amended to read as follows:



   Section 202: Building Official. The Building Official appointed by the
Development Services Department Director shall interpret the Mechanical Code
provisions, for the application of this code.



   CHAPTER 3 – GENERAL REGULATIONS



8.   Section 303.9 shall be amended to read as follows:



   303.9: Existing and Abandoned Equipment. Any HVAC equipment including
process cooling equipment not being used shall be removed including all
ducts, hoods, flues, piping, electrical and miscellaneous supports.



9.   Section 304.13 shall be amended to read as follows:



   304.13: Minimum requirements for Cooling equipment. All HVAC systems
shall be equipped with an evaporator coil, refrigeration line sets, and
electrical disconnect required for the installation of an exterior condensing
unit. Line sets shall extend to exterior of building and be capped as
required. Stop valves shall be installed per IMC section 1107.8. System does
not have to be charged with approved refrigerants.



10.   Section 306.5 shall be amended to read as follows:



   306.5: Elevated Access and Service Space. Where equipment requiring
access and appliances are installed on roofs or elevated structures at a
height exceeding 10 feet, such access shall be provided by a permanent
approved means of access. Equipment located on a roof shall be through the
interior of the building using a roof hatch opening having a permanent ladder
access as referenced below. The means of access shall be from grade or floor
level to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall
not require climbing over obstructions greater than 30 inches (762 mm) high
or walking on roofs having a slope greater than four units vertical in 12
units horizontal (33 percent slope). Where access involves climbing over
parapet walls, the height shall be measured to the top of the parapet wall.
Permanent ladders installed to provide the required access shall comply with
the following minimum design criteria:



      1.   The side railing shall extend above the parapet or roof
edge not less than 30 inches (762 mm). Exception: interior ladders using a
roof hatch.



      2.   Ladders shall have rung spacing not to exceed 14 inches
(356 mm) on center.



      3.   Ladders shall have a toe spacing not less than 6 inches
(152 mm) deep.



      4.   There shall be a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) between
rails.



      5.   Rungs shall have a minimum 0.75 inch (19 mm) diameter and
be capable of withstanding a 300 pound (136.1kg) load.



      6.   Ladders over 30 feet (9144 mm) in height shall be
provided with offset sections and landings capable of withstanding 100 pounds
per square foot (488.2 kg/m2). Landings dimensions shall be not less than 18
inches (457mm) and not less than the width of the ladder served. A guard rail
shall be provided on all open sides of the landing.



      7.   Ladders shall be protected against corrosion by approved
means. Catwalks installed to provide the required access shall be not less
than 24 inches (610 mm) wide and shall have railings as required for service
platforms.



      8.   Landings required. Ladders shall be provided with a clear
and unobstructed bottom landing area having a minimum dimension of 30 inches
centered in front of the ladder.



      Exception: This section shall not apply to Group R-3 occupancies.



11.   Section 307.2.1 shall be amended to add the following laguage at the
end of the section sentence as follows:



   The use of a condensate pump shall be prohibited unless the means of
drainage by minimum slopes cannot be achieved due to existing conditions.



   CHAPTER 4 – VENTILATION



12.   Section 403.1.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   403.1.1: Smoking Rooms or Lounges. Table 403.3 references ventilation
rates for smoking areas under the headings for "Education", Public spaces"
and "Retail stores". Smoking is not permitted in public places as referenced
in the Village Code (6-2-2-12) and shall take precedence.



   In building uses were smoking is permitted, the ventilation rate used
for "Smoking lounges" under the heading of "Education" in Table 403.3, shall
be used for design.



13.   Section 403.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   403.4: Return Air from occupied spaces (commercial). A ducted return
grille/register or a transfer grille/register shall be in all occupied rooms
and spaces with ducted supply cfm quantities. Air shall be returned via a
ducted sheet metal return grille or through a sheet metal ceiling or open
wall grille to a room with a ducted return of adequate size. Transfer return
grille shall be located min. 7'  0" above finished floor or by a ducted
transfer grilles located in ceiling.



14.   Section 403.5 shall be amended to read as follows:



   403.5: Return Air from habitable spaces (residential - single and
multiple family). A ducted return grille/register shall be in all occupied
rooms and spaces with ducted supply cfm quantities. Transfer grilles shall be
permitted for alterations per building officials approval. Center of transfer
grilles shall be min. 7'  0" above finished floor.



   CHAPTER 5 – EXHAUST SYSTEMS



15.   Section 506.3.1.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   506.3.1.2: Type 2 hood duct materials. Type 2 heat removal hood duct
materials shall match the min. gauge sheet metal as the Type 2 hood based on
materials specified in IMC section 507.5



   CHAPTER 6 – DUCT SYSTEMS



16.   Section 603.5 shall be amended to add the following language at the
end of the section sentence:



   Nonmetallic ducts shall not be used in a non-combustible plenum.



17.   Section 603.5.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   603.5.1: Gypsum Ducts. Building cavities shall not be used as ducts or
plenums. See adopted International Energy Conservation Code, (R-403.2.3)



18.   603.6.2.1 Connector length shall be amended to a maximum length of 7
feet, 0 inches (2133.5 mm) for a connector.



19.   Section 603.18.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   Section 603.18.2: Prohibited locations.



   Exception: Dwelling is amended to add language.



   CHAPTER 7 – COMBUSTION AIR



20.   Section 702.1 shall be amended to read as follow:



   702.1: Combustion Air. Factory built or masonry fireplaces shall be
provided with an adequate amount of exterior air (combustion air) as
referenced in the Building Code, the Fuel Gas Code and the Energy
Conservation Code as shown in Chapter 15 (Referenced Standards).



   CHAPTER 8 – CHIMNEYS AND VENTS



21.   Section 801.18.4 Clearances shall be amended to delete in its
entirety the language therein and substitute the following:



   Clearances: Any portion of a masonry chimney located within the
exterior wall of the building shall have a minimum airspace clearance to
combustibles of 2 inches. Chimneys located entirely outside the exterior
walls of the building, including chimneys that pass through the soffit or
cornice, shall have a minimum airspace clearance of 1 inch. The airspace
shall not be filled except to provide fire stopping as approved by the Code
Official.



   Clearances shall be provided in accordance with the International
Building Code.



   Exception: Masonry chimneys without the required airspace clearances
shall be permitted to be used if lined or relined with a chimney lining
system listed for use in chimneys with reduced clearances in accordance with
UL 1777. The chimney clearance shall be not less than permitted by the terms
of the chimney liner listing and the manufacturer's instructions.



22.   Section 801.18.4.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   801.18.4.1: Fire blocking. Noncombustible fire blocking shall be
provided in accordance with the International Building Code.



23.   Section 802.1.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   Section 802.1.1: Fuel Gas Vents. Fuel Gas appliances shall be vented to
meet the requirement of the 2018 ICC "International Fuel Gas Code" as
referenced in Chapter 15 of this code.



24.   Section 1209.5.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   Exception:



   Heated slabs placed on ground located 24" or more below finished
established grade shall be required to be insulated along perimeter only with
min. R 5 insulation extending horizontally for 24" under slab.



(Ord. 4820, 6-3-13; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5182, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord.
5224, 10-2- 17; Amd. Ord. 5435, 10-7-19)



CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



SECTION:



5-7-1:   Title



5-7-2:   Code Adopted



5-7-3:   Enforcement



5-7-4:   Deletions



5-7-5:   Amendments to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code



5-7-6:   Negligent Housing Management



5-7-1:  TITLE:



   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of
the Village of Orland Park.



(Amd. Ord. 5403, 5-6-19; Amd. Ord. 5434, 10-7-19)



5-7-2:  CODE ADOPTED:



   There is hereby adopted by the Village, and amended as stated
hereinbelow, relative to the maintenance of existing buildings, structures,
premises and facilities within the Village, those rules and regulations set
forth with particularity in that booklet being marked and designated as
“International Property Maintenance Code 2018,” 1st Printing, May 2017,
as published by the International Code Council Inc., 4501 West Flossmoor
Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, one copy of which booklet is
on file in the office of the Village Clerk for public use, inspection and
examination, and which copy has been on file for public use, inspection and
examination for more than thirty (30) days prior to the passage hereof, which
foregoing rules and regulations are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part hereof as if fully set forth in this Chapter, provided however, the
penalty provisions are not adopted.  The general penalty provisions in this
Municipal code shall be applicable.



(Amd. Ord. 5183, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5403, 5-6-19; Amd. Ord. 5434, 10-7-19)



5-7-3:  ENFORCEMENT:



   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Building Division
Manager of the Development Services Department to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter.  In the event any building or structure is in violation of
this Chapter, the Board of Trustees and/or the Manager of the Building
Division, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings (i) to prevent the occupancy of any unsafe building, structure
or land, (ii) to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or
about the premises, or (iii) to restrain, correct or abate the violation.



(Amd. Ord. 5183, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5403, 5-6-19)



5-7-4:  DELETIONS:



The following sections of the above Code are not adopted:



Section 404.3; “Exception 2" only.



   Comments: A 7' high min. basement ceiling height clearance is required.



(Amd. Ord. 5183, 5-1-17; Amd. Ord. 5403, 5-6-19; Amd. Ord. 5434, 10-7-19)



5-7-5:  AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:



The below Sections and Subsections are amended in the following respects:



   1.   Section 107.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



      107.3 METHOD OF SERVICE: Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is:



         1.   Delivered personally,



         2.   Sent by certified and/or first class mail addressed
to the last known address; or



         3.   If the notice is returned showing that the letter
was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the structure affected by such notice.



         Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the
owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall
constitute service of notice upon the owner.



   2.   Section 107.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



      107.4 PENALTIES: Penalties for noncompliance with orders and
notices shall be as set forth in Section 106.2.



   3.   Section 110.1.1 is added to Section 110.1 and shall read as
follows:



      110.1.1 SERVICE CONNECTIONS: Before a structure is demolished or
removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service
connections within the structure such as water, electric, gas, sewer and
other connections.  A permit to demolish or remove a structure shall not be
issued until a release is obtained from each utility, stating that its
respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and
regulators have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner; and
evidence that applicable county, state and any other governing body permits
have been or are being secured from the applicable governing bodies.



   4.   Section 111 and the following subsections shall be amended to
read as follows:



   SECTION 111 MEANS OF APPEAL



      111.1 APPLICATION FOR APPEAL: Any person affected by a decision
of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code may appeal
to the President and Board of Trustees.  An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, that the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or that the requirements of this code are
adequately satisfied by other means.



      111.1.1 MANNER OF APPEAL: Within fourteen (14) days of the code
official's decision for which an appeal is sought, the owner or person shall
file a written request for appeal with the Village Manager.  The written
request shall briefly state the relief sought and the reasons for the relief.



      111.1.2 TIME OF CONSIDERATION: Not later than twenty one (21)
days after the Village Manager received the appeal, the item will be placed
on the President and Board of Trustee's agenda for consideration.



      111.4 CONSIDERATION: The Board of Trustees shall consider the
matter at a regularly scheduled board meeting or the Board may send the
appeal to the Building Committee for their input and recommendation prior to
Board consideration. The person appealing, his representative, the code
official and any other person whose interests may be affected, shall be given
an opportunity to be heard. The board shall uphold the decision of the code
official by a majority vote of the members or the board may modify or reverse
the code official's decision by a concurring vote of 2/3 or more of the
members.



         111.4.1 RESOLUTION: The decision of the board shall be by
resolution.  Certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and the
code official.



         111.4.2 ADMINISTRATION: The code official shall take
immediate action in accord with the board decision.



      111.5 COURT REVIEW: Any person, whether or not a previous party
of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a
writ of certiorari to correct errors of law.  Application for review shall
be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the
decision in the office of the Village Manager and Village Clerk.



      111.6 STAYS OF ENFORCEMENT: Appeals of notice and orders (other
than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard and decided by the Board of Trustees.



   SECTION 112 STOP WORK ORDERS



   5.   Section 112.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



      112.4 FAILURE TO COMPLY:  Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be liable to a fine of that amount referenced in Section 106.2 of this
code.



   CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS



   6.   Section 201.3 shall read as follows:



      201.3 TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES: Where terms are not defined
in this code and are defined in the building, fire prevention, land
development, plumbing, electrical or mechanical codes and ASME A 17.1, as
amended, listed in Title 8, Chapter 8, such terms shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as in those codes.



   7.   Section 202 shall add or change the following definitions to
read as follows:



      BEDROOM: A room within a dwelling unit capable of being used for
sleeping purposes and having a closet.



      BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The corporate authorities of the Village of
Orland Park.



      BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.



      BUILDING CODE: The building code officially adopted by the Board
of Trustees, or other such codes officially designated by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Orland Park, for the regulation of construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, location, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures.



      CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS: All the written, graphic and pictorial
documents prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and
physical characteristics of the elements of the project necessary for
obtaining a building permit.  The construction drawings shall be drawn to an
appropriate scale.



      DWELLINGS:



         Dormitory: A space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated
rooms, for persons not members of the same family group.



         Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



         Hotel: Any building containing six or more guestrooms,
intended or designed to be occupied, or which are rented or hired out to be
occupied, for sleeping purposes by guests.



         One-family dwelling: A building containing one dwelling
unit with not more than five lodgers or boarders.



         Rooming house: A building arranged or occupied for lodging,
with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one-family
dwelling or a two-family dwelling.



         Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living,
but not for cooking purposes.



         Two-family dwelling: A building containing two dwelling
units with not more than five lodgers or boarders per family.



      FAMILY: An individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit, or a
group of not more than four persons not related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit.



      PLUMBING: The practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixture,
appliances and appurtenances within the scope of the plumbing code, as
amended, listed in Title 8, Chapter 8.



      PLUMBING FIXTURE: A receptacle or device which is either
permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the
premises, and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges waste water,
liquid borne waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the
drainage system of the premises; or which requires both a water supply
connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises.



      PUBLIC NUISANCE: Includes but is not limited to the following:



         1.    The physical condition or occupancy of any
premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law;



         2.   Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises
or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures;



         3.   Any premises that has unsanitary sewerage or
plumbing facilities;



         4.   Any premises designated as unsafe for human
habitation;



         5.   Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a
fire hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or unsecure so as to endanger life, limb
or property;



         6.    Any premises from which the plumbing, heating or
facilities required by this code have been removed, or from which utilities
have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the
required precautions against trespassers have not been provided;



         7.   Any premises that is unsanitary, or that is
littered with rubbish or garbage, or that has an uncontrolled growth of weeds;



         8.   Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or
abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent so as not to provide shelter; in
danger of collapse or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the
premises; or



         9.   Any item as listed in the Village of Orland Park
Village Code, Title 6, Chapter 2, listed in Title 8, Chapter 8.



      REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL: An architect or engineer,
registered or licensed to practice professional architecture or engineering,
as defined by the statutory requirements of the professional registration
laws of the State of Illinois.



      SECURITY HOURS: The period of time from "dusk to dawn" based on
seasonal / meteorological time of year.



   CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



   8.   The "Exception" listed in Section 302.2 shall be amended to
read as follows:



      EXCEPTION: Water retention areas and reservoirs approved by the
village engineer.



   9.   Section 302.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



      302.3 SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND WALKWAYS: All sidewalks, walkways,
stairs, driveways, aisles, regular and handicapped parking spaces,
handicapped signs, and similar areas shall be kept  in a proper state of
repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions as required by the
building and land development codes as amended and the Illinois Accessibility
Code, as amended and listed in Title 8, Chapter 8.  Stairs shall comply with
the requirements of Sections 304.12 and the Building Code when major repairs
are required, listed in Title 8, Chapter 8.



         302.3.1 ILLUMINATION REQUIREMENTS: For security and life
safety reasons, all existing commercial & multifamily residential buildings
greater than 2 dwellings units (with a common entryway) shall have parking
lots, access aisles and loading areas be illuminated from dusk until dawn.
See definitions in Title 5 Chapter 7 Definitions for security hours and "dusk
until dawn".



   10.   Section 302.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



      302.4 WEEDS: All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or menacing plant growth in excess of 8 inches or
as required by the Village Code, Title 6, (6-2-2-7) as amended, listed in
Title 8, Chapter 8 of this code. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds
shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than
trees or shrubs; provided however, this term shall not include cultivated
flowers, gardens and intentional native landscaping. The Land Development
Code also regulates property landscape for orderly appearance concerns under
Section 6-305 ("Tree Preservation Standards") listed in Title 8, Chapter 8 of
this code.



   11.   Section 303.2 shall add a new subsection and be amended to
read as follows:



      303.2 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUB ENCLOSURES:  Private
swimming pools, Spas and Hot Tubs containing water or liquids more than 24
inches deep shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 60
inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the
side of the barrier away from the pool (See Land Development Code 6-310 H and
6-310.1). Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self closing and self
latching. Where the self latching device is less than 54 inches (1372 mm)
above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the
pool side of the gate. Self closing and self latching gates shall be
maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released
from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing
pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces
its effectiveness as a safety barrier.



         Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a lockable safety cover
that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section.



         303.2.1 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:  The lack of a fence barrier
to protect the public from Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs shall be
considered a dangerous and unsafe condition per the Village Code 6-2-2-3,
item #8 and violations are subject to the penalties and fines as referenced
in Section 106.2 of this code. (See Land Development Code Section 6- 310, H
or as amended for barrier details)



   12.   Section 304.3 and its subsections shall be amended to read as
follows:



      304.3  ADDRESS NUMBERS: Address numbers shall be installed as
required in Subsections 304.3.1 through 304.3.4.



         304.3.1 REQUIRED: All buildings, tenant spaces and
structures shall have an address shown.



         304.3.2 LOCATION: All address numbers shall be placed in a
conspicuous place on or near the building entrance.  The address is to be
visible at night from a light fixture nearby or internally lit.



         304.3.3 SIZE AND TYPE: Numbers shall be block style for
primary location.  Script or written type numbers may be used for additional
locations.



         304.3.3.1 RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED AND DETACHED
(R-3): Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height and a maximum
of six (6) inches.



         304.3.3.2 ALL OTHERS: Numbers shall be a minimum of six (6)
inches in height and a maximum of ten (10) inches.



         304.3.4 COLOR: Address numbers shall be a contrasting color
to the background color they are installed onto.



   13.   Section 304.5 shall be amended to read as follows:



      304.5 FOUNDATION WALLS: All foundation walls shall be maintained
plumb, free from open cracks, breaks and water leaks and shall be kept in
such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents.



   14.   Section 304.12 shall be amended to read as follows:



      304.12 STAIRS AND RAILINGS: All exterior and interior stairs and
railings shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed
loads and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair so as to
carry all design loads.



         304.12.1 STAIRWAYS, HANDRAILS AND GUARDS: Every exterior
and interior flight of stairs having three (3) or more risers, and every open
portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking
surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall
have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches or more than 38
inches high, measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the
finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less
than 36 inches high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck,
ramp or other walking surface for single family dwellings and within
residential units. Commercial buildings and common use stairways within
multi-family residential buildings require guardrails to be not less than 42
inches high. Handrails used for commercial buildings and common stairways
used by multi-family buildings are required on both sides of a stairway when
having more than a single (1) riser, as noted in the Building Code,
referenced in Title 8, Chapter 8.



   15.   Section 304.14 shall be amended to read as follows:



      304.14 INSECT SCREENS: During the period from March 1st  to
November 30th, every door, window and other outside opening utilized or
required for ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where
products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging
door shall have a self closing device in good working condition.



         EXCEPTION:  Except for restaurant kitchens, screen doors
shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or
insect repellent fans are employed.



   16.   Section 304.15 shall be amended to read as follows:



      304.15 DOORS: All exterior doors, door assemblies, and hardware
shall be maintained in good working condition.  Locks at all entrances to
dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.
See number of exits as referenced in Chapter 7 of this code.



   17.   Section 304.20 is added to Section 304 and shall read as
follows:



      304.20 TEMPORARY BOARDING OF BUILDING OPENINGS: All temporary
boarding of window and door openings is allowed on fire damaged properties
for maximum of sixty (60) days. Temporary boarding is prohibited on abandoned
buildings so as to not blight residential or commercial properties.



         Exception #1: Building or structures under construction
with current issued permit(s).



   18.   Section 305.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



      305.4 INTERIOR STAIRS RAILINGS AND WALKING SURFACES:  Interior
stairs, railings and walking surfaces shall be protected and maintained in a
good sound condition as noted in Section 304.5 of this code.



   19.   Section 308.4 and its Subsections are added to Section 308 and
shall read as follows:



      308.4 TRASH ENCLOSURES REQUIRED: Trash, recycling and grease
receptacle enclosures of adequate size shall be provided at all buildings and
uses except for single family attached and detached dwelling units. The
enclosed area shall be screened from view on all sides by walls. No more than
25% of the total wall length may be left open for a latching gate. There
shall not be any type of trash or other enclosure or container in the front
yard of any building or use, including single family attached and detached
dwelling units.



         308.4.1 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS: Trash enclosures shall be
constructed of the same building materials and in the same architectural
style as the principal structure, and shall be maintained in good repair and
structurally sound condition.  If an existing enclosure is being repaired,
it must be repaired with the same materials used for its construction.



         308.4.2 ENCLOSURE HEIGHT: Any enclosure constructed shall
have a height not greater than eight (8) feet and not less than six (6) feet.



         308.4.3 FOUNDATION: Any enclosure constructed shall have a
concrete foundation capable of supporting the walls and any other live and
dead loads anticipated as required by the building code listed in Title 8,
Chapter 8.



   CHAPTER 4 - LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS



   20.   Section 401.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



      401.3 ALTERNATIVE DEVICES: In lieu of the means for natural light
and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the building and mechanical codes as amended, listed in Title
8, Chapter 8 shall be permitted.



   21.   Section 403.5 shall be amended to read as follows:



      403.5 CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST: Clothes dryer venting systems shall
be independent of all other systems and shall be vented to the exterior in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.



   CHAPTER 5 - PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS



   22.   Section 505.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



      505.4 WATER HEATING FACILITIES: Water heating facilities shall be
properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and
laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees F.  A gas
burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room,
bedroom or other occupied room.  An approved combination temperature and
pressure relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters. For accessible fixtures the water
temperature shall be as required in the Illinois Accessibility Code, and the
State of Illinois Plumbing Code, as amended, listed in Title 8, Chapter 8.



   23.   Section 507.2 is added to Section 507 and shall read as
follows:



      507.2 NEW OR ALTERED STRUCTURES/ BUILDINGS: Drainage of roofs
from new or existing structures including sump ejection shall be drained away
from contiguous side property lines. Subsoil storm and sump drainage piping
shall be drained towards the front or rear of the property and subsoil drain
terminals shall be minimum of ten (10') feet from all property lines and not
discharged in a manner that would create a hazardous public nuisance. If
subsurface storm drain systems including sump water ejection are altered in
any manner, the location of all terminals shall be subject to building
officials approval.



   CHAPTER 6 - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS



   24.   Section 601 shall be amended to read as follows:



   SECTION 601 - GENERAL



      601.1 SCOPE: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum building, mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be
provided.



      601.2 RESPONSIBILITY: The owner of the structure shall provide
and maintain building, mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in
compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner
occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter and the building, mechanical and
electrical codes, as amended, listed in Title 8, Chapter 8.



   25.   Section 602 shall be amended to read as follows:



   SECTION 602  HEATING FACILITIES



      602.1 FACILITIES REQUIRED: Heating facilities shall be provided
in structures as required by this section.



      602.2 RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS: Every dwelling/unit shall be
provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of
68 degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms
based on the outdoor design temperature of minus ten (-10) degrees Fahrenheit.



      602.3 HEAT SUPPLY: Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guestroom on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October
1st to May 15th to maintain the room temperatures specified in Section 602.2
during the hours between 6:00 a. m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less
than 65 degrees F. during other hours.



         EXCEPTION:  When the outdoor temperature is below the
lowest outdoor design temperature required as listed in Section 602.2 (-10
degrees Fahrenheit), the owner or operator shall not be required to maintain
the minimum room temperatures, provided that the heating system is operating
at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in a full open position.



      602.4 NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES: Every enclosed occupied work
space shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from October
1st to May 15th to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees
Fahrenheit, based on the outdoor design temperature of minus ten (-10)
degrees Fahrenheit during all working hours.



         EXCEPTIONS:



            1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that
require cooling or special temperature conditions.



            2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged
in vigorous physical activities.



            3.   When the outdoor temperature is below the
lowest outdoor design temperature required as listed in Section 602.4, the
owner or operator shall not be required to maintain the minimum room
temperatures, provided that the heating system is operating at full capacity,
with supply valves and dampers in a full open position.



      602.5 ROOM TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT: The required room
temperatures shall be measured at a point 3 feet above the floor and 2 feet
inward from the center of each exterior wall.



   26.   Section 604.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



      604.2 ELECTRICAL SERVICE: The size and usage of electrical 
appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with the electrical code, as amended,
listed in Title 8, Chapter 8.  Every dwelling shall be serviced by a main
service that is not less than 100 amperes, three wire.



         EXCEPTION: Existing single family residences, where no
additional electrical outlets or equipment demands have been added to the
original electrical service approved for the building's use.



      27.   Section 606.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



         606.1 ELEVATORS AND ESCALATORS GENERAL: Elevators,
escalators and dumbwaiters shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1
and A17.3 as amended and listed in Title 8, Chapter 8 of this code.



      28.   Chapter 8 shall be amended to read as follows:



         CHAPTER 8
         REFERENCED STANDARDS



         This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in
various sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the
promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the
effective date and title. The application of the reference standards shall be
as specified in Section 102.8.



         ASME Headquarters
         Two Park Avenue
         New York, NY 10016 5990
         Email: CustomerCare@asme.org



         Standard
         reference
         number                  Title



         225 ILCS 312/Elevator Safety Act      State of
Illinois "Elevator Safety Act"



         ASME A17.1/2007            Safety Code for
Elevators and Escalators



         ASME A17.3 2005            Safety Code for
Existing Elevators & Escalators



                  CODES
                  Village of Orland Park
                  14700 Ravinia Avenue
                  Orland Park, IL 60462



         Village Code, ordinance 2989      Title



         Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 1      Building Code
as amended



         Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 3      Electrical
Code, as amended



         Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 4      Plumbing Code,
as amended



         Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 5      Fire Prevention
Code, as amended



         Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 6      Mechanical
Code, as amended



         Village Code, Title 6, Chapter 2      Orland Park
Nuisance Regulations, as amended



         Village Code, Title 5, Chapter 8      Rental Housing
Code and amendments



         Ordinance No. 2084            Land Development
Code, as amended



               State of Illinois
               Capital Development Board
               William G. Stratton Building
               401 South Spring Street, 3rd Floor
               Springfield, Illinois 62706



         Illinois Accessibility Code         October 23,
2018, as amended



(Amd. Ord. 5403, 5-6-19; Amd. Ord. 5434, 10-7-19)



5-7-6:  NEGLIGENT HOUSING MANAGEMENT:



   1.   Negligent housing management is hereby prohibited. A person
commits  negligent housing management when, having personal management or
control of residential real estate, whether as a legal or equitable owner
thereof, or as a managing agent or otherwise, he or she knowingly permits, by
gross carelessness or neglect, the physical condition or facilities of the
residential real estate to become or remain so deteriorated that the health
and safety of an inhabitant is endangered.



   2.   Failure to comply with an action to correct a Village Code
violation that is ordered by the code official or his or her designee that
would address the conditions that are endangering the health and safety of an
inhabitant, within seven (7) days of service of notice identifying the
Village Code violation(s), will constitute a violation of this section. Each
and every day that a Village Code violation persists after the seven (7) day
notice period shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this
section.



   3.   Defacing, removing or covering up the placard from any
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or causing another to deface, cover
up, or remove a placard from any premises which has been designated as unfit
for human habitation and has been placarded as such constitutes a violation
of this section.



   4.   Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this
section, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for this and any subsequent or continuing
violations.



(Ord. 5444, 10-21-19)



CHAPTER 8
RENTAL HOUSING



SECTION:



5-8-1:   Administration General Provisions



5-8-1-1:   Purpose



5-8-1-1-1:   Crime Prevention Rental Housing



5-8-1-2:   Effective Date



5-8-1-3:   Interpretation and Application of Ordinance



5-8-1-4:   Scope



5-8-1-5:   Severability



5-8-1-6:   Responsible Department for Enforcement



5-8-1-7:   Occupancy and Registration



5-8-1-8:   Administration and Enforcement



5-8-1-8-1:   Enforcement



5-8-1-8-2:   Access for Inspection



5-8-1-8-3:   Violations



5-8-1-8-4:   Penalties



5-8-1-9:   Right of Appeal



5-8-2:   Definitions



5-8-3:   Licensing, Registration and fees



5-8-3-1:   Rental Registration



5-8-3-2:   Crime Fee Rental Housing Program



5-8-3-3:   Fees



5-8-3-4:   Penalties



5-8-4   Standards and Requirements



5-8-4-1:   Zoning Ordinance



5-8 4-2:   Property Maintenance 



5-8-4-3:   Housing Standards



5-8-4-4:   Parking and Bicycles



5-8-4-5:   Tenant Responsibilities



5-8-1  ADMINISTRATION GENERAL PROVISIONS:



5-8-1-1  PURPOSE:



   1.   Minimum Residential Standards:  The purpose of this Code is to
provide minimum standards for the protection of the life, safety, health,
welfare, and property of rental residential owners and tenants, as well as
that of the general public.



   2.   Maximum Occupant Loads: To prevent the overcrowding of rental
dwellings by requiring compliance with minimum space standards per occupant
for each dwelling unit.



   3.   Prevent Slum Areas:  To facilitate the enforcement of minimum
standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings and thus to
prevent slums and blight.



   4.   Maintain Property Values: To preserve the value of land and
buildings throughout the Village of Orland Park.



   5.   Crime-Free Housing: To reduce and prevent crimes from occurring
within rental housing and neighborhoods.



5-8-1-1-1:  CRIME PREVENTION: 



   This Code is intended to promote the reduction in crime with
regulations that require the land/building owners to be annually licensed by
the Village.  A Rental Housing License will be issued when application forms
are completed with the accurate tenant records as required by the Orland Park
Police Department. "Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design" (CPED)
will also be part of building construction standards. 



   Crime Free general reference Sections (5-8-2, 5-8-3-2, 5-8-3-3 item 6,
5-8-4-3 item 13, 5-8-4-6)



5-8-1-2:  EFFECTIVE DATE:



   This Code shall take effect and be in full force immediately upon
approval of the Village Board of Trustees. After the effective date of this
Code it shall be unlawful for any owner, as defined herein, to lease or
operate Residential Rental Housing without registering each Rental Unit with
the Village of Orland Park and obtaining a license to operate it as
Residential Rental Housing and complying with the provisions of this Code,
together with other applicable codes and ordinances of the Village of Orland
Park.



5-8-1-3:  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF CODE:



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare.  This Code and The International
Property Maintenance Code, 2006 or latest edition adopted by the Village (VC
5-8) shall apply, as minimum standards for maintenance of Residential Rental
Housing.  Where the requirements of this Code vary from any other lawfully
adopted Village or state laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, codes, deed
restrictions or covenants, the more restrictive or that imposing the higher
standards shall govern.  The Village does not enforce any private covenants
between land owners or tenants or finally determine conflicts between
neighboring property owners.



5-8-1-4:  SCOPE:



   This Code shall apply to all real property located within the
incorporated limits of Orland Park, Illinois, which contains one or more
Rental Units, as defined herein.



5-8-1-5:  SEVERABILITY:



   Should any section or provision of this Code be declared by the courts
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the Code as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



5-8-1-6:  RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT FOR CODE:



   The Village of Orland Park, Illinois has created this "Rental Housing
Code" pursuant to its home rule powers and has designated the Development
Services Department as the enforcement body. The Director of Development
Services, or his/her designee, has the authority for enforcing the provisions
of this Code and shall serve to render interpretations of this Code. The
Crime Free Rental Housing Program will be coordinated by the Orland Park
Police Department through the Chief of Police or his/her designee.



5-8-1-7:  OCCUPANCY, LICENSE, AND REGISTRATION:



   No Dwelling Unit may be occupied by other than the owner and owner's
family without having been licensed, registered and inspected.  The
provisions of this Code's subsection 5-8-3 shall apply for Registration and
Bi-Annual inspections of any Rental Unit within the Village.  Occupancy
limits shall be determined by the applicable Village Codes.  No person,
corporation or business entity of any kind or nature whatsoever, shall engage
in the business of renting any Dwelling Unit to the public, or operating a
Rental Dwelling or Dwelling Unit, rooming house or rooming unit, unless a
valid and current Residential Rental License has been issued by the Village
Clerk for the specific location.  This agreement is not intended to apply to
licensed professionals acting as brokers or agents, unless licensed
professionals are owners or managers of property subject to this Code.  No
person shall rent or occupy a Dwelling Unit or rent or occupy any rooming
house unit unless a current valid license has been issued for that specific
location.  This licensing requirement shall not apply to group homes
governed by the Specialized Living Centers Act, 405 ILCS 25/1 et seq.,
dealing with the developmentally disabled, or other similar uses governed by
state or federal laws, rules or regulations.  No license shall be issued or
renewed unless the owner or operator agrees in the application to such
inspections as may be required pursuant to this chapter.



5-8-1-8:  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



5-8-1-8-1:  ENFORCEMENT:



   The Village of Orland Park Departments of Development Services and
Police shall administer this Code. These Departments may delegate such duties
and responsibilities in connection with the administration and enforcement of
this Code to such persons as are appropriate for conformance through
respective Department chain of command.  The Development Services Director
or the Chief of Police, may, when circumstances dictate, call upon the Police
Department, County, State, Fire District or other authorities, agencies,
codes or regulations in identifying and correcting conditions in rental
housing which constitute violations of this Code or other duly enacted
ordinances, regulations, or laws as applicable.



5-8-1-8-2:  ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, Village authorized
representatives may enter at reasonable times after giving  notice to the
landlord of any building, structure, or land within the  Village to perform
the duties imposed by this Code. Reasonable notice for required scheduled
inspections shall be defined as a minimum of ten (10) calendar days advance
written notice.  It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to notify
the tenant (s) of inspection appointments, arrange access with the tenant (s)
and provide access to all units.  In the absence of the building landlord or
landlord's agent, an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age must be
present during the inspection.



      1.   Revocation of Registration:



         Units not made accessible for inspection (or otherwise not
inspected) in accordance with this Code, shall be in violation of this Code
and shall not be licensed/registered or shall have the registration revoked.



      2.   Residential Rental Property Complaints:



         In the case of a complaint of a potentially life or health
threatening condition(s) or a property maintenance violation from any source,
the Village may promptly inspect or investigate without prior notice, except
that notice of such inspection or investigation shall be provided to the
landlord or agent as soon as reasonably possible.



      3.   Inspection Areas:



         Rental property inspections will include a physical
inspection of the rental residential property including the interior of all
rental units, building exterior, exterior structures such as garages and
storage areas, common areas, basements/cellars, laundry areas, electrical,
plumbing and storage areas, as deemed appropriate by the inspector/code
enforcement official with the exception of personal items.



      4.   Denial of Access:



         Except in the case of an emergency, if a tenant or property
owner denies an inspector access to a rental property, the Director of
Development Services or his/her designee shall apply to the Circuit Court for
the issuance of an administrative search warrant for inspections under this
Code.



      5.   Required Inspections:



         Systematic Residential Rental Property inspections will be
conducted tri-annually (every three years). Inspections based upon complaints
received will be conducted as received and determined as necessary by the
Village (see 5-8-1-8-2, 2.). 



5-8-1-8-3:  VIOLATIONS:



   Violations of this Code and fines shall be as stated in this Chapter or
as specified in the Administration Section 1-4 of the Village Code, if no
fine is stated in this Chapter.



      1.   Time Limit for Removal:



         When a licensing inspection of a Rental Residential
Property reveals any violations of applicable codes, a compliance time frame
will be set by the inspector/code official.  In establishing a compliance
time frame, the inspector/code official shall determine the reasonable
minimal time necessary to correct the violations based upon the number and
severity of the violations.  The Village shall send notice to the property
owner or the listed property agent by regular U.S. mail at the last address
provided on the most recent license application.  Said notice shall include
the following:



            a.    Description of the property sufficient for
identification.



            b.    A statement listing the violations of
applicable codes.



            c.    The date upon which the licensing
re-inspection will occur.



            d.    An explanation that if upon completion of
the licensing re-inspection, the requirements of applicable Village codes
have not been met, it will be recommended to the Director of Development
Services that the license be suspended or revoked.



      2.   Immediate Action:



         Notice of violations involving imminent danger to the life,
safety, health, welfare and/or property of the landlord and/or tenants may be
made by any means reasonably calculated to provide actual notice, which shall
include but not be limited to personal delivery, registered or certified
mail, or posting of an appropriate notice on the premises.



      3.   Occupancy Denial:



         In the case of imminent danger or fire hazard, structural
failure or danger of imminent collapse, interruptions or failures in
plumbing, heating, electrical systems, or other hazardous health situations,
the Village may order immediate repair or correction and may order the
premises vacated pending such repair or correction.



      4.   Citation Issuance:



         If at the conclusion of the period established for
corrective action, the violation has not, in the Village's reasonable
judgment, been satisfactorily corrected, then the Village may issue citations
in accordance with provisions of this Code, suspend or revoke the license for
the affected unit or units, and have the rental unit vacated. Citations for
local municipal violations are adjudicated through the Village of Orland Park
Administrative Adjudication of Non Vehicular Code Violations, Title 1,
Chapter 14.



            a.    Units vacated under this subsection shall be
posted with signs indicating that the unit has been determined to be
"Illegal", or if applicable "Unfit for Habitation"' and that occupancy is
prohibited until the rental unit has been inspected to verify that the
violation has been corrected.



            b.    Any person who defaces or removes a posted
sign as described in 4a above without the approval of the Village shall be in
violation of this Code.



      5.   Time Limit to Vacate a Building or Unit:



         If notification has been presented to the landlord that the
property is not properly licensed or that the license has been suspended or
revoked, the rental property or properties shall be vacated within sixty (60)
days of notification by the Village.



            a.   If said property is not vacated within the 
sixty (60) day period, the landlord will be responsible for all fines as set
forth in this Code.  Citations will be issued with a mandatory court
appearance. Fines imposed upon rental property owners who have initiated
statutory eviction proceedings against tenant(s) pursuant to the Crime Free
Program of this Code (Section 5-8-3-2) shall be waived so long as such
eviction proceedings are pending and being actively pursued.  This waiver
does not relate to fines resulting from property maintenance violations. 



            b.    Notification will be either personally
delivered or mailed to the land-lord or property agent as listed on the most
recent registration application.  This notice to the tenants and occupants
will be posted:



               1   You are hereby notified that the license
for this structure has been revoked or the owner has failed to license this
residential rental property pursuant to Chapter 5 Title 8 of the Village of
Orland Park Code.



               2   You must vacate this structure within
sixty (60) days of the date of this notice.



               3   If you fail to vacate this structure,
you will be in violation of this above referenced Code and subject to
penalties and fines with a minimum of $250.00 and a maximum of $1,000 for
each day you are found to be in violation with a mandatory court appearance.



      6   Hearing/ Right of Appeal:



         Whenever a property owner gets notice of a permit denial,
suspension or threatened revocation and required vacating of a license issued
under this Chapter, the licensee shall have the right to request a hearing. 
The request shall be made within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice. 
The request shall be made by certified or registered mail, overnight courier
or hand delivery to the Development Services Department.



         Whenever a request for a hearing is made, the Village
President shall call a hearing by the procedures in Section 7-1-16 C of this
Code.  Appeal of the decision rendered following such a hearing may be taken
pursuant to Section 7-1-16 D of this Code.



      7   "Crime Free Rental Housing":



         The landlord or managing agent will be in violation of this
Code if he/she has not complied with all "Crime Free Housing" requirements as
stated in Section 5-8-3-2.  The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall
designate a Crime-Free Rental Housing co-coordinator, who shall be
responsible for conducting the Crime Free Housing Seminars and maintain a
list of the attendees and their dates of attendance.



      8   Unfit Properties:



         The Village may prohibit persons from entering or
occupying, except for repair related activity, any Rental Unit, building or
structure, including utility and out buildings, found to be unfit, found not
to comply with Village codes or ordinances, or that poses dangerous, unsafe,
or unhealthy conditions for the building's occupants, passers-by, or the
general public.  Unfit properties shall be posted with appropriate language
that does not permit occupancy.  Any person, not the owner, who enters,
occupies, uses or any person, including the owner, who permits others to
enter, occupy or use the structure after such a posting shall be charged with
trespassing. (Village Code Title 8, Chapter. 6 5-1) Each day the Rental Unit
building or structure is entered, occupied or used following such a posting
shall be considered a separate offense.



5-8-1-8-4:  PENALTIES:



   Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity violating any provision
of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties of all applicable codes and
such person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall be deemed guilty of  a
separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which such
violation is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon finding that a
violation has occurred, shall be fined in accordance with the appropriate
provisions of this Chapter and  according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B for this and subsequent or continuing violations.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



5-8-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   ABANDONED DWELLING:  A dwelling unit, building, structure, property,
or part thereof that has not been actively used for its intended, designed,
or permitted purpose for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or for a
cumulative period of eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period.



   ABANDONED USE:  A non-conforming use within a dwelling unit, building,
structure, property, or part thereof, that has been discontinued for a period
of twelve (12) consecutive months, or for a minimum of eighteen (18) months
during any three (3) year period.



   APARTMENT:  A unit within an apartment building.



   APARTMENT BUILDING: A residential building containing three or more
dwelling units. An apartment building may also be classified as a
multi-family dwelling. 



   APPROVED: Having received approval of the Village of Orland Park
Development Services Department.



   BATHROOM:  A room meeting the criteria of Section 5-8-4-3 (1).



   BEDROOM:  A room within a dwelling unit capable of being used for
sleeping purposes, having a closet and an openable window, and meets the
minimum square footage requirements as described in 5-8-4-3 (3b) as provided
in the International Property Maintenance Code (2006 or as adopted edition).



   CRIME FREE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM:  A system of rules used to educate
rental housing unit owners, owner's mangers and/or agents for the control and
record keeping for any municipal violation or criminal activity as defined by
local, state or federal law. This includes the environmental design for
rental housing units and facilities.



   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, STRUCTURE, OR PREMISES: Any building, structure or
premises that has become or remains in an unsafe or dilapidated condition so
to pose a danger to public health, safety or welfare.



   DUPLEX:  A single building containing only two (2) dwelling units,
side-by-side or one above the other.



   DWELLING UNIT:  One or more rooms containing individualized cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities which is designed to be occupied or intended
for use by one household. 



   FAMILY:  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single household unit; or a group
of not more than four (4) persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption,
living together as a single household unit.



   GRADE FLOOR OPENING: Window or other opening located such that the sill
height of the opening is not more than forty-four inches (44") above or below
the finished ground level adjacent to the opening.  (Amd. Ord. 5343,
10-15-18)



   GRANDFATHERING:  Permitted use of a previously existing non
conformity.  (See "Previously Existing Non-Conformity").



   HABITABLE ROOM:  Any room meeting the requirements of this Code for
living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes, but not including bathrooms,
pantries, hallways, storage areas, utility rooms, or unfinished
cellars/basements, or attics.



   HOT WATER: Water at a temperature of not less than 110F.



   HOUSEHOLD:  see Family



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY: Kinship members including:



      Mother: a female parent



      Father: a male parent



      Son: a male child of the parent(s)



      Daughter: a female child of the parent(s)



      Brother: a male child of the same parent(s)



      Sister: a female child of the same parent(s)



      Grandfather: a parent's father



      Grandmother: a parent's mother



      Grandson: a child's son



      Granddaughter: a child's daughter



   IMMINENT DANGER:  A condition which could cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at anytime.



   KITCHEN:  An area or room meeting the criteria of Section 5-8-4-3 (2).



   LANDLORD: The land Owner, lessor, or sublessor of Rental Residential
Property.



   LESSEE:  See Tenant



   OCCUPANT:  A person who lives in a dwelling unit.  An occupant who is
not an individual owner is a tenant.



   OWNER: The land owner, person, agent, operator, firm or corporation
having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the Land
records of Orland Park, Illinois, as holding any interest in title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian
of the estate of any such person, and the Personal Representative of the
estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.



   OWNER'S AGENT:  A person eighteen (18) years of age or older who
maintains a primary residence (as defined herein) or an office for the
purpose of transacting business in the Village of Orland Park and is
customarily present to perform the duties of managing agent on a full time
basis whether the rental unit is occupied or not. 



   PREVIOUSLY EXISTING NON CONFORMITY: Occupancy levels or permissible
number of units in a dwelling granted prior to the adoption of The Village
Land Development Code, which would be less under that Code or subsequent
amendments.



   PRIMARY RESIDENCE:  A dwelling unit maintained and occupied on a
routine basis by at least one individual owner more than 50% of the year and
can be proven to be that individual owner's legal residence through tax
records or other official documents filed with the state or federal
government.  A residence occupied by its owner 50% or less of the year is
classified as a "Secondary Residence".



   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:  The duly adopted Property Maintenance Code
of the Village of Orland Park.  (Title 5 Chapter 7)



   REGISTRATION: The process by which owners submit application for a
license to operate one or more rental units in the Village.  All rental
units must be licensed and registered to be occupied by tenants.  A license
and occupancy may be refused or revoked by the Village on units not in
compliance.



   RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: See Residential Rental Housing.



   RENTAL UNIT:  An independent dwelling unit not occupied by the owner
as a primary or secondary residence. See "Residential Rental Housing"
definition.



   RENTER:  A Tenant.  (See Tenant).



   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING:  A dwelling, townhouse, condominium,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure for residential
use by a person or persons who is not the legal owner of record.  Units
occupied by immediate family as herein defined are not considered residential
rental housing.  This  Code is not intended to, an does not, apply to
hotels, motels, nursing homes or assisted living facilities.



   SECONDARY RESIDENCE:  A dwelling unit occupied by an owner less than
50% of the year and occupied by no one else at any time except for
individuals related by blood or marriage when the owner is actually present.



   SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE:  A building designed to be occupied by a
family; single household.  See Family



   TENANT:  A person not the owner who occupies a dwelling unit with the
consent of the owner for monetary or non-monetary consideration.



   VILLAGE:  The Village of Orland Park, Illinois.



   VILLAGE MANAGER:  The Village Officer appointed by the Board of
Trustees of the Village to act as Village Manager.



   ZONING ORDINANCE:  The Village of Orland Park Land Development Code.



5-8-3:  LICENSING, REGISTRATION, AND FEES:



5-8-3-1:  RENTAL REGISTRATION:



   1.   Registration Form Date:



      Prior to engaging in the business of renting any dwelling unit to
the public or operating a rental dwelling or dwelling unit, every owner of a
rental property, whether occupied or vacant, shall  file with the Village a
completed license application for the unit and Owner's registration form
including the appropriate fee for each rental property and units.



      Initial Registration Time Frame: All residential rental property
must be licensed and registered with the Village within six (6) months of the
effective date of this Code or within thirty (30) days of notification by the
Village.  A residential rental license shall be issued for a period of one
(1) calendar year and shall expire on December 31st next after issuance
unless previously revoked.



   2.   Application Form Renewal:



      Application for license registration renewal must be filed at
least  thirty (30) days prior to the registration expiration date. A failure
to renew an existing rental housing building(s) license and registration will
result in an additional charge as specified Section 5-8-4-3 item #1 of this
Code. 



   3.   New Owner Registration:



      Any person becoming an owner of an existing registered rental
unit shall file a complete license application and registration form within
thirty (30) days of the property transfer; however, the new owner will not
have to pay the license and registration fee until the next annual license
and registration if the previous owner had registered the property and paid
the appropriate fees but must attend a "Crime Free Housing" training seminar
within three (3) months of property ownership.



   4.   Notification of Sale:



      Registration/License is non-transferrable to another person or to
another rental dwelling unit.  Every person holding a registration/license
must give notice in writing to the of the Village of Orland Park within five
business days after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the
ownership or legal control of any registered/licensed rental dwelling.  Such
notice must include the name, address and contact information of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental dwelling or dwellings.



   5.   New Rental Unit Registration:



      Any rental unit must be registered within thirty (30) days of
construction, conversion from owner-occupancy, or change from any other
non-rental status.



   6.   Residential Rental License Application Required Information:



      The Residential Rental License Application form shall contain the
following information:



         a.   A description of the premises by street name and
number and Property Tax Identification number.



         b.   The name and address of the property owner.  If
the owner is a corporation, the name and address of the "owner's agent"
thereof shall also be provided. If the property is held in a land trust, the
names and addresses of all beneficiaries must be disclosed.  The agent shall
be authorized by the owner in writing to accept service of any Village
notices on behalf of the owner, including appointment letters, notices of
code violations, court process or any other communication or correspondence
in connection with the administration and enforcement of this and other
Village Codes and ordinances.



         c.   The name, address and twenty-four (24) hour contact
information of the owner's agent.                           



            1.   When a rental unit is owned by more than one
individual, or is owned by an entity that is not a natural person, an owner's
agent must be designated.



            2.   The Village shall be notified in writing
within ten (10) days of any change of the owner's agent.



            3.   An owner with a designated "owner's agent"
who is found not to be customarily available or able to perform the duties as
defined shall designate a different individual who is able to properly
fulfill the requirements within ten (10) days of being notified of the
deficiency.



            4.   The signature of the owner or the owner's
agent.



            5.   For the purposes of an emergency response to
a residential rental property the owner or owner's designated agent must be
located within thirty (30) miles of the Village corporate limits for building
and tenant emergencies.  This person must be listed on the license
application and registration form and readily accessible to the Unit Tenant,
Village, Police and/or Orland Fire Protection District.



   7.   Refusal or Revocation of License and Registration:



      Rental units found to be out of compliance after an
Administrative Adjudication hearing or by an appropriate court order with
this or other applicable codes or ordinances shall lose rental status, shall
have the license and registration refused or revoked, and shall not be
occupied until brought back into compliance. Tenant removal shall be the
responsibility of the building owner.



5-8-3-2:  CRIME FREE PROGRAM:



   1.   Owner Responsibilities:



      "Owners" and "owner's agents" must comply with all rules and
regulations required in the Crime Free Rental Housing Program.



         a.   Owners or "owner's agent" must advise prospective
tenants of the Village of Orland Park's Crime Free Rental Housing Program, as
defined in Section 5-8-2 of this Code.



         b.   All owners or owners' agents shall require a signed
lease, identifying all tenants eighteen (18) years of age or older.



         c.   All landlords shall incorporate into the body of
all leases or rental agreements, or renewals of leases or rental agreements,
the first and last legal names, gender and date of birth of all individuals
who will reside at the rental property during the term of the lease.  All
such landlords shall also require their tenants, as a condition of their
lease, to provide written notice containing the first and last legal names,
gender and date of birth of any guests who will be temporarily residing at
the rental property for more than a calendar week (seven (7) consecutive
days).



      d.   Owners or owner's agents must have all adult tenants sign
the Crime Free Lease Addendum that must read as follows:



         “In addition to all other terms of this lease, Landlord
and Tenant agree as follows:”



         The tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest
or any other person or persons associated with the tenant or his or her
household.



         1.   Shall not engage in any criminal activity or
violation of local, state or federal law, when such activity or violation
constitutes a threat to public health or safety or which constitute a breach
of the peace or disorderly conduct, on or near the rental unit, common areas
or appurtenances; 



         2.   Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate
any violation of local, state or federal law, when such activity or violation
constitutes a threat to public health or safety, and/or obstruction or
resistance of law enforcement efforts against criminal activity on or near
the rental unit, common areas or appurtences;



         3.   Shall not knowingly permit, solicit, aid or abet
activities on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances, which
facilitate any violation of local, state or federal law, when such activity
or violation constitutes a threat to public health or safety or which
constitute a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct.



         Should the tenant, any member of the tenant's household,
any guest or any other person or persons associated with the tenant, or
his/her household, violate any provisions stated herein on or near the rental
unit, common areas or appurtenances, such a violation shall constitute a
material noncompliance with the lease and shall further constitute grounds
for termination of tenancy and eviction.



         Violation of any of the above provisions shall be a
material and irreparable violation of the lease and good cause for
termination of tenancy.  A single violation of any of the provisions of this
added addendum shall be deemed a serious violation and a material and
irreparable non-compliance.  It is understood that a single violation shall
be good cause for immediate termination of the lease.  Proof of violation
shall not require criminal conviction, but the tenant understands and agrees
that an arrest (supported by admissible corroborating evidence that criminal
activity in violation of the above provisions has occurred ) for a described
violation or criminal activity shall be sufficient evidence of a violation
and grounds for termination of tenant's tenancy and occupancy. In addition,
commission of Village ordinance violations on four (4) or more separate
occasions in a six (6) month period or on six (6) or more separate occasions
in a twelve (12) month period when such violations constitute threats to
public health or safety or which constitute a breach of the peace or
disorderly conduct shall be good cause for termination of tenancy.



   Should tenant or occupant, on one (1) or more occasions, use or permit
the use of the rental unit or rental property for the commission of a felony
or Class A misdemeanor under the laws of the State of Illinois, the landlord
shall have the right to void the lease and recover the rental unit or rental
property pursuant to 735 ILCS 5/9-120.



         In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum
and any other provisions of the lease, the provisions of the addendum shall
govern.



      NOTE:  A TENANT WILL NOT BE IN VIOLATION OF THIS LEASE OR
SUBJECT TO EVICTION FOR CONTACTING THE POLICE, OR FOR SEEKING OTHER PUBLIC
SERVICES, AS A CRIME VICTIM OR CONCERNED PERSON.  A TENANT WILL NOT BE IN
VIOLATION OF THIS LEASE OR SUBJECT TO EVICTION FOR REPORTING ACTS OF DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE, DATING VIOLENCE, SEXUAL ASSAULT OR STALKING.  A TENANT IS
ENCOURAGED TO REPORT THESE CRIMES WITHOUT FEAR OF HIS/HER STATUS AS A TENANT.



   2.   Tenant Access To Owner or Owner's Agent:   



      The owner or owner's agent of a Rental Residential Property shall
provide each tenant or occupant with the name and telephone number of a
responsible person, or managing agent, who in emergency situations will be
available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis and who has the authority to make
repairs as needed for occupancy.



   3.   Maximum Number of Tenants Notification:   



      The owner of a Rental Residential Property shall inform each
tenant or occupant in writing, prior to occupancy, of the maximum number of
persons allowable by the occupancy standards set forth in this Code. (5-8-4-3
(3).



   4.   Tenant Records Access: 



      The owner or owner's agent of a residential rental property shall
make available to the Development Services Director and/or Chief of Police or
their designees, upon request, the following: the signed lease, the signed
Crime Free Lease Addendum, credit history, and background checks as required
to be maintained by this Code.



   5.   Sub-Leasing: 



      The owner or owner's agent must advise all tenants that
sub-leasing is not allowed without prior approval of the owner/managing agent
and compliance with the "Crime Free Rental Housing Program" requirements.



   6.   Construction Requirements:



      See the Standards Section (5-8-4-3-12) of this Code for Crime
Prevention Through Environmental Design" (CPTED).



   7.   Nuisance Residential Rental Property:



      It is hereby declared a nuisance and declared to be against the
health, safety, peace, and comfort of the Village of Orland Park for any
property owner or owner's agent to knowingly permit the following:   



      a.   Rental of a Rental Unit, or Residential Rental Property,
to a tenant who knowingly permits, solicits, aids or abets any of the
following offenses to occur on or near the rental unit, common areas or
appurtenances  related to the tenant:  murder, kidnapping, sexual assault,
robbery, burglary, aggravated kidnapping, prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, pandering, obscenity, child pornography, sale or distribution
of obscene publications, criminal housing management, possession of
explosives, unlawful use of weapons, sale of firearms, gambling, keeping a
gambling place, concealing a fugitive, violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, violation of the Cannabis Control Act or commission of any
other crime under state or federal law, which constitutes a threat to public
health or safety not specifically listed above.  Prohibition of these
offenses applies also to members of the tenant's household, guests or other
parties under control of the tenant.



      b.   Rental of a Rental Unit, or Residential Rental Property
to a tenant who knowingly permits, solicits, aids or abets any of the
following offenses to occur on or near the rental unit, common areas or
appurtenances relating to the tenant:  commission of Village ordinance
violations on four (4) or more separate occasions in a six (6) month period
or on six (6) or more separate occasions in a twelve (12) month period when
such violations constitutes threats to public health or safety or which
constitute a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct, or an unreasonably
high number of calls for police service including, but not limited to, calls
that may fall within the descriptions listed above that when compared to
other properties in the Village of similar type, reasonably indicate that the
activity at this property is out of character for the area and is impacting
the quality of life of those in the area. Prohibition of these offenses
applies also to members of the tenant's household, guests or other parties
under control of the tenant.



      c.   Prior to seeking abatement of a nuisance or eviction of
tenants under this Section, the Village shall provide notice to the property
owner or owner’s agent stating that the property is in danger of being
declared a nuisance. If the Village seeks the eviction of tenants or the
abatement of a nuisance based on the conduct of a tenant or tenant’s
guests, or the conduct in a tenant’s rental unit, then the tenant shall
also be provided this notice. Said notice shall include the following:



         i.   Description of the property sufficient for
identification.



         ii.   A statement listing the applicable violations(s)
of Subsection 7a or 7b.



         iii.   Notice that Subsections 7a and 7b do not apply to
situations where a tenant is a crime victim or where the tenant or other
person calling on the tenant’s behalf has called for police service as a
crime victim or concerned person.



         Upon receiving such notice, the property owner, owner’s
agent, or tenant shall have the right to request an informal hearing before
the Chief of Police or his/her designee within seven (7) days of receipt of
the notice.



      d.   Subsections 7a or 7b shall not apply if a tenant is a
victim of a crime, has called for police service as a crime victim or
concerned person, or where a third party has called for police service on a
tenant’s behalf. Further, Subsections 7a and 7b shall not apply if a tenant
is a victim of the ordinance violations or has called for police service as a
crime victim or concerned person. Further, Subsections 7a or 7b shall not
apply to a tenant who reports acts of domestic violence, dating violence,
sexual assault or stalking.



      e.   The Village Police Department’s Crime Free Housing
Co-Ordinator may attempt to assist property owners in the abatement of
nuisances or with proceedings for the eviction of tenants that have violated
any of the provisions of Subsections 7a or 7b above.



      f.   For purposes of Subsections 7a and b, above, it shall be
sufficient evidence that a described offense occurred if the offender has
been arrested or cited for one or more of the offenses  described in
Subsections 7a or 7b and the arrest or citation is supported by admissible
corroborative evidence that criminal activity or an ordinance violation has
occurred.



   8.   Required Class Training:



      The owner of any Rental Residential Property, and when
applicable, the property management agent of any Rental Residential property,
shall register, attend and successfully complete a landlord "Crime Free
Rental Housing Program" training class conducted by the Village of Orland
Park within three (3) months from the date of the issuance of a license or
renewal license for a Rental Residential Property.  (see item 5-8-4-2 item #
6 violations)



         a.   An owner or property agent of any Rental
Residential Property who successfully completes the Village landlord training
class for "Crime Free Rental Housing Program" shall not be required to attend
and complete a landlord training class following the issuance of any
subsequent license or renewal license for any Rental Residential Properties
as long as all Properties stay in compliance with the "Crime Free Rental
Housing Program" requirements.  If a residential rental property owner or
agent has successfully completed and received a certificate of completion of
the required "Crime Free Rental Housing" training class meeting the
requirements of this Code in the last five (5) years, the class requirement
will be waived with verification of the certificate.



         b.   If the "Crime Free Rental Housing Program" class is
not attended or certification is denied, the Residential Rental license for
all properties owned or managed by that owner or property manager will be
denied or revoked.  Penalties set forth in this Code for non-license
compliance will be applicable.



         c.   When a new property agent is hired for a Rental
Residential Property and that property agent has not attended and
successfully completed a landlord training class for "Crime Free Rental
Housing Program" by the Village, the new property agent shall attend and
successfully complete this class within three (3) months from the date of the
person's hiring as the property agent for the Rental Residential Property.



         d.   See Section 5-8-3-3 item 5 for required Training
Fees.



5-8-3-3:  FEES:



   Registration and inspection fees shall be established annually by the
Village and shall be assessed to and paid by each Rental Residential Property
owner.



   1.   Registration: An annual Registration/License fee of $50.00
shall be paid to the Village by the building owner (or owner's agent) for
each separate building as defined by the Building Code.  This registration
fee will be waived for the first sixty (60) days after the effective date of
this Code.



   2.   Delinquent fees, fines, charges: Any or all other amounts due
to the Village by the owner in part or in whole must be paid before the owner
can register any rental property.



   3.   Tri-Annual Inspection Fees: 



      a.   Single Family Dwelling - $150.00



      b.   Two (2) dwelling unit building (Duplex) - $200.00



      c.   Apartment Buildings (three (3) dwelling units or more) -
$200.00 and $50.00 for each individual unit more than two (2) units.



   4.   Re-Inspection Fees Per Unit:



      a.   No fee for the 1st re-inspection if all violations have
been corrected.



      b.   2nd re-inspection - $200.00



      c.   3rd and subsequent re-inspections - $300.00



   5.   Crime Free Rental Housing Training Fee:



      Required training classes as administered by the Orland Park
Police Department, shall be completed by the land owner (or owner's
registered agent) for all residential rental buildings. The Fee for this
class shall be incorporated in the registration fee.



(Amd. Ord. 5343, 10-15-18)



5-8-3-4:  PENALTIES:



   1.   Failure to register as an owner:  shall be fined according to
the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.  Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.



   2.     No-Show inspections for designated scheduled times by
owner/agent: shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B for each offense.  Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.



   3.   Penalties - See Sections 5-8-1-8-4 when applicable. 



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



5-8-4:  STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:



5-8-4-1:  ZONING ORDINANCE:



   No Rental Residential Unit shall be created or occupied unless it
complies with the provisions of the Village Land Development Code and other
applicable Village Code.



      1.   New Rental Units:



         No new Rental Units shall be established or added, nor
shall the occupancy limit of any Rental Residential Unit be increased except
in conformity with the Village Zoning Ordinance and all applicable Village
Codes.



      2.   Existing Abandoned Rental Units:



         Rental Units that have been abandoned, as defined herein,
have lost rental status for any reason, are otherwise unlicensed,
unregistered or have not been inspected in accordance with this Code, shall
lose or forfeit any previously existing legal non-conformity and must meet
current standards and requirements prior to occupancy.



5-8-4-2:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE: 



   No Rental Residential Unit shall be occupied or continued to be
occupied unless the structure in which said Unit is located complies with the
provisions and standards of the Village Property Maintenance Code (VC 5-7)
and is maintained in a structurally sound condition and kept free from
health, fire and other hazards to life and property.



      1.   General Repair:



         The owner of the Rental Residential Unit shall be
responsible for keeping the premises maintained in good repair and fit for
human habitation, which shall include the building's interior and exterior
and all living areas.  Repairs may require obtaining proper Village building
permits. (VC 5-1-13)



      2.   Exterior and Site:



         The building exterior and sites which Rental Residential
Units are located shall be maintained to Village Codes including but not
limited to:



         a.   Building Exterior envelope: walls, roof, soffits,
doors windows etc.



         b.   Building address (See 5-8-4-3 item # 12f. of this
Code)



         c.   Landscaping (5-8-4-3 item 12d. and VC nuisances 6-2)



         d.   Parking lot spaces and access aisle repair and
maintenance.



         e.   Roof and site water drainage of an "approved"
design.



         f.   Public and private sidewalks.



         g.   Village Property Maintenance Code (5-7) and
Nuisance Code (6-2) regulations apply.



      3.   Exterior Balconies:



         Exterior balconies and porches may not be used as storage
areas.



      4.   Equipment Safety and Maintenance: 



         Every facility, piece of equipment, utility or service
which is required under this Code shall be so constructed and/or installed to
function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition and shall not be removed, shut off or disconnected in any
occupied Rental Residential Unit except for such temporary interruptions as
may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during
temporary emergencies or tenant's failure to pay agreed upon services. 
Utilities or services shared by more than one Unit shall be the owner's
responsibility to maintain.



      5.   Rodents, insects, and other pests:



         All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation.  All Rental Residential Property shall be treated by a licensed
pest control company annually.  Receipts or reports must be made available
upon request to the Village authorized inspector.  All structures in which
insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved
processes that will not be injurious to human health.  If upon inspection
there is an insect or rodent infestation in more than one Dwelling Unit, the
Owner shall be required to contract with a licensed extermination company to
treat all common areas and infested units not less than on a monthly basis
for the remainder of the license year. 



      6.   Garbage Containers: 



         Providing for garbage and rubbish removal and supplying
such facilities or containers as are necessary for the sanitary disposal of
all garbage and rubbish is a condition of occupancy.  Such exterior
containers shall be enclosed on three (3) sides with appropriate materials
for appearance and the containers must be emptied at a frequency so that
garbage and rubbish does not overflow provided containers.



      7.   Interior Storage:



         In a common area, patio, balcony, hallway, stairwell, or in
any living areas, it shall be unlawful to:



            1   Accumulate and store building materials,
lumber, boxes, and cartons, scrap metal, machinery, junk, flammable or
hazardous materials or devices in such quantities or in such a manner as to
create a fire, health, or other hazard to the premises or persons residing
therein.



            2   Store gasoline and similar combustible
liquids; if stored in a multi family dwelling must be locked in an approved
fire resistant cabinet.



            3   Store a motorcycle, moped, gasoline powered
lawnmower, snow blower, or other similar equipment which may contain a
hazardous material including, without limitation, gasoline.



      8.   Public Utilities:



         Water, electric, and natural gas utilities must be made
available and operational in buildings and Rental Residential Units for
occupancy approval.



5-8-4-3:  RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS:



   All new and existing Rental Residential Units shall meet the standards
set forth in the Village Property Maintenance Code(s) in effect from time to
time and the standards contained herein.  In the event of conflict between
standards, the more stringent standard shall apply.



      1.   Bathroom Equipment: 



         Full bathrooms, shall contain the following minimum
equipment:



         a.    One flush toilet with at least thirty-two inches
(32") of clear shoulder width and eighteen inches (18") clear space in front.



         b.    One sink connected to hot and cold running water.



         c.    One bathtub or shower stall connected to hot and
cold running water.



         d.    All bathrooms and powder rooms shall be contained
within a separate room providing privacy from other portions of the unit or
building.



      2.   Kitchen Equipment:



         Kitchens, where required, shall contain the following
minimum equipment:



         a.    One sink connected to hot and cold running water



         b.    Space and safe access to utility hook-ups for
adequate refrigeration and cooking appliances refrigeration and cooking
appliances.



         c.    Fixed counter space made of impermeable, cleanable
and durable material for food preparation consisting of a minimum of three
(3) continuous linear feet and a minimum of eighteen inches (18") deep.



         d.    Adequate storage space for food, dishes, cookware
and utensils in proportion to the number of occupants configured in a manner
to prevent contamination from food preparation, cleaning activities, pets or
vermin.  Storage space may not be directly on the floor unless within a
pantry or closet.



      3.   Living Space Requirements for Tenants:   



         a.    Prohibited Occupancy:  Kitchens, living, family,
dining rooms and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping
purposes.  Rental Residential Units shall not be occupied by more occupants
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of this Code.



         b.    Bedrooms:  Every bedroom occupied by one person
shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area. Every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at
least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant twelve (12)
years of age and over and at least thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area
for each occupant less than twelve (12) years of age.



         c.    Access from bedrooms:  Bedrooms shall not
constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and
shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.



         d.    Living Rooms:  Shall be a minimum of 120 square
feet.



         e.   Dining Rooms:  Shall be a minimum of 80 square
feet.



      4.   Plumbing Requirements:



         All plumbing fixtures, including sinks, bathtubs, shower
stalls and toilets, shall be constructed of dense, durable, non-absorbent
materials and shall have smooth impervious surfaces free from defects and
concealed surfaces unable to be kept sanitary.



         a.    All plumbing fixtures shall be properly
maintained, vented and connected to the Village municipal sewer system.



         b.    All units must have water service to be considered
habitable.  Any unit lacking potable water service must be vacated
immediately.



      5.   Heating Requirements:



         a.    Every Rental Residential Unit shall have a heating
system capable of providing heat to the entire unit at a minimum of
sixty-eight (68) degrees.  Between the period of October 1st and May 15th of
the succeeding year the owner or manager of any Rental Residential Unit
within the Village shall provide heat to those persons occupying said Rental
Residential Units as provided in the following schedules:



            A minimum temperature of sixty eight (68) degrees
Fahrenheit from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. through ten thirty o'clock (10:30)
P.M. averaged throughout any room occupied by the tenant when the outdoor
temperature is minus twenty (-20) degrees Fahrenheit or above.



            A minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees
Fahrenheit from ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. through six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. throughout any room occupied by the tenant when outdoor temperature is
minus twenty (-20) degrees Fahrenheit or above. (ord. 1159, 1-25-82)



         b.    Any unit where the utility or service required for
operation of the heating system has been removed; shut off or disconnected
between October 1st and May 15th shall be considered uninhabitable and must
be vacated immediately.



         c.    All gas duct furnaces must be vented to the
exterior. All duct furnaces shall be tested in accordance with ANSI Z83.8 or
UL795 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions.



         d.    No heater shall be operated with the use of an
extension cord.  All floor furnaces shall be approved and tested in
accordance with ANSI Z21.86/CSA 2.32 and shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions.



         e.    Heaters and vents shall be installed with
clearances from combustible materials in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instruction.



         f.    Any unit or service required for operation of the
heating system(s) must be maintained by the building owner.



         g.    For the protection of building tenants, the
Village may require the heating system to be inspected and repaired by a
qualified heating system specialist whenever a hazard condition is apparent
or may be considered possible.



      6.   Electrical Requirements:



         a.    All electrical wiring shall be protected by a
circuit breaker or fuse.  Every room in a rental unit, except a bathroom
shall be equipped with not less than two (2) duplex outlets.  Bathrooms
shall have at least one (1) outlet.



         b.    Each Rental Residential Unit shall have a minimum
electrical service of at least 100 amps.



         c.    Where provisions are made for major electrical
appliances requiring 220 volt service such as room heaters, air conditioners,
stoves, washers and dryers, such units shall be on individual circuits.



         d.    No electrical circuit shall serve more than one
Rental Residential Unit.



         e.   Every outlet, circuit, fixture, load center,
service entrance or other component shall be maintained in a safe working
condition.



         f.     All work performed on electrical systems in
Residential Rental Housing must be performed in accordance with applicable
codes and regulations and may require permits and/or additional
inspections.  Electrical contractors providing service, shall be licensed
and bonded as required in the Village Building Code 5-1-6.



      7.   Stairways and Steps Standards: 



         a.   All stairways, both interior and exterior, shall be
maintained in a safe condition, as required in the Village Property
Maintenance Code (5-7).



         b.    Building common area stairways must remain
illuminated at all times.  Lighting standards for stairways shall not be
reduced.



         c.    Storage is not allowed under or near stairwells.



      8.   Handrails and Guardrails:



         a.    Stairway Handrails:  Continuous handrails shall
be placed on both sides of stairways accessible to the general public. 
Handrail height shall be not less than thirty (30") in., nor more than
thirty-four inches (34"), measured vertically at the tread nosing for
stairways with three or more risers.  Stairways within individual Dwelling
Units may be on one side of the stairway.  Handrails acting as a guardrail
along stairways shall follow the details for openings in subsection c. below.



         b.    Guardrails:  Porches, balconies, landings, or
raised floors surfaces located more than thirty inches (30") above the floor
or grade below shall have a guardrail not less than forty two inches (42) in
areas open to the general public.  Guardrail height may be reduced thirty
inches (36") in height when located within a single family Dwelling Unit.



         c.    Guardrail Openings:  Handrails or guardrails on
open sides where the floor or grade below is more than eighteen inches (18")
shall have intermediate rails, parts, or closures which will not allow
passage of an object six inches (6") in diameter.



      9.   Light and Ventilation: 



         a.    Every bathroom not containing an operable window
shall provide adequate light and mechanical ventilation.  Ventilation must
vent to the outside.



         b.    Other permitted living areas without direct access
to the exterior via an operable door or window must provide adequate light
and ventilation.



         c.    In every Dwelling Unit, for protection against
mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door used or intended to be used
for ventilation opening directly from a Dwelling Unit to outdoor space shall
have supplied and installed screens and a self-closing device; and every
window or other device with opening to outdoor space, used or intended to be
used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens installed.
During the period from April 1st until December 1st insect screens must be in
place on all doors, windows and other outside openings required for
ventilation of habitable rooms.(see item 12.a below for bedroom egress
requirements).           



      10.   Moisture



         a.    All living areas shall be kept dry and free from
exterior moisture penetration.



         b.    Building components, including enclosed cavities,
which have become wet for any reason, shall be dried adequately to prevent
mold growth.



         c.    All areas of a Dwelling Unit, including non-living
areas part of or adjacent to the Dwelling Unit, shall be kept free of
significant water entry or standing water.  Measures must be taken to
prevent moisture contact with permeable building components or other
materials.



      11.   Fire Safety and Exits:



         Dwelling Units shall be provided with two (2) independent
fire escape routes.  An escape route such as an exterior porch roof, an
accessible operable exterior window or an exterior door or landing may
constitute an independent fire escape route.  Exterior fire escapes shall be
designed to prevent the accumulation of snow or ice.



         a.    Exit Requirements:  Every bedroom shall have at
least one (1) operable exterior window or exterior door constructed to permit
emergency exit or rescue.



            1   Bedrooms protected by a functioning approved
sprinkler system that is tested and certified annually by a qualified
inspector may have no direct exterior exit.



            2   Where no exterior door or window exists in a
bedroom, two (2) doors are required.  Each door must open into a different
room or area and lead to an independent exit of the Unit.



            3.   Minimum clear window openings shall be 820
square inches (5.7 square feet) with a minimum of twenty-four inches (24")
high and a minimum of twenty inches (20") wide.  Opening must be attainable
without the use of tools.  Bottom of the opening shall be no more than
forty-four inches (44") above the floor or to the top of an appropriate fixed
step or platform.  Grade floor openings shall be required to have a minimum
of 720 square inches (i.e., 5.0 square feet) of emergency escape and rescue
openings.  See definitions for grade floor openings.  (Amd. Ord. 5343,
10-15-18)



         b.   Smoke Detectors:



            1   An electrical (hard wired) smoke detector in
each bedroom is required as regulated by State of Illinois and Village Codes
as applicable at time of building permit issuance.



            2   Smoke detectors operated by battery are only
acceptable as allowed by Village ordinance and as permitted by the State of
Illinois Smoke Detector Act as described below. (ILCS 425 60/3). 



            In the case of any dwelling unit that is newly
constructed, reconstructed, or substantially remodeled after December 31,
1987, the requirements of this Section shall apply beginning on the first day
of occupancy of the dwelling unit after such construction, reconstruction or
substantial remodeling. The smoke detectors required in such dwelling unit
shall be permanently wired into the structure's AC power line, and if more
than one detector is required to be installed within the dwelling unit, the
detectors shall be wired so that the actuation of one detector will actuate
all the detectors in the dwelling unit.



            3.    All smoke alarms shall be listed in
accordance with UL 217 and installed in accordance with the provisions of
this Code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.



               A.    Smoke detectors are to be installed as
required by the manufacturer and placed on each and every floor level
including the basement, all bedrooms and on the ceiling or wall outside of
each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.



               B.    Smoke detectors should be installed in
all multi unit common area hallways, exit passageways, and stairwells.



               C.    Areas separated by doors or distance
may require additional smoke detectors.   



               D.   All substantially remodeled or rewired,
enlarged, expanded, or otherwise upgraded units shall meet all applicable
codes including having interconnected smoke detectors.



               E.    All systems, devices and equipment to
detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any
combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times
in accordance with the International Fire Code.  Maintaining the operable
condition of all smoke detectors shall be the responsibility of the owner and
managing agent.  Should any smoke detectors be found to have been removed,
disabled, or destroyed by the tenant, the tenant shall be deemed guilty of a
municipal infraction under the provisions of this Code or State laws as
applicable.



         c.   Fire Extinguishers:  Every Rental Residential Unit
shall have one (1) fire extinguisher, 2.5 pound charge, manufactured by an
approved testing agency for combating Class A, B, and C fires.



         d.   Carbon Monoxide Detectors:  Carbon Monoxide
Detectors shall be the Owner's responsibility for installation as regulated
by the State of Illinois (Public Act 094-0741) as shown below.



         State of Illinois Public Act 094-0741



            (1)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with
at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within
fifteen (15) feet of every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon
monoxide alarm may be combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the
combined unit complies with the respective provisions of the administrative
code, reference standards, and departmental rules relating to both smoke
detecting devices and carbon monoxide alarms and provided that the combined
unit emits an alarm in a manner that clearly differentiates the hazard. 



            (2)   Every structure that contains more than one
dwelling unit shall contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in
operating condition within fifteen (15) feet of every room used for sleeping
purposes.



            (3)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a
structure to supply and install all required alarms. It is the responsibility
of a tenant to test and to provide general maintenance for the alarms within
the tenant's dwelling unit or rooming unit, and to notify the owner or the
authorized agent of the owner in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant
cannot correct. The owner is responsible for providing one tenant per
dwelling unit with written information regarding alarm testing and
maintenance.



            (4)   The tenant is responsible for replacement of
any required batteries in the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling
unit; except that the owner shall ensure that the batteries are in operating
condition at the time the tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The
tenant shall provide the owner or the authorized agent of the owner with
access to the dwelling unit to correct any deficiencies in the carbon
monoxide alarm that have been reported in writing to the owner or the
authorized agent of the owner.



            (5)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under
this Act may be either battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or
wired into the structure's AC power line with secondary battery back-up.



         e.    Fire Separation and Barriers Between Residential
Units:  Attached Single and Multi-Family Dwelling Units shall maintain wall
and ceiling fire barriers as required from their original Building permit
requirements.  Openings between residential units and common use areas shall
be patched as needed for controlling the spread of fire.  (units constructed
after 12/17/85 have required a two-hour fire separation rating for
construction per ordinance 148)



         f.    Mistaken Egress: Any door, passage or stairway
which is neither a means of egress nor access to a means of egress, and which
is so located or arranged as to be mistaken for a means of egress, shall be
properly identified as to its use.



      12.   Security, Crime Free Rental Housing Program
Requirements: 



         The following requirements provide "Crime Prevention
Through Environmental Design" (CPTED).  Each Rental Unit must comply with
these requirements:



         a.    Deadbolts with three inch (3") screws secured into
the building framing for strike plates on all Unit entry doors.



         b.    Anti-lift slide devices on sliding doors and
windows on the first floor, garden levels and accessible second levels.



         c.     Adequate security lighting for all hallways,
entryways and parking lots and common areas.



         d.     Proper trimming of trees and shrubs, eliminating
hiding places.



         e.    Eye views on entry doors with 180° degree view.



         f.    All multi-unit buildings must have the building
address in clear view on the front and back of the building.  Single
residences must have the building address in clear view on the front of the
building.  Each of the figures of every such address on any residence or
apartment building shall no be less than four inches (4") in length. (VC
3-2-2-2).



         g.    Buzzer type entry security system must be in
proper working order from all of the Dwelling Units in every multi-unit
buildings with common entrances.  All front and back entry doors must locked
at all times.



5-8-4-4:  PARKING AND BICYCLES:



   1   Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained for all
Rental Units in accordance with the standards set forth in the Land
Development Code and Village building code standards.  (VC 5-1-13, item 4)



   2   Secure bicycle stands shall be provided where necessary or as
requested by tenants.



5-8-4-5:  TENANT RESPONSIBILITIES:



   Every tenant of a Rental Unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that portion of the premises, both interior and exterior, that the
tenant occupies uses, shares or controls.  Every tenant shall insure that
his/her trash, garbage and other refuse is stored and disposed of in a clean
and sanitary manner.



   1   No tenant either by negligence or abuse shall create or
contribute to the creation of any violation of this Code.



   2   No tenant shall create or permit to be created by others any
noise, smoke, vibration, fumes, vapor, glare, odor or dust within that
portion of the premises that the tenant occupies, uses or controls which
interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of other Rental Residential
Units on a Rental Residential Property or of nearby properties.



   3   No tenant shall store flammable or hazardous materials or
devices in such quantities or in such a manner as to create a fire, health,
or other hazard to the premises or other persons.



   4   Vehicles are to be parked or driven on improved parking areas or
driveways only without blocking public access to sidewalks or roadways.



   5.   In a common area, patio, balcony, hallway, stairwell, or in any
living areas, a person shall not store or accumulate a motorcycle, moped,
gasoline powered lawnmower, or other similar equipment which may contain a
hazardous material including, without limitation, gasoline.  These areas may
not be used as storage areas.



(Entire Section Ord. 4448, 1-19-09; Amd. Ord. 4959, 1-9-15)



TITLE 6 HEALTH, NUISANCES



CHAPTER  1   HEALTH CODE



CHAPTER  2   NUISANCES



CHAPTER  3   PUBLIC RESTROOM FACILITIES



CHAPTER  4   NOISE CONTROL



CHAPTER  5   LANDSCAPE WASTE DISPOSAL



CHAPTER  6   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



CHAPTER  7   DISRUPTION OF UTILITY SERVICE



CHAPTER  8   SANITARY FACILITIES AT CONSTRUCTION SITES



CHAPTER  9   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS



CHAPTER 10   SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES



         (Ord. 4457, 2/16/09)



CHAPTER 1
HEALTH CODE



SECTION



6-1-1:    Administrative General Provisions



6-1-1-1:    Purpose



6-1-1-2:    Powers



6-1-1-3:    Rules and Regulations



6-1-1-4:    Amendments to 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750



6-1-1-5:    Amendments to the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code
890) Repealed



6-1-1-6:    Inspection Frequency; Right of Entry; Fees



6-1-1-7:    Inspection of Records



6-1-1-8:    Inspection Reports



6-1-1-9:    Correction of Violations



6-1-1-10:    Procedures When Infection is Suspected



6-1-1-11:    Suspension, Revocation and Appeal



6-1-1-12:    Penalties



6-1-1-13:    Exterior Refuse Enclosures



6-1-2:    Definitions



6-1-3:    Temporary Food Service Establishment



6-1-3-1:    Submittal of Plan and Application



6-1-3-2:    Permitting



6-1-3-3:    Permit Duration



6-1-1:  ADMINISTRATIVE GENERAL PROVISIONS:



6-1-1-1:   PURPOSE:



   It is the purpose of this code to enhance public protection by
targeting for education and enforcement those issues which are most commonly
associated with the occurrence of foodborne illness. 



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-1-2:   POWERS:



   The Health Inspector shall be given specific power to make inspections
and for that purpose may enter buildings, structures and premises to enforce
the environmental health laws of the Village and to that end shall make such
orders, requirements, decisions and determinations as are necessary to the
enforcement of the environmental health laws. 



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-1-3:   RULES AND REGULATIONS:



   The current and subsequent editions of the Food Service Sanitation
Code, as amended from time to time and promulgated by the Illinois Department
of Public Health, are hereby adopted by reference. The (FDA) 2017 Food Code
Chapters as referenced in the July 29, 2016 Food Service Sanitation Code are
adopted by reference. Three (3) copies of the Illinois Department of Public
Health Food Service Sanitation Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 750) and 2017 Food
Code shall be on file for public use, and have been for more than thirty (30)
days prior to the passage of this section.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5131, 10-3-16; Amd. Ord. 5381, 2-4-19)



6-1-1-4:   AMENDMENTS TO 77 Ill. ADM. CODE 750:



   The below listed Sections and Sub-sections are amended in the following
respects:



   1)   Section 4-201.11 of the 2017 Food Code is amended to add at the
end of the section: Food service equipment needs to be commercial grade and
meet the standards regarding safe design, non-toxic materials, intended use,
and workmanship established by one of the recognized accredited agencies for
food service equipment unless otherwise approved by the Health Inspector upon
inspection. These agencies include the National Sanitation Foundation
International (NSF), Environmental Testing Laboratory (ETL), Underwriters
Laboratories (UL-SAN), or Canadian Standards Association International (CSA).
The trademark seal of one of these agencies is an indicator that the
equipment is approved. Existing non-conforming equipment shall be replaced
with conforming equipment when found in disrepair.



   2)   Section 6-501.111 of the 2017 Food Code is amended to add the
following at the end of the section "All food service establishments in the
Village of Orland Park must have a licensed Pest Control Service monthly."



   3)   Where said rules and regulations make any reference to plumbing
facilities, The Plumbing Code of the Village, as amended, shall be applicable.



   4)   To the extent that when any ordinance of the Village sets forth
a more stringent requirement than said rules and regulations, the more
stringent requirement shall be applicable.



   5)   Section 6-501.115 of the 2017 Food Code is amended to add the
following at the end of the section:



      Pet dogs are allowed at the exterior areas in outdoor dining
areas of food facilities if the following requirements are met:



      A)   A separate entrance must be present where pets do not
enter through the food establishment to reach the outdoor dining area.



      B)   Warning signs must be posted at all entrances of the
outdoor eating area identifying the patio as a "Dog Friendly Area."



      C)   No food preparation shall be allowed at the outdoor
dining area including dispensing/mixing of drinks.



      D)   Pets shall not be allowed on tables or chairs.



      E)   Pets shall remain on leashes.



      F)   Food for the pets will not be permitted in the outdoor
eating area.



      G)   Water must be served in a single use disposable bowl by
their owners.



      H)   All surfaces of the patio must be cleaned and sanitized
daily.



      I)   Table tops and arms of chairs must be sanitized between
each seating of patrons.



      J)   In cases where excrement or other bodily fluids (urine,
saliva, vomit) are deposited, an employee shall immediately clean and
sanitize the affected areas.



      K)   Pets must not come in contact with multi-use or reusable
utensils such as plates, silverware, glasses and bowls. Those items shall not
be stored, displayed or preset at the outdoor dining area.



      L)   Restaurant employees are prohibited from touching or
petting dogs while working.



      M)   Hand sanitizer or disposable towelettes will be present
on table tops for patrons to use after handling their pets.



      N)   Entrances into the restaurant from the outdoor eating
area must remain closed immediately after employees and customer enter and
exit the area. The use of air curtains instead of physical separation will
not be allowed.



      O)   Pets in poor health and exhibiting aggressive behavior
must be excluded from the premises.



      Food service facilities that do not adhere to the above listed
requirements upon inspection will be restricted from allowing pets on their
premises.



   6)   Section 5-104.11(B)(3) of the 2017 Food Code is amended to
change “Water containers” to “Water containers may be used to supply
water for temporary and seasonal food service operations only”.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 4900, 5-5-14; Amd. Ord. 5131, 10-3-16; Amd.
Ord. 5165, 2-20-17; Amd. Ord. 5292, 4-16-18; Amd. Ord. 5381, 2-4-19)



6-1-1-5:   AMENDMENTS TO THE ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE (77 ILL. ADM. CODE
890):



   This section has been repealed.



   (Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5131, 10-3-16)



6-1-1-6:   INSPECTION FREQUENCY; RIGHT OF ENTRY; FEES:



   Category I facilities shall have at least three contacts with a minimum
of two of those contacts a routine inspection. Category II facilities shall
have two contacts with a minimum of one inspection a routine inspection. 
Category III and Seasonal Food Service facilities shall have one routine
inspection.  In addition, follow-up inspections will occur as often as
deemed necessary by the Health Inspector to ensure compliance with all codes
and ordinances. The category types are defined in Section 750.100 of the
Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code.



Inspection fees shall be as provided in Subsections 5-2-7-9 and 7-2-6 of the
Village Code (Health Inspection Fees).



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5381, 2-4-19)



6-1-1-7:   INSPECTION OF RECORDS:



   The Health Inspector, after displaying proper identification, shall be
permitted to examine the records of the food establishment to obtain
information pertaining to pest control services rendered, employee
certifications, and food and supplies purchased, received or used. 



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-1-8:   INSPECTION REPORTS:



   Whenever a routine inspection of a food establishment is made, the
findings will be recorded in the Food Establishment Inspection Report Form
provided by the Health Inspector. Inspectional remarks shall be written and
shall state the correction to be made. The completed Food Service
Establishment Inspection Report Form is a public document that shall be made
available to public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5131, 10-3-16; Amd. Ord. 5381, 2-4-19)



6-1-1-9:   CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:



   A.   All PRIORITY and PRIORITY FOUNDATION violations as defined in
Preface X of the 2017 Food Code shall be corrected as soon as possible and if
not immediately corrected will be given a time limit for correction as
determined by the Health Inspector to prevent significant threat to health.



   B.   All CORE violations as defined in Preface X of the 2017 Food
Code shall be corrected within a specified period of time or as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5131, 10-3-16; Amd. Ord. 5381, 2-4-19)



6-1-1-10:   PROCEDURES WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED:



When the Health Inspector has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease
transmission from any food service facility employee, it may secure a
morbidity history of the suspected employee, or make any other investigation
as indicated and shall take appropriate action. The Health Inspector may
require any or all of the following measures:



   A.   EMPLOYEE: The immediate exclusion of the employee from
employment in food service establishments;



   B.   LICENSE SUSPENSION: The immediate closing of the food service
facility concerned until the Health Inspector determines that no further
danger of disease outbreak exists;



   C.   EMPLOYEE RESTRICTION: Restriction of the employee's services to
some area of the facility where there could be no danger of transmitting
disease;



   D.   MEDICAL EXAMINATION: Adequate medical and laboratory
examination of the employee, of other employees, and of the body discharges
of such employees;



   E.   EDUCATION: Require additional foodborne illness prevention
education. Provide guidelines to help minimize the extent and number of
occurrences of foodborne illness outbreaks.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-1-11:   SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND APPEAL:



   The Health Inspector may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend
any license authorized by this Title if the operator does not comply with the
requirements of this Title, and the operation of the establishment
constitutes an imminent hazard to public health.  Whenever a license is
suspended, retail food operations shall immediately cease.  The suspension
will be lifted once the required corrections are made as determined by a
follow-up inspection to be provided within a reasonable time period not to
exceed eight (8) days. 



   License revocation and the process to appeal are referenced in Section
7-1-16 of the Village Code.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-1-12:   PENALTIES:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



6-1-1-13:   EXTERIOR REFUSE ENCLOSURES:



   Exterior refuse enclosures for food service establishments are required
to be of adequate volume and size and shall comply with the Property
Maintenance Code (Village Code 5-7-5, item 19).  Newly constructed food
service facilities shall comply with the Village Land Development Code
Section 6-302 D for the enclosure design and materials used for Dumpster and
Trash Handling Areas.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:



   For purposes of following regulations, words shall have the meanings
assigned to them in Title 7, Chapter 2, Section 7-2-1 of the Village Code
with the addition of the following:



   Health Inspector: The person meeting the qualifications of a Licensed
Environmental Health Practitioner as defined by the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulations and designated by the Director of Development
Services to enforce health regulations pursuant to the Codes and Ordinances
of the Village.



   Contact: A routine food service sanitation inspection with a scored
report, an in-service educational presentation, a re-inspection, an emergency
inspection, a requested inspection, a foodborne illness investigation or a
licensure inspection performed by the Health Inspector or under the
supervision of the Health Inspector.



   Employee: Any person working on the premises of a food service
establishment who engages in management, supervision, food preparation,
cleaning or service.



   Imminent Health Hazard:  Any hazard to the public health when the
evidence is sufficient to show a product or practice posing or contributing
to a significant threat of danger to health, creates or may create a public
health situation (1) that should be corrected immediately to prevent injury
or illness and (2) that should not be permitted to continue (i.e. flooding
(including sewer backup), fire, no potable water available under pressure, no
electricity, no natural gas, suspected disease transmission from employee(s),
operating without a business license).



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5131, 10-3-16; Amd. Ord. 5381, 2-4-19)



6-1-3:   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT:



6-1-3-1:   SUBMITTAL OF PLAN AND APPLICATION:



   Temporary Food Service Establishments shall apply for a permit prior to
seven (7) days in advance of an event.  Each separate food vendor must apply
for a permit.  As part of the application process, a list of menu items,
list of equipment items, list of food sources and hours of operation must be
submitted.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-3-2:   PERMITTING:



   A Temporary Food Service permit may be issued after review of the
application if foodborne illness risks are deemed low by the Health Inspector
or will be issued after inspection.  It shall be unlawful to handle food at
a Temporary Food Service Establishment prior to issuance of a permit.  The
permit shall be posted in public view.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



6-1-3-3:   PERMIT DURATION:



   Temporary Food Service Establishments permits are valid for fourteen
(14) days after issuance.  A maximum of two (2) permits may be granted for
each event.



(Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES



SECTION:



6-2-1:   Definitions



6-2-2:   Declaration of Public Nuisances



6-2-2-1:   Animals



6-2-2-2:   Dogs



6-2-2-3:   Dangerous and Offensive Conditions



6-2-2-4:   Garbage and Rubbish



6-2-2-5:   Obstructions



6-2-2-6:   Spreading Poisons



6-2-2-7:   Weeds and High Grass



6-2-2-8:   Dead or Infected Trees and Shrubs



6-2-2-9:   Combustible Materials Near Buildings



6-2-2-10:   Motor Vehicles



6-2-2-11:   Inoperable Motor Vehicles or Parts Thereof



6-2-2-12:   Smoking Ban – Public Places



6-2-2-13:   Small Unmanned Aircraft (Deleted by 5377, 1-28-19)



6-2-3:   Abatement



6-2-4:   Citation Procedure



6-2-4-1:   Procedure for Police Officers



6-2-4-2:   Disposition of Citations



6-2-4-3:   Complaint; Failure to Obey



6-2-4-4:   Citation Procedure



6-2-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this Chapter:



      PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



      MOTOR VEHICLE:  A machine propelled by power other than human
power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners
or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall
include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers or
semi-trailers, motorcycles, buggies and wagons or any other similar vehicle.



      STREET or HIGHWAY:  The entire width between the boundary lines
of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, including but not limited to the
hard traveled portions of any roadway, the berm or the parkway.  (Ord. 881,
8-28-78)



      POLICE OFFICER:  As used in this Chapter, the term "police
officer" shall include all police officers of the Orland Park Police
Department, including auxiliary officers, and all other enforcement officers
and officials of the Village.  (Ord. 901, 11-13-78)



6-2-2:  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:



   Each of the following enumerated acts or omissions is hereby declared
to constitute a public nuisance and shall constitute a violation of this
Municipal Code.  In addition, it shall be a public nuisance and shall
constitute a violation of this Municipal Code to commit any offense or permit
a condition or use of property which is in fact a nuisance according to the
common law, other ordinances of the Village, or the statutes of the State of
Illinois, or the statutes of the United States or which deleteriously affects
public health, welfare, or safety, or greatly offends the public morals or
decency.



(Am. Ord. 4924, 9-2-14)



6-2-2-1:  ANIMALS:



   1.   Animal Carcasses:  To cause or permit the carcass of any dead
animal or vegetable matter, slops, swill, suds, garbage, filth, stable
drippings or other offal or noisome substance of any kind to be collected,
deposited or remain in any place, except in approved covered containers and
then only long enough to be properly disposed of.



   2.   Unclean Animal Shelter:  To keep, cause or suffer to be kept
upon any premises any chicken coop, chicken house or pen; or to keep, cause
or suffer to be kept upon any premises any stable, kennel, doghouse, dog-run
or other structure or place for the retaining, care or shelter of any fowls
or animals in an unclean, unsanitary or filthy condition.



   3.   Grazing of Animals:  To allow or permit the grazing or riding
of animals upon parkways, or on private property without the permission of
the owner thereof, nor in such a manner as to interfere with anyone walking
upon the public sidewalks, or that they may cause damage to ornamental
plantings. (Ord. 881, 8-28-78)



   4.   Certain Animals and Fowl Prohibited:  To own, keep or use any
railroad car, yard, pen, place, structure or premise, in or upon which
cattle, swine, chickens, fowl or other livestock shall be confined or kept,
unless the aforementioned animals are kept in conformance with the conditions
of a special use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of the Land
Development Code of the Village.  (Ord. 1327, 3-12-84)



   5.   Permitting Offensive Animal Noises:  To keep or permit to be
kept upon any premises any dog or other animal or fowl emitting loud,
frequent and continuous offensive noises.



   6   Ground Feeding:  Ground feeding of animals and/or birds,
including but not limited to cats, squirrels, chipmunks, rats, mice, rabbits,
raccoons, opossum, skunk, deer, ducks, geese.  To spread, cast, deposit or
dump food, including birdseed, corn, bread pieces, food scraps, animal chow
or any like or similar substance on any public or private property in the
Village.  Above- ground bird feeders shall be permitted as long as all feed
is placed in a container or feeder designed for the specific purpose of
feeding birds.  (Ord. 4400, 8-4-08)



6-2-2-2:  DOGS:



   1.   Permitting Dogs to Discharge Fecal Matter or to Urinate on
Public or Private Property.  (See also DOGS Chapter of the POLICE
REGULATIONS Title 8 of this Code).



   To suffer or permit any dog owned or under one's control to deposit or
discharge any fecal matter or to urinate upon any public or private property
other than upon the property of such owner or person having control of such
dog.  The words "fecal matter" and "urinate" shall have the following
meanings:



      (1)   "Fecal matter" is hereby defined as waste matter or
excrement discharged from the intestines; and



      (2)   "Urinate" is hereby defined as the act or process of
passing or discharging a fluid from the kidneys known as "urine".



   2.   Dangerous, Fierce, Vicious Dogs:  To own or permit any
dangerous, fierce or vicious dog to be found at large in the streets or
public ways or upon the private premises of any person other than the owner
or keeper of such dog.



   3.   Authority to Slay Dangerous Dogs:  Any dangerous, fierce or
vicious dog running at large in the streets or public places of the Village,
or upon private premises of any other person than the owner or keeper, and
any dog which may in any manner disturb the quiet of any person or
neighborhood or which shall bite a person, is hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and such dog may be slain by any police person.



   4.   Dogs Running at Large:  To own or permit any dog upon the
streets or in public places or upon private property other than that of the
owner or keeper unless such dog is firmly held on a leash, is muzzled or is
in an enclosed vehicle.



   5.   Violations and Penalties: Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine according
to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such
person shall be convicted.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



6-2-2-3:  DANGEROUS AND OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS:



   1.   Offensive Substances:  To throw or deposit any night soil,
dead animal, offal, compost or other offensive or noisome substance upon any
lot, street, alley, park or other public place or in any watercourse, pond,
spring or well.



   2.   Offensive Smells:  To so conduct any business or use of any
premises as to create an offensive smell which taints the air or renders it
unwholesome or disagreeable to the neighborhood.



   3.   Dense or Offensive Smoke:  To cause or permit the emission of
dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other device.



   4.   Obstructing Watercourses:  To obstruct any watercourse, ravine
or gutter so as to cause water to stagnate therein, or to permit foul or
stagnant water to stand upon any premises.



   5.   Polluting Water:  To pollute, corrupt, contaminate or render
unwholesome or impure the water of any drinking hydrant, watermain,
reservoir, storm sewer, spring, stream, pond or lake.



   6.   Unsanitary Buildings or Premises:  To prevent any building,
structure or premises to become a breeding place for rats or other vermin or
to permit said building, structure or premises to remain in an unclean or
unsanitary condition so as to be prejudicial or dangerous to the health of
individuals or the public.



   7.   Offensive Business:  To erect, maintain or use any building or
other place for a rendery, tallow chandlery, glue factory, tannery,
slaughtering house, packing house, rendering establishment, bone factory or
without limitation to the foregoing, for any trade, employment or manufacture
which by occasioning noxious exhalations or otherwise, is offensive and
dangerous to health of individuals or the public.



   8.   Dangerous buildings, structures or premises:  To permit any
building, structure or premises to become or remain in an unsafe or
dilapidated condition so as to pose a danger to public health, safety or
welfare."  (Ord. 3320, 12-6-99)



   9   Stagnant water: To allow stagnant water to accumulate or stand 
in swimming pools, ornamental ponds or fountains, and other containers so as
to enhance or promote the breeding of mosquitoes or other unhealthful insects
and the resulting danger to public health, safety and welfare.  For purposes
of this section, stagnant water shall mean any accumulation of water which
does not circulate at all times with sufficient velocity to prevent the
existence of any “dead” or non-moving spots.  (Ord. 3774, 7-7-03)



6-2-2-4:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:



   1.   Open Rubbish:



      (1)   To allow, cause or permit rubbish to be set out upon the
parkways, at the rear of store buildings, or other places, for the purpose of
being picked up by a rubbish collector, in containers which are not suitable
or which permit or allow the rubbish contents to be scattered or blown
around, causing an unclean condition to the annoyance, prejudice or
discomfort of others.



      (2)   To place, cause or permit any tangible thing to be
placed upon or permitted to remain upon any parkway within the Village,
except for the purpose of being picked up by a regularly scheduled scavenger
service; to allow or permit the placement of items for pickup by a scavenger
service upon any parkway sooner than one day before the regularly scheduled
day for pickup; to allow or permit containers or other tangible things to
remain upon any parkway beyond the day following the regularly scheduled day
for scavenger service pickup.  (Ord. 881, 8-28-78)



   2.   Garbage or Refuse on Premises: 



         (1)   To cause or permit to remain on any premises
garbage, offal, refuse, ashes, miscellaneous waste or any animal or vegetable
matter which is likely to become offensive or injurious to health or to be
blown about by the wind, for a longer period of time than twenty four (24)
hours at any one time, except in metal or concrete containers with tight
fitting covers thereon from which regular garbage collection is made at least
once a week, provided, however, that grass clippings and leaves only may be
contained in plastic bags.



         (2)   To dump or place, or to cause to be dumped or
placed, any residential or commercial garbage, rubbish, waste or recyclable
materials on any premises or property in the Village without the consent of
the owner or such premises or property. (Ord. 1116, 10-19-81; Amd. Ord. 4748,
8-6-12)



   3.   Garbage and Debris:



      (1)   To permit or maintain an unsightly yard, lot or premises
where there is an accumulation or deposit of tin cans, glass jars, bottles,
metal materials, refuse, rubbish, junk, waste, manure, straw, weeds, tree
stumps, tree clippings, brush, discarded or broken building materials,
discarded sod, old lumber, old brick or concrete blocks, machinery or parts
thereof, or other like matter or things.



      It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or
controlling any plot of real estate to permit the accumulation or deposit of
the aforesaid garbage and debris except as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Discarded or broken building materials incident to
construction on the site where the debris is located shall not remain on the
plot for more than seven (7) days.  Failure to remove said building
materials within seven (7) days or permitting the deposit or accumulation of
any of the other garbage or debris described in 3(1) of this subsection for
any period of time shall constitute a violation of this Section.



      (3)     An authorized Village official or representative
thereof shall serve or cause to be served a notice or citation upon any
person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any real estate within the
Village upon which such a nuisance is found to exist, requiring them or any
of them to remove the garbage and debris constituting such nuisance within
twenty-four (24) hours.  The notice or citation will be served in one of the
following manners; 



         (a)    By a written notice sent by United States
certified mail, postage prepaid, to the last known person owning, leasing,
occupying or controlling the real estate and as to the owner the notice may
be addressed to the address shown on the most recent tax bill for said real
estate. 



         (b)   By general notice addressed to all owners,
lessees, occupants or persons controlling real estate printed in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Village, which notice shall direct attention to
the provisions of this Section and provide that the garbage and debris shall
be removed not later than ten (10) days after said notice is so printed. 
Said notice is authorized to be printed once in each month from April through
September in each year as the Director of Development Services shall deem
necessary.



         (c)    By a written notice personally delivered by the
Village official or representative to the person owning, leasing, occupying
or controlling the real estate.



(Ord. 4407, 9-2-08)



      (4)   In the event any person so notified shall fail or refuse
to comply with said notices or citations, it shall be lawful for the Village
to cause such garbage and debris to be removed in any manner it shall
designate, and to charge the cost of such removal to any person owning,
leasing, occupying or controlling such real estate.  The cost for so doing
shall be calculated on the basis of administration fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus actual cost of garbage and debris removal.  (Ord.
4407, 9-2-08)



      (5)   The cost and expense incurred by the Village, and/or by
the person or firm performing the service by authority of the Village, in the
abatement of the nuisance following the refusal or failure of the responsible
party to abate the nuisance, including reasonable attorney’s fees, shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate affected, which lien shall be enforced
as provided by statute.  The Village shall provide notice of the lien either
by personally serving or sending notice by certified mail to the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last
preceding year.  (Ord. 4407, 9-2-08)



      (6)   Any commercial or residential property within the
Village that has been previously issued a notice or citation under this
section within the same calendar year will be considered a repeat offender
and the Village will have the authority to abate the nuisance without
additional prior notice, and the real estate property owner will have a lien
placed upon this property per the above stated procedures.  Notice of the
lien shall be sent as in (5) above.  (Ord. 4407, 9-2-08)



   4.   Burning Garbage or Leaves:  To burn any garbage, refuse,
leaves, grasses, weeds or any "organic horticultural landscape waste" as
defined in Ordinance 1997 passed and approved on May 21, 1990;' except that
the burning of elm tree wood and prunings of elm trees on the premises where
it is produced shall be permitted, as may be necessary, to control the spread
of the Dutch elm disease; provided, however, that all required permits from
the County of Cook, Illinois, the State of Illinois or the United States
Government have been obtained for such burning.



(Ord. 2155, 10-21-91)  (See also, LANDSCAPE WASTE DISPOSAL Chapter of this
Title.)



6-2-2-5:  OBSTRUCTION:



   1.   Open Building Materials: To create or suffer to be created or
to remain upon any premises in a residential district for a period of more
than seven (7) days, unless incident to construction on the premises and then
not to exceed thirty (30) days, the storing, piling, accumulating, heaping,
amassing or collecting bricks, concrete blocks, lumber, iron, pipe or any
building materials in such quantities that the same is, or may become a
menace to the health of individuals or the public; or that the same is
unsightly, objectionable and offensive to those living in the neighborhood or
to the public; or that the same may or does become dangerous to the children
playing in the neighborhood; or that the same may or does become an
attraction to rats and thereby become, or is dangerous to the health of any
individual or the public.



   2.   Business Use of Public Property:  To use or occupy any part of
a street, parkway, alley or sidewalk of the Village for the purpose of
carrying on, soliciting or promoting any trade, business or other enterprise;
also, to cause or permit the storage of any product, supplies for or
equipment incidental to the operations of such business or enterprises, upon
any street, parkway, alley or sidewalk within the Village.



   3.   Obstructing Public Ways;  To obstruct or encroach upon public
streets and highways, private ways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots
or public places of the Village so as to interfere with the passage of
vehicles or persons thereon.



6-2-2-6:  SPREADING POISONS:



   To spread, or to cause or permit any agent or employee to spread any
poison for the purpose of killing rats, mice, rodents, insects or other
vermin, in any public way or public place; or to spread or to cause or permit
any agent or employee to spread any poison for such purposes in any yard,
court, passageway or other open place on private premises, or on the outside
of any building or structure, or in any place within a building or structure
which is open to the general public, or where pet dogs, cats or other
domestic animals or fowls have access, without placing the same in a
receptacle of such kind or character that it can be reached only by the kind
of vermin which the poison is intended to kill, or without placing a wire or
other guard about same in such way that no child or domestic animal, domestic
fowl, or other harmless creature can reach the same.



(Ord. 881, 8-28-78)



6-2-2-7:  WEEDS AND HIGH GRASS:



   1.   To permit the growth upon any premises of any noxious weeds,
except as hereinafter provided.  Canada thistles and all of its varieties,
perennial sow thistles, European bindweed, leafy spurge, Russian Knapwood,
Johnson grass, giant foxtail, hoary cress, jimson, burdock, cockleburrs,
ragweed, goldenrod and similar weeds and all weeds which, due to pollination,
are a menace to health are, for the purposes of this Section, defined to be
noxious weeds.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or controlling any plot of real estate to permit the growth of
noxious weeds thereon except when the real estate is a wetland designated by
the Army Corps of Engineers or a natural area otherwise protected by law, or
as hereinafter provided.



   2.   All weeds shall be pulled or otherwise destroyed by the owner,
lessee, tenant, occupant or person in control of said real estate whenever
said weeds shall exceed eight inches (8") in height but in no event less
often than twice a year, once between June 15 and July 1, and once between
August 1 and August 15 of each year.  The failure to destroy such weeds of
the height specified or within the designated periods shall constitute a
violation of this Section.  The pulling or destruction of the weeds shall be
in accordance with the following standards:



      1)   In the event the tract of real estate on which such weeds
are located shall be vacant real estate, but being agriculturally cultivated
with crops for sale or for human consumption, the owner, lessee, tenant,
occupant or person in control of said real estate shall be required to pull
or otherwise destroy those weeds located within thirty feet (30') of the
perimeter of said real estate.



      2)   In the event the tract of real estate on which such weeds
are located shall not exceed five (5) acres and shall be vacant and not
contain any agriculturally cultivated crops for sale or consumption, the
owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in control of said real estate
shall be required to pull or otherwise destroy those weeds on the entire
tract.



      3)   In the event the tract of real estate on which such weeds
are located shall exceed five (5) acres in area and shall be vacant real
estate, the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in control of said real
estate shall be required to pull or otherwise destroy those weeds located
within thirty feet (30') of the perimeter of said real estate.



   2a. The height of natural grass shall not be greater than 8 inches in
height.  This maximum height shall be maintained at all times.  Enforcement
shall be conducted as that required for weed control in this section. (Ord.
4160, 8-7-06)



   3   An authorized Village official or representative thereof shall
serve or cause to be served a notice or citation upon any person owning,
leasing, occupying or controlling any real estate within the Village upon
which such a nuisance is found to exist, requiring them or any of them to
remove the weeds and/or high grass constituting such nuisance within
twenty-four (24) hours.  The notice or citations will be served in one of
the following manners;



      (a)    By a written notice sent by United States certified
mail, postage prepaid, to the last known person owning, leasing, occupying or
controlling the real estate and as to the owner the notice may be addressed
to the address shown on the most recent tax bill for said real estate.



      (b)    By general notice addressed to all owners, lessees,
occupants or persons controlling real estate printed in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village, which notice shall direct attention to
the provisions of this Section and provide that the weeds shall be destroyed
and/or tall grass cut not later than ten (10) days after said notice is so
printed.  Said notice is authorized to be printed once in each month from
April through September in each year as the Director of Development Services
shall deem necessary.



      (c)    By a written notice personally delivered by the Village
official or representative to the person owning, leasing, occupying or
controlling the real estate.



(Ord. 4407, 9-2-08)



   4.    In the event any person so notified shall fail or refuse to
comply with said notices or citations, it shall be lawful for the Village to
cause such weeds and/or tall grass to be removed or cut down in any manner it
shall designate, and to charge the cost of such removal to any person owning,
leasing, occupying or controlling such real estate.  The cost for so doing
shall be calculated on the basis of administration fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus actual cost of weed and/or tall grass removal.  (Ord.
4407, 9-2-08)



   5.    The cost and expense incurred by the Village, and/or by the
person or firm performing the service by authority of the Village, in the
abatement of the nuisance following the refusal or failure of the responsible
party to abate the nuisance, including reasonable attorney’s fees, shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate affected, which lien shall be enforced
as provided by statute.  The Village shall provide notice of the lien either
by personally serving or sending notice by certified mail to the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last
preceding year.  (Ord. 4407, 9-2-08)



   6.    Any commercial or residential property within the Village that
has been previously issued a notice or citation under this section within the
same calendar year will be considered a repeat offender and the Village will
have the authority to abate the nuisance without additional prior notice, and
the real estate property owner will have a lien placed upon this property per
the above stated procedures.  Notice of the lien shall be sent as in (5)
above. (Ord. 4407, 9-2-08)



6-2-2-8:  DEAD OR INFECTED TREES AND SHRUBS:



   To cause or permit to remain on any premises dead trees or shrubs or
trees or shrubs that are infected with injurious insects, pests or infected
with plant diseases which are liable to spread to other plants, trees or
shrubs to the injury of said plants, trees or shrubs or to the injury of man
or property.



6-2-2-9:  COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS NEAR BUILDINGS:



   To store, keep, pile or stack hay, straw or other combustible or
inflammable materials including but not limited to gasoline, oil, motor fuel,
kerosene or other similar petroleum product within the space of fifty feet
(50') of any building.  Provided, however, that this shall not apply to
temporary piling of materials to be used for building purposes, or to
businesses licensed for the storage thereof or to residences where small
quantities of said materials are properly stored for home use.  (Ord. 881,
8-28-78)



6-2-2-10:  MOTOR VEHICLES:



   1.   Parking of Vehicles:  To park, store or keep any vehicle in
any rear, side or front setback, on either private or public property, on
either grass or gravel, is prohibited.  (Ord. 4469, 4-6-09; Amd. Ord. 5245,
12-4-17)



   2.   Repair of Motor Vehicles Not in a Building and in Public View:
To dismantle, repair or assemble any motor vehicle or repair or store any
major part thereof on any premises not in a building (as defined in Section
2-102 of the Village Land Development Code) which shields such activity on at
least three (3) sides from public view is prohibited unless such activity is
performed solely upon or for a motor vehicle owned by the owner or lessee of
the premises and not for compensation and then not to exceed a period of
three (3) consecutive days if such activity is not done within a building
which shields such activity on at least three (3) sides from public view.
(Amd. Ord. 5245, 12-4-17)



   3.   Repair of Motor Vehicles in Public Ways:  To wash or repair
any motor vehicle, including but not limited to changing or replacing parts,
greasing or the performance of any other type of maintenance, service or work
on any motor vehicle on any roadway or public right of way within the Village
except for such emergency repairs as are necessary to remove such vehicle
from the roadway.  Such emergency repairs shall be made only as close as
possible to the right-hand edge of the roadway, with the vehicle facing in
the direction of the traffic flow, except in cases of indicated one-way
streets where such emergency repairs may additionally be performed as close
as possible to the left-hand edge of the roadway, with the vehicle facing in
the direction of the traffic flow; to cause or permit to remain on any
premises any motor vehicle, wagon or other conveyance, not currently licensed
by the State of Illinois, which has been stripped of component parts,
permitted to become in a rusted condition or which has been damaged to the
extent that the repair thereof would cost in excess of four hundred dollars
($400.00).  (Ord. 901, 11-13-78)



   4.   Operating Motorized Vehicles Without Adequate Muffler:  To
drive, operate or run any motorized vehicle on private or public property
without an adequate muffler or noise abatement system so as to permit the
emission from said motorized vehicle of loud or disturbing noises.  An
inadequate muffler or noise abatement system includes but is not limited to
any muffler or noise abatement system which has been changed or altered
subsequent to original manufacture, removed or permitted to remain in
disrepair due to inadequate or improper maintenance, an accident or any other
cause.  (Ord. 881, 8-28-78)  (See NOISE CONTROL Chapter of this Title and
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC Titles of this Code.)



6-2-2-11:  INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES OR PARTS THEREOF:



   To cause or permit an inoperable motor vehicle to remain on public or
private property within the view of the public.



      1.   For purposes of this paragraph, the following definitions
shall  apply:



         "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle
from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or
other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts
have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is
incapable of being driven under its own motor power.



         "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor
vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under
its own motor power for three (3) consecutive days in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations.



   This paragraph shall not apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within
a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over twenty five
(25) years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of
business, engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.



      2.   Once an inoperable motor vehicle described above has been
identified, the Police Department, or the Department of Code Enforcement
shall issue a notice of impending tow for an inoperable motor vehicle.  The
notice, to be given in accordance with paragraph 3 below, shall inform the
owner, lessee, occupant or person controlling the real estate whereon the
vehicle is located that the vehicle is scheduled for towing on the tenth day
following receipt of the notice, or publication of the notice, whichever is
applicable.  If the person notified wishes to challenge the substance of
notice of impending tow and the scheduled towing before the tow occurs, a tow
hearing may be requested at the Police Department in accordance with
Ordinance No. 1319, and a decision on the appropriateness of tow will be made
to determine whether or not the tow is justified and whether it will proceed
as scheduled.  (See also MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC Title of this Code).



      3.   The notice of impending tow shall be served in one of the
three (3) following described methods:



         i.   By a written notice sent by United States certified
mail, postage prepaid, to the last known person owning, leasing, occupying or
controlling the real estate, and as to the owner the notice may be addressed
to the address shown on the most recent tax bill for said real estate.



         ii.   By a written notice personally delivered by a
police officer or such other authorized Village official or representative to
person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling the real estate.



         iii.   By general notice addressed to the owner, lessee,
occupant or person controlling said real estate printed in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village of Orland Park, which notice shall direct
attention to the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 1736, 1-25-88)



6-2-2-12:  SMOKING BAN - PUBLIC PLACES:



   1.   Definitions:



      Main Entrance:  Any public entryway into or out of an enclosed
indoor area used by the general public and/or to which the general public is
invited or permitted or which serves as a place of employment.  A Main
Entrance does not include an entryway to or from an outdoor dining area, a
delivery/storage entrance or an entryway limited only to employees working
within the enclosed indoor area.



      Open Air Dining Area:  Any seating area within the Village open
to the air that is accessory to a restaurant, hotel, cafeteria, club, or
other public place engaged in purveying commercial food or beverage service
where members of the public, members or guests are invited to sit and receive
food and beverage service for a consideration.



      Outdoor Venue:  Any outdoor theater, amphitheater, plaza,
street, or other improved area that is used as a public venue or forum to
which members of the general public are invited to listen, view or otherwise
participate in an outdoor event within the Village.



      Park:  Any public park or recreation area within the Village
that is open to and used by the general public.



      Public Place:  Park (as defined herein), outdoor venue (as
defined herein), or enclosed indoor area used by the general public and/or to
which the general public is invited or permitted, or which serves as a place
of employment, including but not limited to:



         (1)    Health care facilities, nursing homes (except as
hereinafter provided), food service establishments, restaurants,
taverns/bars, retail food stores, banquet halls, commercial establishments,
indoor theatres, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, auditoriums, arenas, common or public areas of
condominium buildings and health care facilities (including nursing home care
facilities, except as hereinafter provided), laundromats, public
transportation facilities, marketing establishments, educational facilities,
retail stores, convention facilities, bingo facilities, galleries, shopping
malls, arenas and meeting rooms, polling places, school, Village of Orland
Park or other government buildings, offices and office buildings, factories,
warehouses and other places of work.



         (2)    Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways,
offices, elevators, and other common areas.



         (3)    Meeting places, meeting or conference rooms,
cafeterias, room chambers, places of public assembly, offices used by more
than one employee, residences used as a licensed child care facility, adult
day care facility, health care facility or a home- based business of any kind
open to the public.



         (4)    Taxis, vehicles of public conveyance and vehicles
owned, leased or operated by the Village of Orland Park.



         (5)   Facilities used for exhibiting a motion picture,
stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance.



      A Public Place does NOT include:



         (1)    Private residences, except when used as a
licensed childcare facility, adult day care facility, health care facility or
a home-based business of any kind open to the public.



         (2)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to
guests and are designated as smoking rooms provided, however, that not more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or
motel may be so designated.



         (3)    Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes
and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all
of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain,
as the case may be, in a room where smoking is permitted.



         (4)   A temporary outdoor smoking shelter
(“shelter”) erected by the owner or other person in control of a Public
Place on the premises of the Public Place and which outdoor smoking shelter
meets the following criteria:



            a.   Not more than one (1) shelter shall be
erected on or upon a Public Place;



            b.   The shelter shall be permitted only from
November 1 through and including April  30 in any year;



            c.   The shelter shall not exceed one hundred
(100) square feet (except as provid in below) and shall not be located within
fifteen (15’) feet of any Main Entrance to a Public Place;



            d.   No food or beverage service shall be provided
to or permitted within the shelter;



            e.   An Open Air Dining Area designated for
smoking may be converted to a shelter provided all other requirements for
shelters set forth herein are met, except that such shelter may exceed one
hundred (100) square feet but if the shelter uses Tent, Canopy or Membrane
type Material, it may not exceed 200 square feet; and (Ord. 4231, 3/19/07)



            f.   Plans for any shelter shall be submitted in
advance of erection to the Village’s Department of Development Services for
review and approval and, upon such approval, the issuance of a permit.  No
fee shall be charged for such review or permit.



(Ord. 4228, 3/5/07)



      Retail Tobacco Store:   A commercial retail establishment that
derives more than 80% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco,
plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for
burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of
other products is merely incidental. This does not include a tobacco
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any
establishment with any type of liquor, food or restaurant license.



      Smoke or Smoking:   The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe,
cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or the
lighting or emitting or exhaling of the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette
of any kind.  "Smoke" also means the gaseous products and particles created
by the use of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other
lighted smoking equipment. “Smoking” also means the use of any electronic
or battery operated pipe, cigar or cigarette (also known as an e-cigarette)
of any kind or the inhalation or exhalation of smoke from any electronic or
battery operated pipe, cigar or cigarette and “smoke” also means the
vapors or gaseous products and particles created by the use of an electronic
or battery operated pipe, cigar, cigarette or smoking equipment.



(Ord. 4649, 5-16-11; Amd. Ord. 4894, 4-7-14)



   2.   PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES:



         Except as provided in 3, below, smoking shall be prohibited
in all Public Places within the Village of Orland Park.  The owner or other
person in control of a Public Place shall post a clear and conspicuous sign,
in form and content approved by the Village, at every Main Entrance to the
Public Place stating that smoking therein is prohibited.  Such owner or
other person in control shall also remove all ashtrays and other smoking
paraphernalia from within the Public Place.



   3.   EXEMPTION FOR EXISTING BUSINESS AND FREE STANDING BUILDINGS:



         (1)    Smoking shall be permitted within the enclosed
business premises known as "D'wan Hookah Lounge/ D'wan Cigar and Hookah
Lounge" located at 9925 W. 143rd Place wherein only smoking products and
smoking equipment is sold at retail, being the only such business in the
Village, provided:



            (a)   The current owner or other person in control
of such business and who holds the tobacco dealer license issued by the
Village keeps and maintains such license in good standing and continues to
operate such business at its present location referred to above; and



            (b)   No goods, products or services are sold or
delivered within the said business premises by the said tobacco dealer
licensee, or anyone under said licensee's supervision and control, except for
smoking products and smoking equipment and accessories permitted via the
license.



         (2)   Any retail tobacco store that begins operation
after the effective date of Public Act 0095-0017 (January 1, 2008) of the
State of Illinois may only qualify for an exemption if:



            (a)   The business is located in a free standing
structure on a property that is a minimum of 100 feet from any residential,
park or school property line measured from lot line to lot line;



            (b)   The business is located in a free standing
structure on a property that is a minimum of 20 feet from any other
non-accessory building;



            (c)   The free standing structure is occupied
solely by the business registered for and authorized by a tobacco dealer
license;



            (d)   The business operating hours do not extend
beyond 11:00 P.M. on weekdays and 12:00 A.M. on Fridays and Saturdays in the
OOH, BIZ and VC zoning districts (COR zoning is exempted);



            (e)   The free standing structure includes, or is
improved to include, a fire sprinkler and alarm system; and



            (f)   Smoke emitted from business activity does
not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited or into outdoor
venues or areas where smoking is prohibited per the following subsections (4,
5 and 6).



(Ord. 4649, 5-16-11; Amd. Ord. 4846, 10-7-13)



   4.    PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OUTDOOR VENUES AND EVENTS:



         (1)   It is unlawful to smoke in the following Outdoor
Venues and/or events:



            a.   Public parks and recreation areas within 15
feet of any play area or any playground.



            b.   Public or private school grounds.



            c.   Public sidewalks within 15 feet of a Main
Entrance to a Public Place, but excluding any person who is temporarily in
such area for the purpose of walking or traversing through such area.



            d.   At any scheduled outdoor event to which the
public is permitted or invited, which takes place within an outdoor theater,
amphitheater, stadium, or other similar semi-enclosed facility.



(Ord. 4228, 3/5/07)



         (2)    It is unlawful to smoke in or within 15 feet of
an Outdoor Venue during the time that an outdoor event (as described in 4 (1)
d, above) is taking place.



   5   PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OPEN AIR DINING AREAS EXCEPT AS
DESIGNATED:



         (1)   It is unlawful to smoke in any Open Air Dining
Area except such area, or portion thereof, designated for smoking by the
owner or other person in control of the Open Air Dining Area.



         (2)    It is unlawful for the owner or other person in
control of an Open Air Dining Area to knowingly permit smoking in that Open
Air Dining Area unless such area or portion thereof has been designated for
smoking.



         (3)    The owner or other person in control of an Open
Air Dining Area who has designated all or a portion thereof for smoking must
clearly display signage, in form and content approved by the Village,
indicating the portion of the Open Air Dining Area where smoking is permitted.



   6   REASONABLE DISTANCE:



         Smoking is prohibited within fifteen feet (15') of any Main
Entrance to a Public Place.



   7   NON-RETALIATION:



         No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in
any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or
customer because that employee, applicant or customer exercises any rights
afforded by this Section or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of
this Section.



   8   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:



         (1)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited by this Section 6-2-2-12 shall be guilty of an infraction,
punishable by a fine according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for
each offense of which such person shall be convicted.



         (2)   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls a Public Place and who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted.



         (3)   Each day on which a violation of this Section
occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.



   9.     OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS:



         This Section shall not be interpreted or be construed to
permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.



   10.   SEVERABILITY:



         If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this
Section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect the other provisions of this Section which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
Section are declared to be severable.



(Ord. 1816, 9-19-88, eff. 1-1-89; Amd. Ord. 4192, 10-2-06, eff.1-2-07; Amd.
Ord. 4215, 1-19-07, eff. 3-14-07; Amd. Ord. 4228, 3-5-07; Amd. Ord. 4231,
3-19-07; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



6-2-2-13:   SMALL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT:



(Deleted by Ord. 5377, 1-28-19)



6-2-3:  ABATEMENT:



   Whenever any nuisance shall be found on any premises within the Village
contrary to any provisions of this Chapter, the President of the Board of
Trustees is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to cause the same to be
summarily abated, in such manner as he may direct.



   Inspection:  For the purpose of carrying the foregoing provisions of
this Chapter into effect, it shall be the duty of such officers or officials
as may be directed or deputized by the President of the Board of Trustees,
from time to time to ascertain and cause all nuisances arising under this
Chapter to be abated.  In all cases where a nuisance shall be found in any
building, or upon any grounds or other premises which can be charged by
assessment with the expense of removal, notice shall be given to the owner or
occupant of the building or other premises, when known and can be found, to
remove the nuisance; and in case of his refusal or neglect to comply with
such notice, the officers or officials shall abate the same and report the
expense thereof to the President and Board of Trustees.



   Abatement Notice:  In all cases where a nuisance shall be found in any
building or upon any ground or other premises within the jurisdiction of the
Village, not less than twenty four (24) hours' notice may be given in
writing, signed by the officer or official so directed by the President of
the Board of Trustees, to the owner or occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of such building or other premises, if known and can be
found, to remove such nuisance.  It shall not be necessary in any case for
the notice to specify the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated,
unless the officer or official shall deem it advisable so to do. If the
person so notified shall neglect or refuse to abate the same in accordance
with such notice, he shall be chargeable with the expense which may be
incurred in the removal thereof, to be collected by suit or otherwise in
addition to any fine or penalty which may be imposed by law.



   Emergency Situations:  In an emergency situation where unless the
Village acts, there is an immediate hazard, a serious risk to the public, or
an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from a nuisance
existing in the Village, if a reasonable effort under the circumstances has
been made to notify the person causing or permitting the nuisance and that
person is either unavailable or unwilling to abate the nuisance, said
nuisance may be abated without further notice, and a notice describing the
action taken to abate the nuisance posted on the property.  (Ord. 3774,
7-7-03)



   Where the Village acts to abate a nuisance, the expenses incurred for
the abatement shall be chargeable to the person causing or permitting the
nuisance to continue or to the owner of the building, structure or premises
on or from which the nuisance was abated.  (Ord. 3320, 12-6-99)



6-2-4:  CITATION PROCEDURE:



6-2-4-1:  PROCEDURE OF POLICE OFFICERS:



   A police officer who halts a person for a violation of any provisions
of this Chapter, other than for the purpose of giving him a warning, warning
notice, or preliminary citation as provided hereafter, shall take the name
and address of said person, and such other pertinent information as may be
necessary, and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the
Village a citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him
before the proper court. 



6-2-4-2:  DISPOSITION OF CITATIONS:



   1.   Every police officer upon issuing a citation to an alleged
violator of any provisions of this Chapter shall deliver the original
citation to his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to
be delivered to the proper court in the event the citation has not been
settled as herein provided.



   2.   Upon the filing of such original citation with the proper
court, said citation may be disposed of only by trial or by other official
action, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a fine.



   3.   It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of
the Police Department or other officer or public employee or for any other
person to dispose of, alter or deface a citation or any copy thereof, or the
record of the issuance or disposition of any citation, complaint or warrant.



6-2-4-3:  COMPLAINT; FAILURE TO OBEY:



   Citation as Complaint for Prosecution:  The citation when filed shall
be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this
Chapter.



   Failure to Obey Citation:  It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate the command of a citation duly issued him by a police officer
regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such citation was
originally issued.



6-2-4-4:  CITATION PROCEDURE:



   1.   Whenever a police officer is authorized to give a citation to a
person because of a violation of this Chapter said police officer may, in
lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in the first instance issue to
such alleged violator, a preliminary citation:



      (1)   Advising said person that he has violated a specified
portion of this Chapter;



      (2)   Requesting him to make payment in any amount applicable
to said alleged violation as set forth herein as settlement of said violation
claim and to cease said alleged violation; and



      (3)   Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a
complaint will be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County, charging him
with such violation.



   2.   Pursuant to said preliminary citation, the person so accused of
said violation may settle the violation claim in respect of such portion of
this Chapter by paying to the Village the applicable amount as shown in the
schedule set forth herein, within a period to be specified in said
preliminary citation - not more than thirty (30) days of the time said
alleged offense was committed.



      Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions
contained in the aforesaid citation, at the office of the Police Department
which shall issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit said
amount to the Village Treasurer to be credited to the proper Municipal fund.



   3.   In the event that the person to whom said preliminary citation
is issued fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the prescribed
time, or within a period of time specified in a final notice (if one is
served upon him), then the police officer is authorized to cause a notice to
appear to be served upon said alleged violator and is authorized to file a
complaint and to prosecute the same in the Circuit Court of Cook County.



   4.   The violation claim described in said preliminary citation so
to be issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, may be settled and paid
in the respective amounts set forth in the following schedule:



      (1)   In the event that said payment is made prior to the
mailing by the Municipality or by the police officer of a final notice,  a
fine amount according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each
offense shall be accepted as settlement for each violation.



      (2)   In the event that the same person is given a second or
greater number citation or preliminary citation for the same violation under
this Chapter within a period of three years the amount in (1) above may be
increased to an amount not greater than $750.00 (every day shall be
considered a separate violation).



      (3)   In the event that payment is not made within the time
prescribed in the final notice, and a notice to appear has been served and a
complaint filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County, payment of any fine and
costs shall be in such amounts as may be determined by the Circuit Court of
Cook County.



(Ord. 881, 8-28-78; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC RESTROOM FACILITIES



SECTION:



6-3-1:   Sanitary Requirements



6-3-2:   Inspections; Certificate of Approval



6-3-1:  SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:



   The following rules and regulations, printed in book or pamphlet form,
a copy of each of which was on file in the Village Clerk's office for more
than thirty (30) days prior to the enactment of this Section and which were
available for inspection by the public are hereby adopted by reference,
provided however, the penalty provisions are not adopted.  The penalty
provisions of this Municipal Code shall apply.  Where restrooms are made
accessible to the public, they shall be installed in accordance with the
"Food Service Sanitation Manual", FDA, 1976, and meet the following
requirements:  (Ord. 768, 6-6-76; amd. 1-26-82)



   1.   Toilet facilities shall be adequate and conveniently located. 
Toilet facilities shall be completely enclosed, and shall have tight fitting,
self-closing doors.  Such doors shall not be left open except during
cleaning or maintenance.  If vestibules are provided, they shall be kept in
a clean condition and in good repair.



   2.   Lavatories shall be located within or immediately adjacent to
all toilet rooms or vestibules.  Each lavatory shall be provided with hot
and cold tempered running water.



   An adequate supply of hand-cleaning soap or detergent shall be
available at each lavatory.  An adequate supply of sanitary towels, or an
approved hand-drying device, shall be available and conveniently located near
the lavatory.  Common towels are prohibited.  Where disposable towels are
used, waste receptacles shall be located conveniently near the hand-washing
facilities.



   3.   Floors shall be well drained and constructed of impervious,
easily cleanable material.  All floorwall molding in new construction shall
be a minimum of one-fourth inch (1/4") radius coved juncture.



   4.   Toilet facilities, including the toilet room and fixtures,
shall be kept clean and in good repair.  All restrooms shall be adequately
ventilated, and ventilation facilities shall be maintained and operated so
that all areas be kept reasonably free from excessive heat, steam,
condensation, vapors, smoke, fumes or odors.



   5.   A supply of toilet tissue shall be provided at each toilet at
all times.



   6.   Easily cleanable refuse receptacles shall be provided.  A
separate receptacle shall be provided in the toilet rooms for women for
disposal of sanitary napkins.  Receptacles shall be emptied at least once a
day, and more frequently when necessary to prevent accumulation of refuse on
the floor.  (Ord. 768, 6-6-76)



   7.   All toilet fixtures must be provided in accordance with the
Village of Orland Park Plumbing Code.



(Ord. 768, 6-6-76, amd. 1-26-82)



6-3-2:  INSPECTIONS; CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:



   The Director of Environmental Health shall have the authority to make
such inspection on a yearly basis and from time to time as shall be deemed
necessary for the enforcement of this Chapter, and he shall issue a
certificate of approval upon satisfactory inspection of a facility.  Such
certificate shall be required for yearly renewal of each business license. 
(Ord. 768, 6-6-76)



CHAPTER 4
NOISE CONTROL



SECTION:



6-4-1:   Noise and Vibration Control Definitions



6-4-2:   Noise Control Regulations



6-4-2-1:   Loud Noises Prohibited



6-4-2-2:   Work Signals



6-4-2-3:   Use of Premises



6-4-2-4:   Equipment and Machinery



6-4-2-5:   Motor Vehicles



6-4-2-6:   Recreational Vehicles



6-4-3:   Noise and Sound Pressure Limits in Zoning Districts



6-4-3-1:   General Provisions



6-4-3-2:   MFG Manufacturing District



6-4-3-3:   MFG Manufacturing District



6-4-4:   Vibration Levels in Zoning Districts



6-4-4-1:   MFG Manufacturing District



6-4-5:   Public Performance Exceptions



6-4-6:   Measurement of Noise Levels



6-4-7:   Test Procedures



6-4-8:   Excesses Declared a Nuisance



6-4-9:   Interpretation of Provisions



6-4-1:  NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL DEFINITIONS:



   For the purpose of this Chapter, whenever any of the following words,
terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this Section:



   Acoustical Terminology, Definitions of:



   All acoustical terminology shall be that contained in ANSI S1.l
"Acoustical Terminology".



   ANSI:  American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies.



   ARI:  Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute or its successor
bodies.



   ASHRAE:  American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and
Air-Conditioning Engineers or its successor bodies.



   ASTM:  American Society for Testing Materials or its successor bodies.



   DECIBEL:  A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to the
logarithm of the ratio of the intensity of the sound to the intensity of an
arbitrarily chosen standard sound; abbreviated "dB".



   DISCRETE TONE:  A discrete tone is a sound wave whose instantaneous
sound pressure varies essentially as a simple sinusoidal function of the time.



   FLUCTUATING NOISE:  A fluctuating noise is a noise whose sound
pressure level varies significantly but does not equal the ambient
environmental level more than once during the period of observation.



   IMPULSIVE NOISE:  Impulsive noise is characterized by brief excursions
of sound pressure (acoustic impulses which significantly exceed the ambient
environmental sound pressure.  The duration of a single impulse is usually
less than one second.



   INTERMITTENT NOISE:  An intermittent noise is a noise whose sound
pressure level equals the ambient environmental level two (2) or more times
during the period of observation.  The period of time during which the level
of the noise remains at an essentially constant value different from that of
the ambient is on the order of one second or more.



   IEC:  International Electrotechnical Commission or its successor
bodies.



   ISO:  International Organization for Standardization or its successor
bodies.



   MOTOR VEHICLE:  A motor vehicle is any passenger vehicle, truck,
truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.



   NONSTEADY NOISE:  A nonsteady noise is a noise whose level shifts
significantly during the period of observation.



   PERIOD OF OBSERVATION:  The period of observation is the time interval
during which acoustical data are obtained.  The period of observation is
determined by the characteristics of the noise being measured and should also
be at least ten (10) times as long as the response time of the
instrumentation.  The greater the variance in indicated sound level, the
longer must be the observation time for a given expected accuracy of the
measurement.



   SAE:  Society of Automotive Engineers or its successor bodies.



   SOUND LEVEL (Noise Level):  For air-borne sound, sound level (noise
level) is a weighted sound pressure level, obtained by the use of metering
characteristics and the A-weighing as specified in the referenced standards
(Section 1.3). When the A-weighing is employed, it must be indicated.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL:  The sound pressure level, in decibels, of a
sound is twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of
the pressure of the sound to the reference sound pressure.  Unless otherwise
specified, the effective (rms) pressure is to be understood.



   The reference sound pressure is 20 uN/M2.



   STEADY NOISE:  A noise whose level remains essentially constant (i.e.,
fluctuations are negligibly small) during the period of observation is a
steady noise.



6-4-2:  NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS:



   The following restrictions and regulations are hereby established for
the enforcement of noise control within the Village.



6-4-2-1:  LOUD NOISES PROHIBITED:



   No person shall make, or cause, permit or allow to be made, upon a
public way, or in such  close proximity to a public way as to be distinctly
and loudly audible upon such public way, any noise of any kind by crying,
calling or shouting, or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper,
hammer, drum, horn, hand organ, mechanically operated piano, other musical
instrument, wind instrument, mechanical device, radio, phonograph, sound
amplifying or other similar electronic device.  These restrictions, however,
shall not apply to any licensed peddler crying or calling for the purpose of
advertising goods, wares or merchandise when lawfully using any public alley
in the Village between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) P.M.



6-4-2-2:  WORK SIGNALS:



   No person shall blow, or cause to be blown, within the Village the
steam whistle of any stationary steam plant as a signal for commencing or
suspending work, or for any other purpose.  This Section, however, shall not
be construed as forbidding the use of steam whistles alarm signals in case of
fire, collision or other imminent danger.



6-4-2-3:  USE OF PREMISES:



   No person owning, or in possession or control of any building or
premises, shall use the same, permit the use of the same or rent the same to
be used for any business or employment or residential use, or for any purpose
of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, by its boisterous nature,
disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which such building or
premise is situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to health.



6-4-2-4:  EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY:



   1   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any pile driver,
shovel, hammer, derrick, hoist, tractor, roller, power or chain saw, power
lawnmower or other mechanical apparatus operated by fuel or electric power in
building or construction operations or in outdoor private business or
residential use, between the hours of nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. and 7
o'clock (7:00) A.M., except for work on public improvements and work of
public service utilities, within six hundred feet (600') of any building used
for residential or hospital purposes.  (Ord. 2423, 7-6-93; Amd. Ord. 4169,
9-5-06)



   2.   No person shall sell or lease, or offer for sale or lease, any
powered equipment or powered hand tool that produces a maximum noise level
exceeding the following noise limits at a distance of fifty feet (50'), under
subsection 3 of the Test Procedures Section of this Chapter.



      Type of Equipment         Noise Limit



   Construction and industrial machinery such as crawler-tractors, dozers,
rotary drills and augers, loaders, power shovels, cranes, derricks, motor
graders, paving machines, off-highway trucks, ditchers, trenchers,
compactors, scrapers, wagons, pavement breakers, compressors and pneumatic
powered equipment, etc., but not including pile drivers -



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1972   94 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1973   88 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1975   86 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1980   80 dB (A)



   Agricultural tractors and equipment -



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1972   88 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1975   86 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1980   80 dB (A)



   Powered commercial equipment of 20 HP or less intended for infrequent
use in a residential area, such as chain saws, pavement breakers, log
chippers, powered hand tools, etc. -



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1972   88 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1973   84 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1980   80 dB (A)



   Powered equipment intended for repetitive use in residential areas.
Such equipment includes lawn mowers, small lawn and garden tools, riding
tractors, snow removal equipment -



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1972   74 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1975   70 dB (A)



      Manufactured after 1 Jan. 1978   65 dB (A)



6-4-2-5:  MOTOR VEHICLES:



   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor of a
motor vehicle of a eight in excess of four (4) tons (8,000 lbs.) for a
consecutive period longer than two (2) minutes while such vehicle is standing
on private property and located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
property zoned and used for residential purposes except where such vehicle is
standing within a completely enclosed structure.



   This Section shall not apply to buses operated for the transportation
of passengers while standing in established bus turnarounds, bus terminals,
bus parking lots and bus-storage yards.



   2.   No person shall sell, or offer for sale, a new motor vehicle
that produces a maximum noise exceeding the following noise limit at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from the center line of travel under subsection
1 of the TEST PROCEDURES Section of this Chapter:



 



TYPE OF VEHICLE
 
DATE OF MANUFACTURE
 
NOISE LIMIT


Motorcycle
 
Before 1 Jan. 1970
 
92 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1970
 
88 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1973
 
86 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1975
 
84 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1980
 
75 dB (A)


Any motor vehicle with a group vehicle weight of 8,000 pounds or more
 
After 1 Jan. 1968
 
88 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1973
 
86 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1975
 
84 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1980
 
74 dB (A)


Passenger cars, motor-driven cycle and any other motor vehicle
 
Before 1 Jan. 1973
 
86 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1973
 
84 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1975
 
80 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 Jan. 1980
 
75 dB (A)




 



   3.   No person shall operate within the speed limits specified in
this Section either a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles of a type
subject to registration at any time or under any condition of grade, load,
acceleration or deceleration in such manner as to exceed the following noise
limit for the category of motor vehicle, based on a distance of not less than
fifty feet (50') from the center line of travel under subsection 2 of the
TEST PROCEDURES Section of this Chapter:



 



Noise Limits:
 
 


   Noise Limit in Relation to Posted Speed Limit.
 


 
35 M.P.H.
or Less
 
Over 35 M.P.H.


Type of Vehicle
 
 


Any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's GVW rating of 8,000 lbs. or more, and
any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle
 
 


   Before 1 Jan. 1973
 
88 dB (A)
 
90 dB (A)


   After 1  Jan. 1973
 
86 dB (A)
 
90 dB (A)


Any motorcycle other than a motor-driven cycle
 
 


   Before 1 Jan. 1978
 
82 dB (A)
 
86 dB (A)


   After 1  Jan. 1978
 
78 dB (A)
 
82 dB (A)


Any other motor vehicle and any combination of motor vehicles towed by such
motor vehicle
 
 


   After 1 Jan. 1970
 
76 dB (A)
 
82 dB (A)


   After 1 Jan. 1978
 
70 dB (A)
 
79 dB (A)




 



   This Section applies to the total noise from a vehicle or combination
of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the
enforcement of any other provisions of this Code relating to motor vehicle
mufflers for noise control.



   4.   No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, intake
muffler or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle in a manner
such that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is increased above that
emitted by the vehicle as originally manufactured.  Procedures used to
establish compliance with the paragraph shall be those used to establish
compliance of a new motor vehicle with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(See also, the MOTOR VEHICLES Section, NUISANCE Chapter of this Title and the
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC Title of this Code).



   5.   No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any
motor vehicle of any kind while not in motion, nor shall such horn or signal
device be sounded under any circumstances except as required by law, nor
shall it be sounded for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.



6-4-2-6:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:



   1.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new motor-driven
recreational or off-highway vehicle, including dune buggies, snowmobiles,
all-terrain vehicles, go-carts and minibikes, that produces a maximum noise
exceeding the following noise limit at a distance of fifty feet (50') from
the center line of travel under subsection 5 of the TEST PROCEDURES Section
of this Chapter:



 

TYPE OF VEHICLE
 
DATE OF MANUFACTURE
 
NOISE LIMIT


Snowmobile
 
After 1 Jan. 1971
 
86 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 June 1972
 
82 dB (A)


Same
 
After 1 June 1974
 
73 dB (A)


Any other vehicle including dune buggy, all-terrain vehicle, go-cart, minibike
 
After 1 Jan. 1971
 
86 dB (A)


 
After 1 Jan. 1973
 
82 dB (A)


 
After 1 Jan. 1975
 
73 dB (A)



 



   2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven
vehicle of a type not subject to registration for road use, at any time or
under any condition of load, acceleration, or deceleration, in such a manner
as to exceed the following noise limit at any point on property zoned for
business or residential use at a distance of not less than fifty feet (50')
from the path of travel:



 

DATE OF MANUFACTURE
 
NOISE LIMIT


Before 1 Jan. 1973
 
76 dB (A)


After 1 Jan. 1973
 
82 dB (A)



 



6-4-3:  NOISE AND SOUND PRESSURE LIMITS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:



6-4-3-1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS:



   1.   In business and commercial zoning districts, all activities
involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair of
materials, goods or products, or any property use shall conform with the
performance standards stated in Section 6-4-3-2, provided that performance
standards shall in every case be applied at the boundaries of the lot on
which any such activities take place.



   2.   In residential zoning districts, any property use shall conform
with the performance standards stated in Section 6-4-3-2 for residence
district boundaries, provided that performance standards shall in every case
be applied at the boundaries of the lot in which such use is established.



   3.   The maximum sound pressure levels established in Section
6-4-3-2 to be applied to the boundaries of a lot shall not apply to
construction sites.  Construction site noise level shall be regulated by the
EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY Section of this Chapter.



6-4-3-2:  MFG MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:



   In the MFG Manufacturing District, at no point on the boundary of a
residence, business or commercial zoning district shall the sound pressure
level of any individual operation or plant, or the combined operations of any
person, exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown below
for the zoning districts indicated as measured under subsection 4 of the TEST
PROCEDURES Section of this Chapter:



 



Octave Band Center
 
Maximum Sound Pressure Levels
(dB) Along District Boundaries


Frequency  (Hz)
 
Residence
 
Business- Commercial


31.5
 
72
 
79


63
 
71
 
78


125
 
65
 
72


250
 
57
 
64


500
 
51
 
58


1,000
 
45
 
52


2,000
 
39
 
46


4,000
 
34
 
41


8,000
 
32
 
39


 
 


A-scale levels (for monitoring purposes)
 
55 dB (A)
 
62 dB (A)




 



6-4-3-3:  MFG MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:



   In MFG Manufacturing District, at no point either on the boundary of a
residence, business or commercial district, or at one hundred twenty five
feet (125') from the nearest property line of a plant or operation, whichever
distance is greater, shall the sound pressure level of any individual
operation or plant, or the combined operations of any person, exceed the
decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown below for the zoning
districts included as measured under subsection 4 of the TEST PROCEDURES
Section of this Chapter:



 



Octave Band Center
 
Maximum Sound Pressure Levels
(dB) Along District Boundaries


Frequency  (Hz)
 
Residence
 
Business- Commercial


31.5
 
75
 
80


63
 
74
 
79


125
 
69
 
74


250
 
64
 
69


500
 
58
 
63


1,000
 
52
 
57


2,000
 
47
 
52


4,000
 
43
 
48


8,000
 
40
 
45


 
 


A-scale levels (for monitoring purposes)
 
61 dB (A)
 
66 dB (A)




 



6-4-4:  VIBRATION LEVELS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:



   Any property use established in a manufacturing, commercial or business
zoning district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance
standards governing vibration set forth in the Land Development Code of the
Village.



6-4-4-1:  MFG MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:



   In MFG Manufacturing District, any use or portion thereof creating
intense earth-shaking vibrations such as are created by drop forges, or heavy
hydraulic surges, shall be set back at least three hundred feet (300') from
the boundary of a residence, business or commercial zoning district unless
such operation is controlled in such a manner as to prevent transmission
beyond the lot lines of earth-shaking vibrations perceptible without the aid
of instruments.



6-4-4-2:  BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:



   In business and commercial zoning districts, the performance standards
governing vibration in the MFG Manufacturing District shall apply.



6-4-5:  PUBLIC PERFORMANCE EXCEPTIONS:



   The operational performance standards established by this Chapter shall
not apply to any public performance being conducted in accordance with the
provisions of a special permit granted by the Village for the conduct of a
public performance.



6-4-6:  MEASUREMENT OF NOISE LEVELS:



   Noise levels shall be measured in terms of the sound pressure level in
octave-frequency bands using equipment which meets the requirements
established by this Chapter.  Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the
performance standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that equipment
suitable for such noise measurement, as defined by this Chapter, is used. 
Noises such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature shall be
restricted as provided for hereinafter.



6-4-7:  TEST PROCEDURES:



   1.   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise emitted by
new motor vehicles sold or offered for sale meet the noise limits stated in
the Motor Vehicles Section of this Chapter shall be in substantial conformity
with Standards and Recommended Practice established by the Society of
Automotive Engineers, Inc., including SAE Standard J331; SAE Recommended
Practice J184; SAE Recommended Practice J366; SAE Standard J986 and such
other and further standards as may be propounded in the Code of Recommended
Practices of the Department of Environmental Control.



   2.   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise emitted by
motor vehicles in use meet the noise limits stated in the Motor Vehicles
Section of this Chapter shall be in substantial conformity with Standards and
Recommended Practice established by the Society of Automotive Engineers,
Inc., including SAE Standard J986; SAE Standard J331; Recommended Practice
J366; Recommended Practice J184; and such other and further standards as may
be propounded in the Code of Recommended Practices of the Department of
Environmental Control.



   3.   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise emitted by
engine-powered equipment or powered hand tools, sold or leased, or offered
for sale or lease, meet the noise limits stated in the Equipment and
Machinery Section of this Chapter shall be in substantial conformity with the
Standards and Recommended Practice established by the Society of Automotive
Engineers, Inc., including SAE Standard J952; SAE Recommended Practice J184;
and such other and further standards as may be propounded in the Code of
Recommended Practices of the Department of Environmental Control.



   4.   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise levels
emitted by property uses along property lines and zoning district boundaries
meet the noise limits stated in the Noise and Sound Pressure Limits in Zoning
Districts Section of this Chapter shall be in substantial conformity with
ANSI Standard S1.4-1961 or IEC Standard 123-1961; ANSI Standard S1-12-1967;
ANSI Standard S1.11-1966; IEC Standard 179-1965; IEC Standard 225-1966; SAE
Recommended Practice J184.



   5.   Test procedures to determine whether maximum noise emitted by
new motor-driven recreational or off-highway vehicles including dune buggies,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts and minibikes, meet the noise
limits stated in the Recreational Vehicles Section of this Chapter shall be
in substantial conformity with Standards and Recommended Practice established
by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., including SAE Standard J331;
SAE Standard J986; SAE Recommended Practice J184.



6-4-8:  EXCESSES DECLARED A NUISANCE:



   Any emission of noise or earth-shaking vibration from any source in
excess of the limitations established in or pursuant to this Chapter shall be
deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be subject to
summary abatement procedures.  Such abatement may be in addition to the
administrative proceedings, fines and penalties herein provided.



6-4-9:  INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:



   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impair any cause of
action, or legal remedy therefor, of any person or the public for injury or
damage arising from the emission or release into the atmosphere or ground
from any source whatever of noise or earth-shaking vibration in such place or
manner, or at such levels, so as to constitute a common-law nuisance.  (Ord.
799, 9-28-77)



CHAPTER 5
LANDSCAPE WASTE DISPOSAL



SECTION:



6-5-1:   Definitions



6-5-2:   Purpose and Intent



6-5-3:   Maintenance



6-5-4:   Composition



6-5-5:   Separation and Collection



6-5-6:   Prohibited Items



6-5-7:   Owner/Occupier Responsibility



6-5-8:   Prohibited Activity



6-5-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For purposes of this Chapter, the following shall be defined as follows:



   COMPOSTING:  A controlled biological reduction of horticultural
landscape organic wastes to humus.



   ORGANIC HORTICULTURAL LANDSCAPE WASTE:  Shall include leaves, grass,
plant clippings, garden plant debris, natural Christmas trees and other
organic honicultural debris accumulated from the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines and trees.



   SOLID WASTE/REFUSE:  Putrescible and non-putrescible wastes,
including, but not limited to garbage, rubbish, dead animals, animal offal,
animal feces, human wastes, abandoned vehicles, machinery components,
construction or demolition debris, and landscape waste unless composted in
accordance with this Chapter.



6-5-2:  PURPOSE AND INTENT:



   The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the recycling of organic
horticultural landscape wastes through composting, and to establish standards
for proper compost maintenance.



6-5-3:  MAINTENANCE:



   All compost piles shall be maintained using approved composting
procedures in compliance with the following requirements:



   1.   All compost piles shall be enclosed in a freestanding compost
bin.  A compost bin shall be no larger than one hundred twenty five (125)
cubic feet in volume, and shall be no taller than five feet (5') from ground
level.



   2.   A compost bin shall provide adequate penetration of moisture
for the compost materials and adequate ventilation for the process of
decomposition.



   3.   All compost piles shall be so maintained as to prevent the
attraction or harborage of rodents and other pests.  The presence of rodents
or other pests in or near a compost pile shall be cause for the Village to
proceed against the owner/occupier of the premises.



   4.   Compost piles shall be maintained in such a manner so as to
prevent the creation or propagation of unpleasant or noxious odors onto
surrounding areas.



   5.   A compost pile may not be located in a yard except under the
following conditions only:



      (1).   In a rear yard not less than three feet (3') from all
lot lines; and/or



      (2).   In a side yard no closer to any lot line than the
required setback distance prescribed for the zoning district in which the
property is located.



6-5-4:  COMPOSITION:



   A compost pile may contain the following and only the following Items:



      1.   Organic horticultural and landscape waste, as defined in
the Definitions Section this Chapter; and/or



      2.   Commercial compost additives not prohibited by any State,
local or Federal laws.



6-5-5:  SEPARATION AND COLLECTION:



   For waste collection purposes, organic horticultural landscape waste
shall be separated from other solid waste and refuse, and such organic
horticultural waste shall be placed only in Waste Wheeler Carts, Kraft paper
bags, or other containers specifically designated by the Village.  Village
refuse hauling services shall not accept any organic horticultural landscape
waste for collection unless it is packaged in conformity with this Section.



6-5-6:  PROHIBITED ITEMS:



   1.   Lake Weeds;



   2.   Cooked or prepared food scraps of any kind;



   3.   Fish, meat or any other animal product or byproduct;



   4.   Manures of any kind;



   5.   Solid waste or refuse as defined in the DEFINITIONS Section of
this Chapter.



   6.   Any other items not stated or contemplated by the COMPOSITION
Section of this Chapter.



6-5-7:  OWNER/OCCUPIER RESPONSIBILITY:



   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to maintain
all property under his/her control in accordance with the requirements of
this Chapter.  Further, if the owner of the premises is not the occupier of
the property, the responsibility shall also be that of the occupier of the
premises.



6-5-8:  PROHIBITED ACTIVITY:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   1.   Mix organic horticultural landscape waste with any other waste;



   2.   Dump organic horticultural landscape waste on any property
except that same may be spread or composted on the property from which it was
collected and in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter;



   3.   Place organic horticultural landscape waste in any container
for collection not among those types of containers approved by the Village
for organic horticultural landscape waste collection;



   4.   Compost organic horticultural waste within fifty feet (50') of
any residential structure located on another property;



   5.   Burn any organic horticultural landscape waste, except that:



      i.   The burning of elm tree wood and prunings of elm trees on
the premises where it is produced shall be permitted, as may be necessary, to
control the spread of the Dutch elm disease provided, however, that all
required permits from the County of Cook, Illinois, the State of Illinois, or
the United States government has been obtained for such burning; and



      ii.   The burning of organic horticultural landscape waste and
prunings on golf course premises where it is produced shall be permitted
provided, however, that all required permits from the County of Cook,
Illinois, the State of Illinois, or the United States government have been
obtained for such burning.



      iii.   The burning of horticultural landscape waste and
prunings as a part of an approved "Monitoring and Management Plan for
Naturalized Landscape Areas and Detention Basins", as detailed in Section
6-305 Landscape and Tree Preservation of the Land Development Code, shall be
permitted provided, however, that all required permits from the County of
Cook, Illinois, the State of Illinois, or the United States government have
been obtained for such burning.



   6.   Place landscape waste into a collection container other than
his or her own.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16)



CHAPTER 6
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



SECTION:



6-6-1:   Definitions



6-6-2:   Parking Prohibitions



6-6-3:   No Parking Without Consent



6-6-4:   Storage Restriction



6-6-5:   Hazardous Incident Prohibition



6-6-6:   Spiller Pay Requirement



6-6-7:   Prohibitions



6-6-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall be defined
as follows:



   COMBUSTIBLE:  Any substance having a flashpoint above eighty (80)
degrees Fahrenheit to and including one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit as determined by the Tagliabue Open Cup Test, except the
combustibility of solids or contents of self-pressured containers shall be
determined by methods generally applicable to such materials or containers
respectively.



   CORROSIVE:  Any substance which in contact with living tissue causes
destruction of tissue by chemical action; but does not refer to action on
inanimate surfaces.



   FLAMMABLE or COMBUSTIBLE:  Any substance which has a flashpoint of
above twenty(20) degrees  to and including eighty (80) degrees  Fahrenheit
as determined by the Tagliabue Open Cup Tester, and "extremely flammable"
means any substance which has a flash-point at or below twenty (20) degrees 
Fahrenheit as determined by the Tagliabue Open Cup Tester, and "combustible"
means any substance which has a flashpoint above eighty (80) degrees
Fahrenheit to and including one hundred fifty (150) degrees, as determined by
the Tagliabue Open Cup Tester.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL INCIDENT:  An incident which threatens public
health or safety involving the actual or reasonable potential for release of
a hazardous substance or hazardous material.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE or HAZARDOUS MATERIAL:  Any substance or material
or mixture of substances which is toxic, corrosive, an irritant, strong
sensitizer, radioactive, flammable, combustible, or which generates pressure
through decomposition, heat or other means and which may cause injury or
illness to humans, domestic livestock, or wildlife or as defined by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Act or any Federal law.



   HIGHLY TOXIC:  Any substance which produces death within fourteen (14)
days in at least half of a group of ten (10) or more laboratory white rats
each weighing between two hundred (200) and three hundred (300) grams, when a
single dose of fifty (50) milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight, is
orally administered or when inhaled continuously for a period of one hour or
less at an atmospheric concentration of two hundred (200) parts per million
by volume or less of gas or vapor or two (2) milligrams per liter by volume
or less of mist or dust, provided such concentration is likely to be
encountered by man when the substance is used in any reasonably foreseeable
manner, or which produces death within fourteen (14) days in at least half of
a group of ten (10) or more rabbits tested in a dosage of two hundred (200)
milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight, when administered by
continuous contact with the bare skin for twenty four (24) hours or less.



   IRRITANT:  Any substance, not corrosive, which on immediate, prolonged
or repeated contact with normal living tissue will induce local inflammatory
reaction.



   PERSON:  Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, firm,
company, estate, association or other legal entity.



   RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCE:  Any substance which emits ionizing radiation.



   STRONG SENSITIZER:  Any substance which will cause on normal living
tissue through an allergic or photodynamic process a hypersensitivity which
becomes evident on reapplication of the same substance.



   TOXIC:  Any substance (other than a radioactive substance) which has
the capacity to produce bodily injury or illness to man through ingestion,
inhalation, or absorption through any body surface.



   TRUCK:  Every motor vehicle being used or maintained for the
transportation of property which includes any of the above-listed substances
or any transported substances which are in a frozen state, heated state,
liquid state or gaseous state contact with which would destroy living tissue.



6-6-2:  PARKING PROHIBITIONS:



   1.   No person shall stop or park a truck or permit a truck to stand
at any time, at any place, within the Village within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any building or structure used for residential purposes, for
school purposes, or for public assembly (more than 20 people), except: in the
case where the property on the truck is being unloaded for use on the
premises where the truck is parked, and the truck departs the premises as
soon as reasonably possible after unloading is complete, or not longer than
two (2) hours, whichever is less.  However, the two (2) hour restriction may
be extended by two (2) hours by the Village, if the Police Department and
Fire Protection District are notified prior to the expiration of the initial
two (2) hour period and there is no reasonably apparent risk of a hazardous
material incident.



   2.   In the event that the driver and/or operator of the truck
should be unable to move the truck further than one thousand feet (1,000') of
a residential structure, school building, or building for public assembly
(more than 20 people) due to mechanical problems, the driver and/or operator
shall, as soon as possible, notify the Police Department and Fire Protection
District and advise said agencies of the location and cargo of said truck.



6-6-3:  NO PARKING WITHOUT CONSENT: 



   No person using any motor vehicle carrying, transporting or containing
a hazardous substance or hazardous material shall park or permit said vehicle
to stand, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaging in loading or unloading, on private property without the knowledge
and the express consent of the person who is in charge of the property and
who is aware of the nature of the hazardous substance or hazardous material
the motor vehicle contains.



6-6-4:  STORAGE RESTRICTION:



   No person shall use, store, deliver or transport hazardous substances
or hazardous materials or cause the use, storage, delivery or transporting of
hazardous substances or hazardous materials in any manner inconsistent with
the requirements of the applicable Village Ordinances, State law or Federal
law.



6-6-5:  HAZARDOUS INCIDENT PROHIBITION:



   No person shall store, manufacture, produce, dispose of, treat,
transport or cause the use, storage, manufacture, production, disposal,
treatment or transportation of any hazardous substance or hazardous material
in any manner which results in a hazardous material incident.



6-6-6:  SPILLER PAY REQUIREMENT:



   1.   Any person causing or permitting a hazardous material incident
may be responsible for any or all of the following:



      (1).   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by
the Village in connection with the operation, maintenance, and staffing
required to respond to such hazardous material incident at the rate of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour per vehicle (or any fraction of an hour)
and the hourly rate of pay, including overhead costs, for each employee who
participates in such response to a hazardous material incident.



      (2).   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by
the Village for equipment and materials used, damaged, lost, spent, destroyed
or rendered irreparable in connection with a hazardous material incident.



      (3).   Assumption of any and all liability and costs for any
clean-up or removal resulting from a hazardous material incident, including
but not limited to any independent clean-up contractor necessitated by such
hazardous material incident.



   2.   The Village Manager shall prepare and forward to the person or
persons causing or permitting a hazardous material incident a bill for the
total costs and expenses incurred for which such person or persons are
responsible pursuant to this Section; provided, however, any cost in
connection with any independent clean-up contractor shall be billed directly
by such contractor.  Payment of the total bill shall be made within thirty
(30) days of receipt.  Any bill or portion of a bill remaining unpaid after
thirty (30) days of receipt shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance at
the rate of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month, or any fraction of a
month.



6-6-7:  PROHIBITIONS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal entity to fail,
refuse or otherwise conduct himself or itself contrary to the provisions of
the NO PARKING WITHOUT CONSENT, STORAGE RESTRICTION, and HAZARDOUS INCIDENT
PROHIBITION Sections of this Chapter.



CHAPTER 7
DISRUPTION OF UTILITY SERVICE   



SECTION:



6-7-1:   Definitions



6-7-2:   Prohibition



6-7-3:   Penalty



6-7-4:   Defenses



6-7-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   “Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, contractor, association, municipality or other governmental unit or
utility company.



   “Utility service”  means telephone, gas, electric, water and storm
or sanitary sewer service, regardless of who provides those services.



   “Disrupt”  means to interrupt any utility service for a period of
sixty (60) minutes or more.



   “Resident”  of Orland Park means any person residing within the
corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park, and any business, commercial,
retail, manufacturing, educational, governmental, or non-profit entity of any
sort, located within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park.



   “Excavation”  means any operation in which earth, soil, rock or
other material in or on the ground is moved, removed or otherwise displaced
by means of any tools, machinery, power equipment or explosives.



   “JULIE”  means the state-wide on-call notice system established
for location of underground utility facilities.



6-7-2:  PROHIBITION:



   No person, through excavation within the corporate limits of the
Village of Orland Park, shall disrupt any utility service to any resident of
the Village of Orland Park.



6-7-3:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



6-7-4:  DEFENSES:



   It shall be a defense to the application of this Chapter to demonstrate
that JULIE, or the utility whose service was disrupted, was contacted prior
to the excavation for the purpose of marking or otherwise identifying the
underground utility facilities, and that the underground utility line
markings or identifications indicated by JULIE or said utility were
respected.  (Ord. 2926, 8-5-96)



CHAPTER 8
SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED AT CONSTRUCTION SITES



SECTION:



6-8-1:   Sanitary Facilities Required At Construction Sites



6-8-2:   Penalty



6-8-1:  SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED AT CONSTRUCTION SITES:



   The owner or developer of property at which any construction requiring
the issuance of a building permit is performed shall provide portable toilet
facilities at the construction site for use by persons working at the site if
permanent sanitary facilities are not available to the workers at the site. 
In the case of a multi-lot development, portable toilet facilities need not
be made available on each lot if such facilities are located within 500 feet
of each lot.  The person responsible for complying with this Section shall
comply with all federal and state laws prescribing the number of and
accessibility to the portable toilet facilities required to be provided under
this Section.  That person shall also provide that such facilities shall be
locked or otherwise secured when the construction site is unsupervised.



6-8-2:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Ord. 3264, 7-12-99; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 9
EMERGENCY ENERGY PLANS



SECTION:



6-9-1:   Definitions



6-9-2:   Submittal of Emergency Energy Plan



6-9-3:   Review of Plan



6-9-4:   Implementation of Emergency



6-9-5:   Violations; Enforcement



6-9-6:   Construction



6-9-7:   Severability



6-9-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:



   "Control Area" means an electrical system bounded by interconnection
(tie-line) metering and telemetry.  It controls generation directly to
maintain its interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to
frequency regulation of the interconnection.



   "Control Area Emergency" means that Control Area is at risk of having
to shed firm load, having taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating
action short of shedding firm load and firm sales.



   "Controlled rotating interruptions of electrical service" means the
implementation of a plan to curtail electric service to firm load customers
for a short period of time and rotating this curtailment of electric service
through different areas within the electric utility's service territory in a
situation where the demand has exceeded or is at significant risk of
exceeding the supply of electricity available to the electric utility.  The
action of an electric utility to interrupt or curtail electric service to a
customer participating in or taking service under an interruptible or
curtailable rate is not included in this definition of a "controlled rotating
interrupting of electric service."



   "Emergency energy plan" means the portions of the Emergency load
conservation procedures, which immediately precede and include the controlled
rotating interruption of electrical service to firm load customers within the
Village.  The Emergency energy plan shall include the following steps:



      (1)   a request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;



      (2)   a declaration of a control area emergency;



      (3)   a public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity
use; and,



      (4)   implementation of the plan for controlled rotating
interruptions of electrical service.



   "Emergency load conservation procedures" means a planned course of
action developed by an electric utility company to be implemented in
emergency situations when the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at
significant risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the
electric utility.



   "Electric utility company" or "electric utility" means any person or
entity engaged in the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise
delivering electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption
within the Village.  This term shall not include any person or entity that
delivers electricity to fewer than 50 customers within the Village.



6-9-2:  SUBMITTAL OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN:



   (a)   Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency
energy plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter,
or within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is
later.  Every such electric utility company shall submit to the Village
Manager or the Village Manager's designee an emergency energy plan adopted by
the company no later than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter,
or within 24 hours of the time the plan is adopted, whichever is later.  The
electric utility company shall be required to examine and update as needed
its emergency energy plan at least annually.  The electric utility company
shall notify the foregoing public official(s) in writing of any material
revisions to its plan and the rationale for said revisions within five (5)
business days of the time said revisions are made.



   (b)   The emergency energy plan shall include, at a minimum,
information detailing:



      (1)   Circumstances that would require the implementation of
the emergency energy plan;



      (2)   Stages of the emergency energy plan;



      (3)   The approximate geographic limits of each outage area
provided for in the emergency energy plan;



      (4)   The approximate number of customers within each outage
area provided for in the emergency energy plan;



      (5)   The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing
homes, schools, day care centers, senior citizen centers, community health
centers, dialysis centers, community mental health centers, correctional
facilities, stormwater and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and
water- pumping stations that have been identified by the Village and persons
on life-support systems that are known to the company, and that could be
affected by controlled rotating interruptions of electric service under the
emergency energy plan; and 



      (6)   The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional
interruptions of electric service to each outage area under the emergency
energy plan.



6-9-3:  REVIEW OF PLAN:



   Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the Village, the Village
shall review the emergency energy plan in order to determine if the emergency
energy plan is complete and to assure appropriate coordination with public
health and safety agencies.  The Village may reject the emergency energy
plan if it does not contain all the information required under Section
6-9-2(b), in which case the Village shall notify the electric utility company
in writing of said rejection and the reasons therefor.  The electric utility
company shall thereafter submit a complete emergency energy plan to the
Village no later than thirty (30) days after such notice is sent by the
Village.



   The Village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively to:



      (1)   Identify customers and facilities for which a controlled
rotating interruption of electric servicewould require heightened response by
Village public health and safety agencies,



      (2)   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public
health and safety, and



      (3)   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties
of the Village's public health and safety agencies.



6-9-4:  IMPLEMENTATION OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN:



   Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be
necessary to implement a controlled rotating interruption of electrical
service due to the demand for electricity exceeding, or being at significant
risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric
utility company, the electric utility company shall do the following:



      (1)   Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing
a controlled rotating interruption of electric service and notify the
appropriate electric utility company personnel, and



      (2)   Notify the Village Manager or the Village Manager's
designee that the electric utility company will be implementing its emergency
energy plan.  The notification shall be made pursuant to a notification
procedure approved by the Village Manager after consultation with the
appropriate Village departments.  The Village Manager or the Village
Manager's designee may waive the notice requirement to accommodate exigent
circumstances.



   Subsequent to providing the notice as required above, an electric
utility company shall reasonably and separately advise the designated Village
officials when it implements each of the steps of the emergency energy
plan.  Such steps shall include the following:



      (1)   A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;



      (2)   A declaration of a control area emergency;



      (3)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity
use.



   The electric utility company shall give a separate notice to the
Village Manager or the Village Manager's designee, immediately upon the
determination that there will be a controlled rotating interruption of
electric service pursuant to the emergency energy plan.  The notification
shall include the areas to be interrupted; the sequence and estimated
duration of the service outage for each area; and the affected feeders and
number of affected customers in each area.  Whenever practical, the
notification shall be made at least two hours prior to the time of the
outages, and in no case shall the notification be made less than 30 minutes
prior to the outages, if the company is aware that controlled rotating
interruptions may be required.



   Notification required by this section shall be in addition to any
notification requirements set forth in any applicable franchise agreement or
franchise ordinance, or as may be required by applicable federal or State law
or regulation.



6-9-5:  VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:



   Any electric utility company that knowingly violates this chapter or
any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person
shall be convicted.  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.



   The Village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction or order to compel the other party to comply with the provisions
of this chapter.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



6-9-6:  CONSTRUCTION:



   Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to preclude or interfere
with the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary
to assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally
safe service, as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS
5/1-101 et seq.).  Nothing set forth in this Chapter shall be deemed to
modify the terms of any existing franchise agreement or franchise ordinance
otherwise applicable to any electric utility company, or to excuse any
performance required by such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any
authority that may be exercised pursuant to such agreement or ordinance, or
to limit any remedy that may be available under such agreement or ordinance.



6-9-7:  SEVERABILITY:



   Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
Chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court or agency of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or
sections of this Chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the Board
of Trustees without the incorporation in this Chapter of any such invalid or
unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ord.
3306, 10/19/99)



CHAPTER 10
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES



SECTION:



6-10-1:   Definitions



6-10-2:   Public Nuisance Declared



6-10-3:   Seizure and Impoundment of Motor Vehicles



6-10-4:   Posting a Bond



6-10-5:   Preliminary Hearing



6-10-6:   Plea Hearing/Evidentiary Hearing



6-10-7:   Disposition of Impounded Motor Vehicles



6-10-8:   Applicability of Other Laws



6-10-9:   Use of Fees Collected



6-10-10:   Administration Review



6-10-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Section, and the interpretation and
enforcement thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which
they are used shall indicate otherwise.  When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number
include the singular number.  The words “shall” and “will” are
mandatory and “may” is permissive.  Words not defined shall be given
their common and ordinary meaning. 



   (1)   HEARING OFFICER: A licensed attorney, who is not an officer or
employee of the Village, designated by the Village Manager.



   (2)   OWNER OF RECORD: The record titleholder to a motor vehicle as
registered with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois, or any other
applicable governmental agency.



6-10-2:  PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:



   A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of
the owner of record, shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be subject
to seizure and impoundment under this Section where such motor vehicle is
used in the commission of any of the violations set forth in this subsection
or when the commission of any of the violations set forth in this subsection
makes impoundment of the motor vehicle reasonably necessary as a community
caretaking function so that the motor vehicle does not jeopardize public
safety and the efficient movement of vehicular traffic.  It shall not be
necessary for criminal charges to be filed, prosecuted, and/or proven in
order to demonstrate that one or more of the following violations has/have
been committed:



   (1)   A violation of Section 8-6-4-1 (Discharge of Firearms) of this
Code, as amended, or Section 8-6-1-2 (Assault and Battery) of this Code, as
amended;



   (2)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-303 (Driving While Driver’s
License, Permit or Privilege to Operate a Motor Vehicle is Suspended or
Revoked), as amended, except where said violation is in regard to a person
whose driver’s license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is
suspended only for a violation of the emissions inspection laws as set forth
in 625 ILCS 5/13C- 1, et seq., as amended;



   (3)      A violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204 (Fleeing or Attempting
to Elude a Peace Officer), as amended; 625 ILCS 5/11-501 (Driving Under the
Influence of Alcohol, Other Drug or Drugs, Intoxicating Compound or Compounds
or any Combination Thereof), as amended; 625 ILCS 5/11-503 (Reckless Driving
or Aggravated Reckless Driving), as amended; or 625 ILCS 5/11-506 (Street
Racing), as amended, or the stopping of a person against whom a warrant has
been issued by a circuit court for failing to appear to answer charges that
the person was (a) operating a motor vehicle while that person’s license
was suspended or revoked or (b) operating a motor vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds
or any combination thereof;



   (4)   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-6 (Indecent Solicitation of a
Child), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/12-2 (Aggravated Assault), as amended; 720
ILCS 5/12-4 (Aggravated Battery), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/12-4.2 (Aggravated
Battery with a Firearm), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/12-4.3 (Aggravated Battery of
a Child), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/12-4.6 (Aggravated Battery of a Senior
Citizen), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/16A-3 (Retail Theft), as amended, when the
value of the merchandise exceeds three hundred dollars ($300.00);  720 ILCS
5/18-1 (Robbery), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/18-2 (Armed Robbery), as amended;
720 ILCS 5/19-1 (Burglary), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/19-1 (Residential
Burglary), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/20-1 (Arson), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/20-1.1
(Aggravated Arson), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/20-2 (Possession of Explosives or
Explosive or Incendiary Devices), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/21-1 (Criminal
Damage to Property), as amended; or 720 ILCS 5/25-1 (Mob Action), as amended;
or 720 ILCS 5/16-1 (Felony Theft), as amended; (Amd. Ord. 4966, 3/2/15)



   (5)    A violation of 720 ILCS 570/401 (Manufacture or Delivery of a
Controlled Substance), as amended; 720 ILCS 570/401.1 (Controlled Substance
Trafficking), as amended; or 720 ILCS 570/402 (Possession of a Controlled
Substance), as amended;



   (6)  A violation of 720 ILCS 550/4(d) (Possession of More than 30
Grams of Any Substance Containing Cannabis), as amended; 720 ILCS 550/5
(Manufacture or Delivery of Cannabis), as amended; 720 ILCS 550/5.1 (Cannabis
Trafficking), as amended; 720 ILCS 550/5.2 (Delivery of Cannabis on School
Grounds), as amended; or 720 ILCS 550/8 (Unauthorized Production or
Possession of Cannabis Sativa Plant), as amended;



   (7)   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1 (Unlawful Use of Weapons), as
amended; 720 ILCS 5/24-3.1 (Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm
Ammunition), as amended; or 720 ILCS 5/24-3.3 (Unlawful Sale or Delivery of
Firearms on the Premises of any School), as amended; however, this subsection
shall not apply when any of the exemptions set forth in 720 ILCS 5/24-2, as
amended, are met;



   (8)    A violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-14 (Prostitution), as amended;
720 5/11-14.1 (Solicitation of a Sexual Act), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/11-15
(Soliciting for a Prostitute), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/11-15.1 (Soliciting for
a Juvenile Prostitute), as amended; 720 ILCS 5/11- 18 (Patronizing a
Prostitute), as amended; or 720 ILCS 5/11-18.1 (Patronizing a Juvenile
Prostitute), as amended;



   (9)    The motor vehicle is otherwise subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to 720 ILCS 5/36-1 (Seizure), as amended; or



   (10)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-101 (Drivers Must Have Licenses
or Permits), as amended.



   (11)    A violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-401(a)(Motor Vehicle Accidents
Involving Death or Personal Injury), as amended.  (Ord. 4626, 3-7-11)



   (12)   A violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-402(a)(Motor Vehicle Accidents
Involving Damage to Vehicle), as amended.  (Ord. 4626, 3-7-11)



   (13)   A violation of 235 ILCS 5/16-20(e) (The Consumption of
Alcohol by a Minor), as amended. (Ord. 4626, 3-7-11)



   (14)   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-9(a)(2)(Public Indecency), as
amended.  (Ord. 4626, 3-7-11)



   (15)   A violation of 720 ILCS 5/16-30 (Identity Theft; Aggravated
Identity Theft), as amended.  (Ord. 4850, 11-4-13)



   (16)   A violation of either 625 ILCS 5/11 601.5 (a) or (b) (Driving
26 miles per hour or more in excess of applicable limit), as amended.  (Ord.
5385, 2-18-19)



6-10-3:  SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:



   (1)    Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that
a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
Section, the police officer shall cause the motor vehicle to be removed or
towed to a facility authorized by the Village.  When the motor vehicle is
removed or towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying
himself or herself as the owner of record of the motor vehicle or any person
who is found to be in control of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation(s), if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of
the motor vehicle owner of record’s right to request a preliminary hearing
as provided in this Section.  Said motor vehicle shall be impounded pending
the completion of the hearings provided for in this Section, unless the owner
of record of the motor vehicle posts with the Village a cash bond as set
forth in subsection 4 below.



   (2)    A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a
motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section
shall first ascertain whether the seizure and impoundment is necessary and
reasonable under the circumstances.  If in the judgment of the police
officer then present, a person authorized by the owner of record or the
operator of the motor vehicle is present and capable to provide for the
lawful immediate removal of the motor vehicle, and said motor vehicle is not
required to be held as evidence in regard to the violation, the police
officer shall allow that individual to promptly remove the motor vehicle
without it being subject to seizure and impoundment if seizure and
impoundment of the motor vehicle is discretionary pursuant to subsection
2(10) above or seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle is contemplated
pursuant to subsections 2(1) through (9) above. 



6-10-4:  POSTING A BOND:



   If a bond in the amount of five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) is
posted with the Village, the impounded motor vehicle shall be released to the
owner of record, upon the payment by the owner of record of the towing and
storage costs to the applicable towing company.  If an administrative fee is
imposed pursuant to subsection 6(2) below, the bond shall be applied to said
fee; provided, in the event that a violation of this Section is not proven,
the bond shall be returned to the person posting the bond.  All bond money
posted pursuant to this Section shall be held by the Village until a hearing
officer issues a decision, or, if there is judicial review pursuant to
subsection 10, until a reviewing court issues a final decision.



6-10-5:  PRELIMINARY HEARING:



   Where the owner of record of a motor vehicle seized under the
provisions of this Section makes a request, in writing and filed with the
Chief of Police or the Chief of Police’s designee, for a preliminary
hearing within twelve (12) hours after the seizure of the motor vehicle, the
Chief of Police or the Chief of Police’s designee must conduct a
preliminary hearing within twenty-four (24) hours after the request for a
preliminary hearing is received by the Village; provided that if the date for
the preliminary hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the
preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day following the
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.  For purposes of this subsection, the
following shall apply:



   (1)    All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing.



   (2)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the
preliminary hearing, and hearsay testimony shall be allowed, and shall be
admissible.



   (3)    If, after the conclusion of the preliminary hearing, the
Chief of Police or the Chief of Police’s designee determines that there is
probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle was used as provided in
subsection 2 above, the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police’s designee
shall order the continued impoundment of the motor vehicle, unless the owner
of record of the motor vehicle posts a cash bond with the Village in the
amount of five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00), and pays the towing and
storage costs to the applicable tow company, as set forth in subsection 4
above.



   (4)    If the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police’s designee
determines that there is not probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle
was used as provided in subsection 2 above, the motor vehicle shall be
returned to the owner of record of the motor vehicle without any fees or
other costs, but the owner of record shall be responsible to pay any towing
or storage charges to the applicable tow company.



6-10-6:  PLEA HEARING/EVIDENTIARY HEARING:



   (1)    Notice of Hearing.  Within ten (10) days after a motor
vehicle is impounded pursuant to this Section, the Village shall notify the
owner of record of the date, time and location of a plea hearing that shall
be conducted, pursuant to this subsection 6. Such notice shall be mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on
the records of the Illinois Secretary of State.  Notice by certified mail
need not be given when the owner of record of the motor vehicle has been
personally served with notice, in written form, of the time, date and
location of the plea hearing. The plea hearing shall be conducted by a
hearing officer, designated by the Village Manager.  The owner of record
shall appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea of guilty or not guilty.  If
a plea of guilty is entered, or if the owner of record fails to appear, the
cause shall be disposed of at that time, with an order/default order in favor
of the Village, which order/default order shall require the payment to the
Village of the five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) administrative fee
and towing and storage costs to the applicable tow company, and the continued
impoundment of the motor vehicle until the owner of record pays to the
Village the five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) administrative fee and
towing and storage costs to the applicable towing company.  If the owner of
record pleads not guilty, an evidentiary hearing shall be scheduled and held
no later than forty-five (45) days after the motor vehicle was impounded,
unless continued by the hearing officer.  All interested persons shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the evidentiary hearing.  At
any time prior to the evidentiary hearing date, the hearing officer may, at
the request of either the Village or the owner of record, direct witnesses to
appear and give testimony at the evidentiary hearing.  The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply at the evidentiary hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible. 



   (2)  If, after the evidentiary hearing, the hearing officer
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the motor vehicle was
used in connection with a violation set forth in subsection 2 above, the
hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the motor
vehicle civilly liable to the Village for an administrative fee in the amount
of five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00), and require the motor vehicle
to continue to be impounded until the owner of record pays the administrative
fee to the Village, plus applicable towing and storage costs to the
applicable tow company. The five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00)
administrative fee shall be a debt due to the Village.  If a cash bond has
been posted pursuant to subsection 4 or 5(3) above, the bond shall be applied
to the administrative fee.  If the owner of record fails to appear at the
evidentiary hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor
of the Village, which order shall require the payment to the Village of the
five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) administrative fee and towing and
storage costs to the applicable tow company, and the continued impoundment of
the motor vehicle until the owner of record pays to the Village the five
hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) administrative fee and towing and
storage costs to the applicable towing company.  If the hearing officer
finds no such violation occurred, the hearing officer shall order the
immediate return of the owner of record’s motor vehicle without any fee or
other costs, or, if a cash bond had previously been posted, the cash bond
shall be returned, but the owner of record shall be responsible for any
towing or storage charges to the applicable tow company.



   (3)    At the evidentiary hearing, the violation citation shall be
prima facie evidence that the violation was committed as provided in the
citation, and the burden of proof shall be upon the owner of record to prove
that the violation was not committed.   



6-10-7:  DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLES:



   (1)    If the administrative fee and other applicable fees are not
paid within thirty (30) days after an administrative fee is imposed against
an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearings provided
in subsection 6 above, or who admits guilt at the plea hearing, the motor
vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner
provide by law for the disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles pursuant to
625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq., as amended.  In all other cases, if the
administrative fee and applicable towing and storage costs to the applicable
tow company are not paid within thirty (30) days after the expiration of time
by which administrative review of the hearing officer’s determination may
be sought pursuant to subsection 10 below, or within thirty (30) days after
an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the
Village, whichever is applicable, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed
and shall be disposed of in the manner provide by law for the disposition of
unclaimed motor vehicles pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq., as amended.



   (2)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner of
record, lien holder or other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a motor vehicle impounded under this Section until the
administrative fee and towing and storage costs to the applicable tow company
imposed pursuant to this Section have been paid.  However, whenever a person
with a lien of record against an impounded motor vehicle has commenced
foreclosure proceedings, possession of the motor vehicle shall be given to
that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund to the Village the
amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required
to pay all lien holders of record, not to exceed the administrative fee, plus
the applicable towing and storage costs.



   (3)    Costs for towing and storage of a motor vehicle pursuant to
this Section shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all tow
companies authorized to tow for the Police Department.



6-10-8:  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS:



   This Section is in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise
abrogate any existing State or Federal laws or any ordinance that relates to
the seizure or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any fee provided for in
this Section shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be
assessed or imposed by a court for any criminal charges.  This Section shall
not apply:  (1) if the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the
time of the violation and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered; (2)
if the motor vehicle is operated as a common carrier as defined by applicable
law and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control
of the motor vehicle; or (3) if the motor vehicle is subject to successful
forfeiture proceedings under 725 ILCS 150/1, et seq., as amended (“Drug
Asset Forfeiture Procedure Act”); 720 ILCS 5/36-1, et seq., as amended
(“Seizure and Forfeiture of Vessels, Vehicles and Aircraft”); or other
State or Federal forfeiturelaws. 



6-10-9:  USE OF FEES COLLECTED:



   All fees collected by the Village pursuant to this Section shall only
be deposited and used for Village traffic safety and enforcement expenditures.



6-10-10:  ADMINISTRATION REVIEW:



   Any owner of record, lien holder or other person with a legal interest
in the motor vehicle, shall have the right to appeal the decision of the
hearing officer to the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, pursuant to
the Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq., as amended.



(New Chapter - Ord. 4457, 2-16-09)



TITLE 7 BUSINESS AND LICENSE



CHAPTER  1   BUSINESS LICENSE ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS



CHAPTER  2   DEFINITIONS AND FEES



CHAPTER  3   REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIED BUSINESSES



CHAPTER  4   RETAIL LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS



CHAPTER  5   SOLICITORS



CHAPTER  6   AMUSEMENT DEVICES



CHAPTER  7   MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES



CHAPTER  8   (Repealed in its entirety Ord. 4881, 2-3-14)



CHAPTER  9   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



CHAPTER  9.5   CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE



CHAPTER 10   TRADE PRACTICES; CONSUMER PROTECTION



CHAPTER 11   FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES



CHAPTER 12   FRAUDULENT SALES



CHAPTER 13   PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



CHAPTER 14   MASSAGE PARLORS



CHAPTER 15   TOBACCO PRODUCTS



CHAPTER 16   RAFFLES



CHAPTER 17   PAWNBROKERS



CHAPTER 18   VIDEO GAMING



CHAPTER 19   LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS ACT



CHAPTER 20   CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES



CHAPTER 21   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED



CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSE ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS



SECTION:



7-1-1:   License Required; Subjects of Licensing Authority



7-1-2:   Applications



7-1-3:   License Procedures



7-1-4:   Investigations



7-1-5:   Approval; Disapproval



7-1-6:   License Year and Termination



7-1-7:   Computation of License Fees



7-1-8:   Licenses not Assignable; Unlawful Use



7-1-9:   Location



7-1-10:   Change in Business



7-1-11:   Records and Standards



7-1-12:   Nuisances Prohibited



7-1-13:   Working Conditions



7-1-13-1:   Health Requirements



7-1-13-2:   Sanitation



7-1-13-3:   Heat Required



7-1-13-4:   Inspection



7-1-14:   Business Open to Public



7-1-15:   Inspections



7-1-16:   Suspension, Revocation and Appeal



7-1-17:   License to be Posted, Destruction, Removal of License



7-1-18:   License Not to Preclude Other Licenses



7-1-19:   Activities and Organizations Excluded



7-1-20:   Peddlers and Hawkers Prohibited



7-1-20-1:   Definitions As Used in This Section



7-1-20-2:   Prohibited Activities



7-1-20-3:   Activities Excepted



7-1-21:   Prohibited Conduct



7-1-22:   Penalty



7-1-1:  LICENSE REQUIRED; SUBJECTS OF LICENSING AUTHORITY:



   No person shall conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or
manage any business, occupation, activity or establishment, either by himself
or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, for which a license is
required by this Chapter, without first having obtained a license for such
business, occupation, activity or establishment.



   Whenever a license or permit is required for the maintenance, operation
or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the
requirement, if, by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee or
partner, he or it is held forth as being engaged in the business, activity or
occupation, or if he or it solicits patronage therefor, actively or
passively, or if he or it performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business, activity or occupation in the Village. 



   No license or permit shall be issued for the maintenance, operation of
conduct of any business or establishment which is a public nuisance, as
defined in Section 6-2-2 of this Municipal Code, or which violates the
ordinances of the Village, the statutes of the State of Illinois or the
statutes of the United States.



(Ord. 1491, 12-16-85; Amd. Ord. 4924, 9-2-14)



7-1-2:  APPLICATIONS:



   Applications for all licenses and permits required hereunder shall be
made to the Development Services Department in writing on a form provided for
that purpose, except as otherwise provided herein.



   If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the
application shall contain the applicant's name, residence address and
residential telephone number.  If the applicant is a partnership or other
non-corporate business entity, the application shall contain the name and
residential address and residential telephone number of each partner,
principal or member thereof.  If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall contain the name, residential address and residential
telephone number of each principal officer and the registered agent
thereof.  If the applicant is an unincorporated association, the application
shall contain the name, residential address and residential telephone number
of the spokesman, such as a minister or leader.



   Each application also shall contain 1) a designation of the type or
kind of license or permit desired, 2) the location or proposed location of
the place of business, occupation or activity, 3) the applicable fee to be
paid as provided in this Title, 4) the number of the certificate of
registration required under the Retailer's Occupation Tax Act, Service
Occupation Tax Act, and/or Use Tax Act, if applicable, and 5) such additional
information as may be needed for the proper guidance of Municipal officials
in the evaluation of such application, including proof of any insurance
policy or bond required by this Chapter.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-3:  LICENSE PROCEDURES:



   All persons desiring to operate a commercial activity or establishment
as listed in this Title shall file with the Development Services Department
an application for a license to operate the commercial activity in the
Village no later than thirty (30) days prior to the time such person desires
to commence operation in the Village.  Thereafter, prior to a person's
continued operation of such a licensable commercial activity or establishment
in a subsequent license year, said person shall file a renewal application
not later than December 31 prior to each subsequent license year.  In the
event such person fails to file said renewal application by January 15 of the
following year, a late fee of 50% of the total license fee shall be charged
and be payable at the time of application.  However, if application is made
after February 28, a citation will be issued to the business owner and a
mandatory court appearance is required.  Delinquency may also result in
suspension and/or revocation of the right to conduct commercial activities
within the Village. No license shall be renewed unless and until the licensee
has paid all other outstanding fines and fees due the Village.



   Each license issued by the Village shall, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary, bear the signature of the Director of Development
Services Department or his designee for purposes of this Chapter.  All
licenses authorized to be issued and required to be procured shall be issued
by the Development Services Department.  Each license issued shall be dated
and shall state to whom it is issued, for what purpose, the location, if any,
at which such business is to be conducted and the date when the license is to
expire.



   The required fee for each license issued shall be collected in full at
the time the application for a license, or the renewal thereof, is filed with
the Development Services Department.  In no event shall any rebate or refund
be made of any license fee, or part thereof, by reason of the death of the
licensee or by any reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the
operation of the commercial establishment.



   It shall be unlawful for any person (which refers to, for purposes of
this Chapter, any individual, partnership, corporation, entity which
conducts, engages in, maintains, operates, carries on or manages a business
or occupation within the Village of Orland Park, and also includes any
business, corporation or entity which rents out or leases any building or
portion of a building to another person) to conduct, engage in, maintain,
operate, carry on, or manage a business or occupation for which a license is
required by any provision of this Code, without a license first having been
procured for such business or occupation. Any person violating this section
shall be charged additional fees no less than $200.00 nor more than $750.00
for each offense, and every day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.



   In addition, all contractors at the time of application shall furnish
the Village a bond (compliance bond) in the amount of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) secured by a surety company licensed in Illinois and which is
acceptable to the Village.  The bond shall be payable to the Village and
shall guarantee that the contractor will comply with all requirements of
applicable Village ordinances.



(Ord. 3892, 6-21-04; Ord. 3910, 9-1-04; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16; Amd. Ord.
5219, 9-5-17; Amd. Ord. 5315, 8-6-18)



7-1-4:  INVESTIGATIONS:



   Subsequent to receipt of an application for a license where ordinances
of the Village necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance
of such permit or license, the Development Services Department shall refer
such application to the proper officer or employee for making such
investigation.  The officer or employee charged with the duty of making the
investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon to the Development
Services Department - favorable or otherwise.



   The Director of the Development Services Department shall make or cause
to be made an inspection in connection with the care and handling of food and
all other matters relating to sanitary conditions, including but not limited
to restaurants.  The said Director shall make or cause to be made any such
inspections relative to the construction and safety of buildings or other
structures.  All other investigations, except where otherwise provided,
shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer or employee
designated by the Village Manager.



   In every case there shall be at least an inspection of the applicant's
commercial premises by the Director of the Development Services Department or
his designee, for the purposes described in the preceding paragraph, unless
as otherwise provided.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-5:  APPROVAL; DISAPPROVAL:



   If, after due consideration of the information contained in the
application, the Development Services Department determines the application
is satisfactory, he shall approve the application.  Thereupon the
Development Services Department shall notify the applicant and issue a
license as provided above.



   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application, the Development Services Department determines that matters
concerning the application are unsatisfactory, it shall disapprove the
application, indicating the reasons therefor.  Thereupon, the Development
Services Department shall notify the applicant that the application has not
been approved and that no license or permit will be issued.



(Ord. 2120, 5-20-91; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-6:  LICENSE YEAR AND TERMINATION:



   The license year for the Village shall commence on January 1 and
terminate on December 31 in each year, where no provision to the contrary is
made.  All licenses, whenever issued, shall terminate on December 31 in each
year.



   The Development Services Department shall endeavor to notify each
annual licensee of the expiration of time of the license held by the licensee
at least thirty (30) days prior to such expiration date; provided, however,
that a failure to make such notification or the licensee's failure to receive
it, shall not exclude the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new
license or a renewal.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon
proper application and payment of the required fee.  The requirements and
procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as
the requirements and procedures for granting a new license.



(Ord. 1491, 12-16-85; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-7:  COMPUTATION OF LICENSE FEES:



   When any license is issued, the license fee shall be the amount as
determined by this Title. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees
shall become a part of the General Corporate Fund.



(Ord. 2170, 11-18-91; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-8:  LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE:



   No license or permit may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used
as collateral or otherwise encumbered.  No person shall use or display any
license certificate, tag, badge or sticker which has been improperly acquired.



   No person shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license,
certificate, plate, tag, badge or sticker issued by the Village.  (Ord.
1491, 12-16-85)



7-1-9:  LOCATION:



   No license or permit for the operation of a business, establishment or
activity in the Village shall be construed to permit its operation in more
than one location in the Village; a separate license or permit shall be
required for each location.  For the purpose of this Chapter, the existence
of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings
containing the principal or accessory uses: 1) shall be connected or shall be
located on the same lot or parcel; 2) shall be operated and managed by the
same person or owner; and 3) shall be an establishment with the same
classification.



   The location of any licensed commercial establishment, or of any
permitted act, may be changed provided: 1) ten (10) days' written notice
thereof is given to the Development Services Department; 2) the Village's
Building Code, zoning ordinances and other applicable ordinances are complied
with; and 3) the license fee required in this Title is paid.



(Ord. 2120, 5-20-91; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-10:  CHANGE IN BUSINESS:



   Moving: when any licensee, by increasing the size of his store, shop,
plant or other place of business, the number or size of his vehicles, the
number or size of vending machines or amusement devices, the risk assessment
of his food service establishment, or by making any change of any kind in his
business, occupation or activity, which places him in a class where the
provisions of this Chapter require him to pay a higher or additional license
fee, he shall pay the additional license fee due to the change or increase,
based on the annual license fee, and shall be entitled to receive a
supplemental license. When the licensee request a change in location but all
other business attributes remain the same, the Development Services
Department may transfer the current active business license to the new
location.



   Change of Ownership: when any active business has a change of
ownership, the new owner must apply for new occupancy and business license.



   Name Change: when any active business changes only the name of the
business and all other attributes, including ownership, remain the same, the
owner shall submit a $30 processing fee along with a new business license
application.



(Ord. 1491, 12-16-85; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5219, 9-5-17)



7-1-11:  RECORDS AND STANDARDS:



   The Development Services Department shall maintain a record of all
commercial establishments and commercial licenses issued under this
Chapter.  These records shall be used for the purpose of classifying,
inspecting, and licensing all commercial establishments in the Village. 
Subject to the terms and provisions of this Chapter, upon submittal of a
business renewal application and payment in full of the required license fee
to the Village, the Village shall issue a license, tag, or sticker,
certificate, or similar evidence of license which shall be displayed by the
owner of the commercial establishment in a conspicuous place of the license
premises within ten (10) days after receipt of said license.



   No license for the operation of a commercial establishment in the
Village shall be issued if one or more of the following conditions are
determined to exist:



   1.   The building or premises of the commercial establishment does
not comply with the provisions and terms of the Village's Building Code, Land
Development Code, fire regulations, health regulations, or with other
applicable ordinances and regulations of the Village.



   2.   The building or premises of the commercial establishment are in
a condition of being unsanitary or unsafe so as to endanger the public
safety, health or welfare.



   3.   The owner of the commercial establishment or such legal entity
comprising the commercial establishment is indebted to the Village.



(Ord. 2120, 5-20-91; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-12:  NUISANCES PROHIBITED:



   Generally, no business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall
be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof, shall be
used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to
life or detrimental to health.  Any charge of conducting or operating a
nuisance may be made under this Chapter or under the provisions of the
Village ordinance prohibiting nuisances generally.



   Unsafe or Unhealthful Business:



   1.   No building or structure, utilized, constructed, or maintained
in connection with any business or occupation, shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe or dangerous condition.



   2.   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever, which shall
be dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in
connection with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor
performed in the Village.



7-1-13:  WORKING CONDITIONS:



7-1-13-1:  HEALTH REQUIREMENTS:



   No owner, lessee, manager or superintendent of any store, factory,
workshop, or other place shall allow or cause any room or part thereof to be
overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or
cleanliness.



7-1-13-2:  SANITATION:



   All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free
from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other nuisance; also
so far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors,
dust or otherwise which are injurious to health.  Sufficient washroom
facilities for all employees shall be provided and such facilities shall be
properly ventilated.



7-1-13-3:  HEAT REQUIRED:



   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating
plant which furnishes heat to any factory, workshop, retail business, or
other commercial establishment, to maintain a temperature when workers are
present within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty five degrees
Fahrenheit without such undue restriction of ventilation so as to interfere
with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this



   requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the
business conducted therein is of such a nature that a lower temperature than
sixty five degrees Fahrenheit is necessary or expedient for work or
manufacturing process of such business.



7-1-13-4:  INSPECTION:



   The appropriate Village officials shall visit or cause to be visited
all such places of employment in the Village as often as they shall deem
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this Section, in
addition to times as may be elsewhere provided, and to have such arrangements
made as may be deemed necessary for the health and safety of the employees.



7-1-14:  BUSINESS OPEN TO PUBLIC:



   All businesses or commercial establishments licensed under this Chapter
which invite the public generally into their establishments for the purpose
of conducting business, commercial activity, or any other activity licensed
under this Chapter shall be subject to the following regulations in addition
to all other applicable provisions of the Village's ordinances.



   All areas within the licensed premises where the public may enter shall
be kept in a safe and sanitary condition.



   All business or commercial establishments subject to this Section shall
refrain from all deceptive trade practices as defined by ordinance, State or
Federal law or regulation and shall comply with all applicable laws and
regulations regarding consumer protection and deceptive trade practices.  In
the event of any such violation, the business license of the establishment
may be revoked pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises open to the public or
engaged in the transportation, processing, preparation or packaging of food
or beverages, any person who the employer knows or should have known, based
upon reasonable observation, was afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who
knows or should have known that he was afflicted with or a carrier of any
such disease to work in or about any such premises.



7-1-15:  INSPECTIONS:



   It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to determine whether or not
all licenses are in compliance with all applicable ordinance and regulatory
requirements during the period of the license.  Whenever inspections of the
premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business
or occupation are provided for or required by this Chapter, or any ordinance,
or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any
ordinance or regulation of the Village, or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or
employee of the Village who is duly authorized by the Manager to make such
inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is requested.



   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, or of any
ordinance or regulations, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the
duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any
duly authorized officer or employee of the Village requesting the same
sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon
official request.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Manager may
revoke under the provisions of this Chapter the license of any owner or
operator of a licensed business in the Village who refuses to permit any duly
authorized officer or employee to make such inspection or to take an adequate
sample of said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee
while in the performance of his duties.



7-1-16:  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND APPEAL:



   A.   When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation,
activity or establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a
nuisance in fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety
or general welfare, or where the holder of any license shall have refused to
allow an inspection of his premises or has refused to furnish a sample of his
goods for testing, the Village of Orland Park shall be authorized  to
summarily order the cessation of business and the closing of the premises
until the danger no longer exists.



      Within eight (8) days after a license or permit is suspended
pursuant to this paragraph A, the Village shall call a hearing in accordance
with subsection C for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be revoked.



   B.   Unless otherwise provided, any license issued under this
Chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Village Manager after notice and
hearing as provided in this subsection C for any of the following causes:



      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained
in the application for the license.



      2.   Any violation by the licensee of a provision of this
Chapter, any applicable federal or state law, or any other Village Code or
Ordinance provisions relating to the license permit, the subject matter of
the license, or to the licensed premises occupied.



      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or
of a misdemeanor where such conviction indicates their inability to operate a
safe, honest and legitimate business operation within the Village.



      4.   Failure of the licensee to pay the license fee or any
other indebtedness, charge, fine or penalty owing to the Village.



      5.   Refusal to permit inspections or interference with an
authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of his duties
in making such inspections as provided in this Chapter.



      6.   When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so
inimical to the public health, safety or general welfare and/or the continued
operation of the business constitutes a nuisance and thus gives rise to an
emergency.



         Said suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall be in
addition to any other provision imposing a penalty for the violation of any
section of the codes or ordinances of the Village.



   C.   The Village shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the license should be suspended or revoked in
accordance with the following subsections:



      1.   Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a
license or permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the
grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing.  Such notice
may be hand delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the licensee to his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for the hearing.



      2.   An attorney designated by the corporate authorities shall
represent the Village at the hearing.  The licensee shall be permitted
counsel and have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
The Village Manager shall serve as the hearing officer and shall render the
decision, which may include suspension for up to 10 days, or revocation,
and/or the payment of fines and performance of other actions.



      3.   At or prior to the hearing, the parties may enter into an
agreement which establishes a series of actions to be taken and/or fines to
be paid which will avoid suspension or revocation at that time.



   D.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Manager in
connection with the suspension or revocation of a license as provided in this
Section, shall have the right of appeal to the Village Board of Trustees. 
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board of Trustees, within ten
(10) days after notice of suspension or revocation, a written statement under
oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal.  The Board of
Trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal
and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee in the
same manner as provided in this Section.  The decision of a majority of the
Board of Trustees present at the hearing of such appeal shall be required to
reverse the decision of the Village Manager.



(Ord. 3357, 5-1-00; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5401, 5-6-19)



7-1-17:  LICENSE TO BE POSTED, DESTRUCTION, REMOVAL OF LICENSE:



   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the Village to keep his license displayed at all times in a prominent place
on the premises, machine or vehicle used for such business.



   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away without
the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate or sticker which has
been issued by the Village except when such license, certificate, plate or
sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises have been abandoned. 
Nothing herein shall prevent the Village Manager or his duly authorized
representative from removing any license, certificate, plate or sticker from
the possession of a former licensee, his premises, any vehicle or any machine
when said license has been revoked under the provisions of this Chapter.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-18:  LICENSE NOT TO PRECLUDE OTHER LICENSES:



   The license required in this Chapter shall be in addition to any
vehicle license, liquor license, building permit, inspection fees or any
other fees or charges that may be required by other Village ordinances,
whether now existing or hereafter adopted.



7-1-19:  ACTIVITIES AND ORGANIZATIONS EXCLUDED:



   The terms and provisions of this Chapter shall not be made applicable
to a building or premises or portion thereof, the principal use of which is
for the practice or operation of a business which is pre exempted from
regulation by State law; provided, however, that such activities when
accessory to the operation of a commercial establishment as herein defined
shall not exclude the principal commercial establishment from the terms and
provisions of this Chapter.



   The license fee requirements of this Chapter shall not apply to
activities sponsored or conducted by religious, educational, civic or
political organizations or institutions except to the extent that such
organization or institution routinely engages in the sale, serving or
preparation of food or drink; or to governmental institutions or agencies
acting in either a governmental or proprietary capacity; or to any franchised
public utility except to the extent that such franchised public utility
engages in the sale or preparation of food or drink for its employees; or to
carriers regulated exclusively by the Federal government; or to home
occupations allowed under the Land Development Code; or to private clubs
except to the extent that such club routinely engages in the sale or
preparation of food or drink for its members or their guests.  Nothing in
this Section shall be deemed to diminish the authority of the Village to
perform any of its necessary or ordinary regulatory functions, nor shall any
organization as described in this Section be relieved of the responsibility
of filing an application and securing a license as is otherwise provided in
this Chapter.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-1-20:  PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS PROHIBITED:



7-1-20-1:  DEFINITIONS AS USED IN THIS SECTION:



   "Transient Merchant" means any person who is engaged temporarily in the
retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise, and in pursuance of such sales
occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure or unoccupied or unimproved
lot for the purpose of conducting such sale.



   "Itinerant Vendor" means any person who transports tangible personal
property for retail sale who does not maintain an established office,
distribution house, warehouse, service center or residence from which such
business is conducted.



   "Peddler" means a person who travels about selling, bartering or
exchanging small wares which he carries with him on his person or on a wagon,
truck, push cart or moveable receptacle of any kind.



   "Hawker"  means a person who cries his wares or exhibits them for sale.



7-1-20-2:  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:



   Peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors and transient merchants are
prohibited within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park.



7-1-20-3:  ACTIVITIES EXCEPTED:



   This Section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any person selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm
products at an established Village market or other location on the private
property of a consenting owner;



      (2)   Any person delivering tangible personal property who is
fulfilling an order for such property which was selected or placed by mail or
other means; or



      (3)   Any person carrying samples of goods and taking orders
for delivery at a later date (see Solicitors Ordinance).



7-1-21:  PROHIBITED CONDUCT:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain,
operate, carry on or manage any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, either by himself or through an agent, employee or partner,
contrary to the standards and regulations set forth in this Chapter.



7-1-22:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined as according to
the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS AND FEES



SECTION:



7-2-1:   Definitions



7-2-2:   License Fees



7-2-3:   Schedule A, Annual License Fees not Determinable on a Square
Footage Basis



7-2-4:   Exceptions to Schedule A, Fee Requirements



7-2-5:   Schedule B, Annual License Fees Determined on a Square Footage
Basis



7-2-6:   Schedule C, License Fees



7-2-7:   Other Business License Fees



7-2-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   Unless specifically defined otherwise within this Chapter, the
following words and terms when used in this Chapter shall be construed as
herein defined:



   ACCESSORY: Accessory means a use, building or structure, or part of a
building or structure which:



      1.   Is subordinate to and serves the principal building or
structure or principal use;



      2.   Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the
principal building or structure or principal use served;



      3.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of
occupants of the principal building or principal use;



      4.   Is located on the same lot as the principal building or
structure or principal use served, with the exception of such accessory
off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on
the same lot as the building or use served;



      5.   Is not a home occupation or storage for a business.



   AMUSEMENT:  Any theatrical, dramatic, musical, or spectacular
performance, motion picture show, circus, rodeo, animal act, athletic
contest, sport, coin operated music box, juke box, games of skill, golf
practice, gun ranges, or similar exhibition, and includes, without being
limited thereto, poultry, animal and flower shows, skating, dancing,
swimming, racing, or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball,
softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling,
billiard and pool games, and any other exhibition, performance and
entertainment not herein named, shown, exhibited or staged within the
corporate limits of the Village and for which an admission charge is made.



   BARBER SHOP:  A place where hair is cut, cleansed, treated or dressed
or the face shaved or beard trimmed, for hire, and where, also, manicure,
chiropody or massage treatments are sometimes furnished for hire.



   BASEMENT:  The portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than one-half (1/2) its clear floor to ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.



   CELLAR:  The portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground but having one-half (1/2) or more than one-half (1/2) of its
clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.



   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT:  Shall include the following activities of
commerce or commercial activities located in the Village,



      1.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT:  A building or premises or a portion
thereof, the principal use of which is for the sale or dispensing or
distribution or storage of food or foodstuffs off the promises and out of the
building.



      2.   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where food that is
intended for individual service and consumption in routinely provided and
completely prepared.  The term includes any such place, regardless of
whether consumption is in, on, or off the premises, and regardless of whether
there is a charge for the food.  The term does not include a private home
where food is prepared for individual family consumption, and it does not
include a retail food store that does not cook or combine ready-to-eat
potentially hazardous food for human consumption.



      3.   MOBILE FOOD UNIT: Any food service establishment or
vehicle from which food is served without a fixed location and which is
capable of being readily moved from location to location.  The service of
food shall not be upon or along the streets, highways, or public places of
the Village or from house to house.



      4.   RETAIL FOOD STORE: Any establishment or section of an
establishment where food and food products are offered to the consumer and
intended for offpremises consumption.  The term does not include
establishments which handle only prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous
foods, foods, food service establishment or food and beverage vending
machines.



      5.   SEASONAL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment that sells
food intended for public consumption and is in operation for less th   an
six (6) months per year (i.e., seasonal kiosks, park concessions).  (Ord.
4801, 3-4-13)



      6.   SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT:  A building or premises or a
portion thereof, the principal use of which in for the rendering of personal
or material services for profit, the wholesale distribution or storage of
material goods or chattels, the sale or servicing or storage of motor
equipment, the washing or cleaning or dyeing or repair of fabrics or wearing
apparel or footwear on the premises, the storage or assembly or distribution
or servicing or repair of building materials or electrical equipment or
mechanical equipment, the storage or distribution of fuels or petroleum
products, the services of printing or blueprinting or photocopying or
multi-Tithing or publishing or duplicating or similar reproduction services,
the provision of facilities for instruction or training or participating in
or presentation of the fine arts, or athletic skills or dexterity or physical
skills or dexterity.



      7.   RETAIL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A retail store not licensed
as a food business, but whose activities say consist of buying, selling,
storing, handling, or dealing in one or more of a variety of goods including,
but not limited to, packaged food, tobacco, paint, wallpaper, hardware,
furniture, dry goods, clothing, shoes, fabrics, floor coverings, flowers and
plants, toys, pottery, gifts, pictures, electrical goods, jewelry, automobile
and truck parts, bicycles, books and newspapers.



      8.   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any food service
establishment which is operated by a person for profit and not by a
charitable, religious, educational, Municipal or other not-for-profit
organization, and which has no permanent location and operates for only a
specified period of time at certain locations (i.e., carnivals, fairs, public
displays, exhibitions, etc.).



   DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT:  A place where clothes are cleansed with
substantially nonaqueous organic solvents.



   FILLING STATION:  Any building, structure, or premises used for the
sale or delivery of gasoline and other liquids used in the operation of motor
vehicles.  (Ord. 1491, 12-16-85)



   FIREARM:  Firearm shall mean any device by whatever name known, which
is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an
explosion, expansion of gas or escape of gas; including, however:



      1.   Any pneumatic gun, spring or B-B gun which expels a
single globular projectile not exceeding  eighteen one-hundredths of an inch
(.1811) in diameter.



      2.   Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and
required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate
Commerce commission.



      3.   Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud
cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition in the building
and/or construction process.



      4.   Model rockets designed to propel a model vehicle in a
vertical direction.



   FIREARM and/or FIREARM AMMUNITION SALES STORE: A facility where those
devices herein defined under firearm are sold or the ammunition therefor is
sold.



   FIREARM RANGE: A facility where those devices herein defined under
firearm and as restricted hereinafter may be fired or discharged.  (Ord.
2010, 7-2-90)



   FLOOR AREA:  Floor Area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of
each floor of the principal building, measured from the exterior walls or
from the center line of party walls, including the floor area of accessory
buildings and structures.  The term does not include any area used
exclusively for the parking of motor vehicles.



   FOOD(S):  Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredients including ice used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in
part for human consumption.



   HAWKER:  A peddler who cries his wares or exhibits for sale.



   KITCHEN or FOOD PREPARATION AREA:  An ascertainable room or area which
is separate and distinct from other facilities within a food service
establishment and which contains all necessary equipment for the type and
volume of foods being prepared and served.



   LAUNDROMAT: Includes establishments wherein washing machine units are
available for use by the general public upon the deposit of a coin or the
payment of a fee to the operator of such establishment or his agent.



   LAUNDRY:  Any place, building, structure, room or portion thereof
which is used for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or ironing
shirts, dresses, underwear, collars, cuffs or other wearing apparel, table,
bed, or other household linens, towels, curtains, draperies or other washable
fabrics, such work being done for the general public.  The word "laundry"
shall also mean and include any private laundry maintained or operated in
connection with a hotel, restaurant or public institution, except a hospital
or charitable institution where no charge in made for laundry services.



   OWNER:  Owner means a person or persons recorded as such on official
records and includes a duly authorized agency or notary, a trustee, a
purchaser, or a devisee; any person having a vested or contingent interest in
the property in question.



   PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS:  Peddle shall mean the selling, bartering or
exchanging or the offering for sale, barter or exchange of any tangible
personal property upon or along the streets, highways or public places of the
Village or from house to house, whether at one place thereon or from place to
place, from any wagon, truck, pushcart or other vehicle or from movable
receptacles of any kind, but shall not include the delivery of any item
previously ordered or the sale of items along delivery routes where the
purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and exhibit his
items.  Nor shall peddle be taken to include the solicitation of orders by
sample where the goods are not delivered at the time the order is taken.



   PERSON:  Person means an individual, corporation, governmental agency,
business, trust estate, partnership, two or more persons having joint or
common interest, or any other legal entity.



   PUBLIC GARAGE: Any building or premises where one or more motor
vehicles, using inflammable liquids for fuel or power, which are operated
otherwise than on rails, are kept for sale or rent or housed, stored,
serviced or repaired for hire.  (Ord. 1491, 12-16-85)



   SECONDHAND DEALER:  A person conducting the business of purchasing,
trading, bartering, or exchanging secondhand gold, silver, and other precious
metals and the personal property listed below.



   SECONDHAND GOODS:  Secondhand goods or used personal goods shall
consist of any item of personal property or object of value such as gold,
silver, jewelry, and/or other precious metals, which is not purchased or sold
as new.  Secondhand or used personal goods do not include goods properly
purchased by one licensed, established merchant in the normal course of
business from another licensed established merchant.  Secondhand or used
personal goods shall include, but are not limited to, the following items:



      (1).   Jewelry of any kind and/or any metal, precious or
semiprecious in nature;



      (2).   Gold, silver, and/or other precious metals in whatever
identifiable form except for numismatic coins or bullions;



      (3).   Any type of gold or precious stone, including diamonds;



      (4).   Office equipment; and



      (5).   Electronic equipment such as televisions, radios,
stereos and computers.



   PRECIOUS METALS:  Any item containing as part of its composition in
any degree, gold, silver, platinum or pewter.



   GEMS: Any item containing or having any precious or semiprecious stones
customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation.



   EXCLUSIONS: The provisions of this definition do not apply to the
following businesses or dealers:



      (1).   Flea market;



      (2).   Neighborhood garage sales;



      (3).   Nonprofit or charitable secondhand goods or thrift type
shops; and



      (4).   Other specific business activity listed in the Business
License Section.



(Ord. 1981-A, 5-21-90)



   SERVICE ACCOMMODATION:  The seating place where one patron or customer
to be served can be seated, or in lieu of seating space, two (2) lineal feet
of counter space or two (2) square feet of floor space which may be used or
occupied by one patron or customer to be served while standing or sitting. 
(Ord. 1491, 12-16-85)



   SNACK TRAY BOX:  Any box, tray, tray container, or other receptacle
which contains for sale candy, crackers, cookies, or other food(s).  (Ord.
2210, 4-27-92)



   TAXICAB:  Any motor vehicle or other vehicle used upon the streets of
the Village for transportation of passengers for hire, except buses subject
to State regulation as a public utility.



7-2-2:  LICENSE FEES:



   It shall be unlawful for any person as herein defined, to engage in or
operate any business, business establishment, commercial enterprise, trade,
occupation or activity named in this Chapter without first paying the license
fee listed in Schedules A, B or C hereafter.  (Ord. 1491, 12-16-85)



7-2-3:  SCHEDULE A, ANNUAL LICENSE FEES NOT DETERMINABLE ON A SQUARE FOOTAGE
BASIS:



 



Advertising Distribution
 
$150.00


Advertising Sales
 
150.00


Ambulance Service
 
75.00


Amusement Park
 
375.00 plus $75.00 per ride


Amusements, per event
 
75.00


Auctioneers, per day
 
75.00


Automobile Filling Stations
 
300.00


Automatic Vending Machines (in addition to any licenses in which machine is
located)
 
$50.00


Bowling Alley, per alley
 
30.00


Carnivals, Circus per day
 
150.00


Catch basin, Sewer and Septic Tank Cleaners
 
75.00


Christmas Tree Sales, fresh
 
75.00


Coin Operated, Music Box, Juke Box
(in addition to any licenses for the business in which machines are located)
 
50.00


Contractor, except those contractors required to pay a license fee on a
square footage basis under Schedule B
 
 


   General:
 
300.00


   Other:
 
75.00


      Brick mason
 
 


      Carpentry
 
 


      Cement
 
 


      Demolition
 
 


      Drywall, acoustical
 
 


      Electrical
 
 


      Excavating
 
 


      Fence
 
 


      Fire Sprinkler/Suppression
 
 


      Flooring and tile
 
 


      Glazing
 
 


      Heating, ventilation, air conditioning
 
 


      Insulation
 
 


      Landscaping
 
 


      Low Voltage
 
 


      Miscellaneous - including but not limited to: antenna, cable,
overhead door installation, equipment installation, escalator, foundation
repair, general maintenance, metal fabricating, mud jacking (cement raising),
mover, satellite dish installation, underground pump and tank work, and well
drilling.
 
 


      Painting and decorating
 
 


      Paving
 
 


      Plastering and Lathing
 
 


      Roofing and insulation
 
 


      Security System
 
 


      Sewer and water, drain layer
 
 


      Sheet metal
 
 


      Siding, Windows, Doors
 
 


      Sign installation
 
 


      Signs–electrical
 
 


      Steel
 
 


      Structural iron, wood and cement
 
 


      Swimming pool installation
 
 


      Tree trimming
 
 


      Tuck pointing and cleaning
 
 


      Waterproofing
 
 


      Wrecking
 
 


Country Club/Food/Pool
 
$1,125.00


Country Club/Golf/Food/Pool
 
1,350.00


Exhibitions
 
75.00


Firearms Range
 
900.00


Firearm and/or Firearm Ammunition Sales Store
 
150.00


Golf Practice Range
 
75.00


Mobile Food Unit
 
300.00


Multi-Merchant Expositions
 
100.00


Pet Shop Operator's License
 
150.00


Scavengers
 
750.00


Secondhand Dealer
 
75.00


Snack Tray Box (Honor Box)
 
30.00


Theater – Outdoor
 
225.00




 



(Ord. 3887, 6-7-04; Amd. Ord. 4938, 10-20-14; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16; Amd.
Ord. 5219, 9-5-17)



7-2-4:  EXCEPTIONS TO SCHEDULE A, FEE REQUIREMENTS:



   Even though vending machines, coin operated music and juke boxes, ice
or milk vending machines, and snack tray boxes maintained on a premises are
incidental to the principal commercial activity licensed under this Chapter,
a licensee shall be required to maintain such machines and/or snack tray
boxes with the payment of the annual license fee required in Schedule A. All
licensees must file an application and receive a license for each machine
and/or snack tray box in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.



   In the event an amusement, activity or exhibition is to be held at the
principal place of business of a person licensed under this Chapter, and such
licensee regulates and sponsors the amusement, activity or exhibition, the
licensee shall not be required to pay the license fee under Schedule A.
Regardless of whether a fee is to be paid or not, all licensees must file an
application and receive a license for each amusement, activity or exhibition
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2210, 4-27-92; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-2-5:  SCHEDULE B, ANNUAL LICENSE FEES DETERMINED ON A SQUARE FOOTAGE BASIS:



   Businesses not listed under 7-2-3 shall be determined on a square
footage basis.  The minimum annual fee for businesses shall be seventy-five
dollars ($75.00).



   The foregoing enumerated minimum license fee schedule of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) as relates and pertains to commercial establishments having
floor area as herein defined, shall be applicable only to those commercial
establishments, business and commercial enterprises or activities having a
floor area of zero (0) to three thousand (3,000) square feet, and the above
enumerated commercial establishments, business and commercial enterprises or
activities having a floor area in excess of three thousand (3,000) square
feet shall pay a yearly license fee as shall be determined in accordance with
the license fee schedule hereinafter set forth.



   The foregoing enumerated minimum license fee schedule shall not be all
inclusive, and all other commercial establishments, business and commercial
enterprises not specifically enumerated herein, and not preempted by State
law and having floor area as herein defined shall pay a yearly license fee as
in the schedule hereinafter set forth.



   Total floor area applicable for the determination of the yearly license
fee shall include the sum total of all the floor area in use or reserved for
or retained for the use of the commercial establishment, including but not
restricted to principal and accessory floor area, cellars and basements, even
though any such floor area may be temporarily vacant or not in use:



 


Floor Area
in Square Feet

 

Yearly License Fee





 
 
 
 
 
 
 



0

 

to

 

3,000

 

$    75.00




3,001

 

to

 

6,000

 

105.00




6,001

 

to

 

9,000

 

135.00




9,001

 

to

 

12,000

 

165.00




12,001

 

to

 

15,000

 

195.00




15,001

 

to

 

20,000

 

240.00




20,001

 

to

 

30,000

 

295.00




30,001

 

to

 

40,000

 

360.00




40,001

 

to

 

60,000

 

450.00




60,001

 

to

 

80,000

 

555.00




80,001

 

to

 

100,000

 

675.00




100,001

 

to

 

140,000

 

825.00




140,001

 

to

 

180,000

 

975.00




180,001

 

to

 

HIGHER

 

1,125.00





 



(Ord. 1491, 12-16-85; Amd. Ord. 3887, 6-7-04; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-2-6:  SCHEDULE C, LICENSE FEES:



   The annual license fee for each food service establishment shall be in
accordance with Schedule B as set forth in Section 7-2-5 and shall include,
in addition to the license fee determined on a square footage basis, a $90
inspection fee per number of required annual inspections as determined by its
risk category. The risk category is based on the Illinois Department of
Public Health Food Service Sanitation Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 750). Category
I shall receive no less than three inspections; category II shall receive no
less than two inspections and category III shall receive no less than one
inspection annually.



   In the event a food service establishment is operated as a part of, or
incidental to the principal commercial activity of a licensee required to pay
a licensee fee under either Schedule A or B of this Chapter, such food
service establishment shall not be required to pay the license fee under this
Schedule C. Nothing in this paragraph shall relieve a food service
establishment from applying for a license or otherwise complying with all
ordinances of the Village.  There shall be no license fee for an occasional
food service establishment.



(Ord. 1491, 12-16-85; Ord. 2761, 7-17-95; Ord. 3887, 6-7-04; Amd. Ord. 5119,
9-6-16)



7-2-7  OTHER BUSINESS LICENSE FEES:



   For the following license fees, consult other sections of this Code as
indicated:



 

Grease Haulers
 
7-3-9


Billiards
 
7-3-11


Automatic Amusement Devices
 
7-6-2


Sale of Tobacco Products
 
7-15-4



 



(Ord. 3887, 6-7-04; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



CHAPTER 3
REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIED BUSINESSES



SECTION:



7-3-1:   Dry Cleaning Establishments and Self-Serve Dry Cleaning
Establishments



7-3-1-1:   Additional License Application Information



7-3-1-2:   Installation and Operation



7-3-2:   Food Establishments (Deleted by Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



7-3-3:   Public Garages and Filling Stations



7-3-3-1:   Additional Application Information



7-3-3-2:   Safety Requirements



7-3-4:   Laundries



7-3-4-1:   Exception



7-3-4-2:   Sleeping in Laundries



7-3-4-3:   Sanitary Conditions



7-3-4-4:   Ceiling Height – Air Space – Ventilation



7-3-4-5:   Floors – Construction



7-3-4-6:   Plumbing and Drainage Facilities



7-3-4-7:   Sprinkling



7-3-4-8:   Mechanical Devices – Heat



7-3-4-9:   Vapors, Smoke or Orders



7-3-4-10:   Inspection



7-3-5:   Mobile Food Units



7-3-5-1:   General Operation



7-3-5-2:   Established Route



7-3-5-3:   Inspections



7-3-6:   Scavenger Business



7-3-6-1:   Bond



7-3-6-2:   Vehicles



7-3-6-3:   Servicing Problems



7-3-7   Firearms and Firearm Ammunition



7-3-7-1:   Dealer License Requirement



7-3-7-2:   Number and Term of Licenses to be Issued



7-3-7-3:   License Application



7-3-7-4:   License Fee



7-3-7-5:   Report of Sales or Gifts



7-3-7-6:   Register Required



7-3-7-7:   Additional Requirements for Firearm/Firearm Ammunition Dealer
License



7-3-7-8:   Firearm Security Measures



7-3-7-9:   Advertising of Firearm Safety Instruction



7-3-7-10:   License Suspension or Revocation



7-3-8:   Record Keeping Requirements for Secondhand Dealers in Gold,
Silver, Precious Metals or Gems



7-3-8-1:   Report to the Chief of Police or his Dispatched Agent



7-3-8-2:   Record Inspection



7-3-8-3:   Goods to be kept Without Concealment for Seven Business/Working
Days



7-3-8-4:   Melting, Wrecking and Remodeling



7-3-8-5:   Purchasing from Minors



7-3-9:   Grease Trap Sludge Collectors and Transporters



7-3-9-1:   Definition



7-3-9-2:   Regulations



7-3-9-3:   Manifest Required



7-3-9-4:   License Required



7-3-9-5:   License Application



7-3-9-6:   Manifest Information



7-3-9-7:   Manifest Copy to be Retained



7-3-9-8:   Inspection Permitted



7-3-9-9:   License Term, Renewal; Village Right to Revoke; Nature of
License



7-3-9-10:   Penalty



7-3-10:   Teenage Cabarets/Juice Bars



7-3-10-1:   Definition



7-3-10-2:   License Required



7-3-10-3:   Application for License



7-3-10-4:   License Fee



7-3-10-5:   General Conditions of License



7-3-10-6:   Special Conditions of License



7-3-10-7:   Penalty; Revocation:



7-3-11:   Pool and Billiard Tables



7-3-11-1:   Prohibition of Unlicensed Pool and Billiard Tables



7-3-11-2:   Application



7-3-11-3:   Restrictions



7-3-11-4:   Term and Renewal of Billiard Parlor Operator's License



7-3-11-5:   Seizure and Destruction of Devices Used for Gambling



7-3-11-6:   Revocation of License



7-3-11-7:   Transfer of License



7-3-11-8:   Penalties



7-3-12:   Pet Shop Operators



7-3-12-1:   Definitions



7-3-12-2:   License Required



7-3-12-3:   License Application



7-3-12-4:   License - Fee



7-3-12-5:   Operation



7-3-12-6:   Disclosures Required



7-3-12-7:   Licensing



7-3-12-8:   Penalties for Violations



7-3-12-9:   Suspension or Revocation of Pet Shop Operator and Business
Licenses



7-3-12-10:   Rules and Regulations; Provisional Licenses



7-3-1:  DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS AND SELF-SERVE DRY CLEANING
ESTABLISHMENTS:



7-3-1-1:  ADDITIONAL LICENSE APPLICATION INFORMATION:



   In addition to the information required on the business license
application, the applicant shall also furnish the number and description of
the dry cleaning machines to be located in said store, and in the case of an
original application for a store not theretofore legally in operation, the
application shall be accompanied by a set of plans and specifications showing
the manner in which such machines shall be installed, showing all plumbing
connections, electrical wire connections and provisions for ventilation, all
of which shall be in compliance with the Building Code and other applicable
ordinances of the Village.  In the case of an initial application, the
Village Comptroller shall submit the aforesaid plans and specifications to
the Director of Code Enforcement of the Village for his examination and
approval before the issuance of any license hereunder.



7-3-1-2:  INSTALLATION AND OPERATION:



   Every operator of a dry cleaning establishment shall maintain and 
operate the establishment so as to satisfy the following requirements:



      (1)   Installation:



         Machines shall not be installed in buildings used in whole
or in part as dwellings.



         A satisfactory means of preventing any leaking liquid from
escaping the enclosure or room in which the dry cleaning equipment is
installed shall be provided.  In order to accomplish this a method must be
provided for drainage or otherwise removing the solvent in the event of
leakage. Such drain shall be connected to an emergency solvent storage tank
of sufficient capacity to hold the maximum quantity of fluid contained in all
the machines.



         An interlock system shall be provided on each machine to
prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle.  This
system may be either electrical and/or mechanical and so connected that in
the event of a power failure the machine fails safe.



         Exhaust ventilation stacks from the dry cleaning machines
shall not be located in proximity to combustion air intakes on gas or oil
fired equipment.



   In self-service establishments, the layout of each store shall be such
that only the front or customer side of the dry cleaning machines shall be
readily accessible to the customer area and that the maintenance portions of
the machines shall not be accessible from the customer area.



      (2)   Operation:



         In self-service establishments, an attendant shall be
present and on duty during all operational hours of each store.



         Only the solvent and supplies specified by the equipment
manufacturer shall be used; provided, however, that in no event shall a
flammable solvent be used in the dry cleaning machines.



         The solvent shall be stored in closed containers and
transferred from such containers in lines free of leaks or defects.  All
storage facilities for solvent external from the dry cleaning machines shall
meet the requirements of the Chief of the Fire Protection District.



         Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall
be handled and disposed of so as not to create a nuisance.  A covered metal
container shall be used for temporary storage.



         The design of each dry cleaning machine shall be such that
in the normal course of operation no significant amount of solvent is
retained in the cleaned items upon completion of the dry cleaning cycle.



         In self-service establishments, customer service areas of
each store shall be provided with general dilution ventilation (exhaust air
flow rates) according to the following schedule:



 

Minimum Air Flow Rate
Number of Machines
 
Per Machine (C.F.M.)



1 - 3

 

250




4 - 8 

 

200




9 - 16

 

150




17 or more

 

100




 



         This exhaust ventilation shall be in continuous operation
during all operational hours of each store.



         Maintenance areas of each store shall be provided with
general dilution ventilation (exhaust air flow rates) according to the
following schedule:



 

Minimum Air Flow Rate
Number of Machines
 
Per Machine (C.F.M.)



1 - 3

 

350




4 - 8 

 

300




9 - 16

 

250




17 or more

 

200




 



         All exhaust ventilation equipment shall be in operation on
a continuous basis during the hours each store is open to the public.  The
fan wiring of the exhaust equipment shall be such that the dry cleaning
machines cannot be operated unless the fan system is in operation.



         Each dry cleaning machine shall be provided with an exhaust
system capable of maintaining a minimum of one hundred feet (100') per minute
face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open, which
exhaust system shall be in operation during all times of operation of the dry
cleaning machine to which it is affixed.  The dual work connections from
this system shall be sealed by solder or tape and the discharge stack
extended above the roof line.



         A supply of make-up air equal to or greater than the total
volume of air exhausted from the store shall be provided for the purpose of
eliminating negative pressure conditions.



         All machinery and equipment shall be kept in good working
condition and installed and maintained so that the customers and employees of
said store and the public generally will neither have access to the
maintenance area nor to any unguarded moving parts of the machinery, except
that the customers shall have access to the operating controls of the dry
cleaning machines.



         The premises shall be kept in good repair and maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition.  For self-service establishments a step by
step instruction list shall be posted in a conspicuous place for customer use
near the dry cleaning machines.  All maintenance personnel shall be
instructed as to the proper procedures for the handling of solvents.



         Each store shall be well lighted during all of the hours of
operation.



7-3-2:  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS: (Deleted by Ord. 4801, 3-4-13)



7-3-3:  PUBLIC GARAGES AND FILLING STATIONS:



7-3-3-1:  ADDITIONAL APPLICATION INFORMATION:



   In addition to the information required by the business license
application the applicant shall, with the application, also include the
dimensions of any buildings operated in connection with said public garage or
filling station and the type of construction thereof and the capacity and
location of all tanks and other storage facilities wherein flammable liquids
are stored.



7-3-3-2:  SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:



   1.   Smoking Prohibited - Signs:  Smoking or carrying lighted
cigars, pipes or cigarettes and the lighting of matches or any open flame are
hereby prohibited at any public garage and filling station as herein
defined.  No smoking signs with letters at least four inches (4") high shall
be prominently displayed therein.



   2.   Use for Cleaning Prohibited;  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha and
similar flammable liquids shall not be used for washing or cleaning purposes
within any filling station or public garage nor in the open air within a
distance of fifty feet (50') of any repair pit or any opening from any
basement space.



   3.   Waste Disposal:  Waste oil or other flammable liquids shall be
stored in metal containers pending removal from the premises.  No such waste
shall be permitted to drain into any sanitary sewer or storm water drainage
system.  Rags and soiled waste shall be kept in metal containers.



   4.   Building and Fire Regulations:  The construction and equipment
of public garages and filling stations, including tanks, and the requirements
for safety clearances around same, shall be made and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of the Building Code and other applicable ordinances, and
the rules and regulations for the storage, sale, transportation and use of
gasoline and volatile oils.



   5.   Alcohol:  Alcohol and other flammable anti-freeze liquids may
be dispensed from safety cans of not more than five (5) gallons capacity.
Dispensing of such liquids from drums shall be done outside the building,
using pump or gravity discharge; air pressure discharge shall not be used.



7-3-4:  LAUNDRIES:



7-3-4-1:  EXCEPTION:



   These regulations shall not apply to any person engaged in doing custom
laundry work at home for a regular family trade, nor to any room, rooms or
portion thereof, located in an apartment house or other dwelling, in which
domestic laundry work is done by or for the occupants of such building
exclusively, and the provisions of these regulations shall not apply to dry
cleaning establishments.



7-3-4-2:  SLEEPING IN LAUNDRIES:



   No person shall be permitted to sleep in any laundry, nor shall any
sleeping room or living room be in direct communication with any laundry. 
No laundered or unlaundered fabric belonging to the customers of any laundry
shall be stored or kept in any room which is used for living purposes.



7-3-4-3:  SANITARY CONDITIONS:



   Every room or place used as a laundry or for the storage of unlaundered
or laundered fabrics in connection therewith shall at all times be kept in
good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition as to floors,
walls, ceilings, windows, woodwork, machinery, utensils and fixtures, and
every such room or place shall be kept free from rats, mice and vermin and
all matters of an infectious or contagious nature.



   No person who has tuberculosis, any acute or active venereal disease,
any communicable or loathsome skin disease or any other communicable disease
shall work in any laundry, and no owner, proprietor, manager or person in
charge of any laundry shall knowingly require or permit any such person to be
employed therein.



   No wallpaper shall be applied upon the walls or ceilings of any room
used for laundry purposes.



7-3-4-4:  CEILING HEIGHT - AIR SPACE - VENTILATION: 



   No laundry shall be maintained, conducted, or operated in any room or
place in which the clear height between the ceiling and the finished floor is
less than ten feet (10'), or which is not ventilated by means of windows,
skylights, air shafts, air ducts or mechanical apparatus so that a complete
change of air in all parts of such room or place shall be made at least six
(6) times per hour.



   Every room in any laundry, (except the room or rooms used for drying
purposes) in which the temperature and humidity are such as, in the judgment
of the Development Services Department Director, might endanger the health of
the person washing therein shall be provided with a mechanical ventilating
system approved by said Development Services Department Director.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-4-5:  FLOORS - CONSTRUCTION:



   The floor of every laundry and every room or place in connection
therewith shall be constructed of concrete, cement, tile or stone laid in
cement, or other impervious material, and shall be watertight and properly
drained. The angles where the floor and wall join shall likewise be
water-tight.



7-3-4-6:  PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES:



   Every laundry shall be provided with adequate sanitary plumbing and
drainage facilities, and the installation of all drains and plumbing fixtures
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the Village
at the time they are installed.  Every toilet, sink, or other plumbing
fixture installed therein shall be of an approved type, of impermeable
material, and thoroughly sanitary.



7-3-4-7:  SPRINKLING:



   No owner, proprietor or manager of any laundry, or any person employed
therein shall sprinkle any fabric with water or other liquid substance
ejected from the mouth or blown out by any other device communicating or
coming in contact with the mouth of such person.



7-3-4-8:  MECHANICAL DEVICES - HEAT:



   Every machine or mechanical device in any laundry which emits or sends
off excessive heat, shall be equipped with a proper heat deflector, hood and
exhaust, or other apparatus that will carry the heat from the room or place
in which it is located.



7-3-4-9:  VAPORS, SMOKE OR ODORS:



   No vapors, smoke or odors emanating from any laundry shall at any time
be permitted to become a nuisance to any portion of the premises in which
such laundry is located, nor to any adjoining or nearby premises.



7-3-4-10:  INSPECTION:



   The Development Services Department Director or designee shall inspect
or cause to be inspected, from time to time, all premises wherein laundries
are conducted, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this
Chapter and the laws of the State relative to the keeping and operating of
laundries are being complied  with, and shall cause the same to be strictly
enforced.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-5:  MOBILE FOOD UNITS:



7-3-5-1:  GENERAL OPERATION:



   It shall be unlawful to sell or otherwise distribute food from a mobile
unit on the public streets and ways of the Village.  The distribution of
food by mobile food units shall be limited to off-street premises, such as
construction sites, or industrial areas.  Permission from the owner or
person in charge of such premises shall be obtained prior to the distribution
of food from a mobile food unit.



(Amd. Ord. 4900, 5-5-14)



7-3-5-2:  ESTABLISHED ROUTE:



   Prior to doing any business within the Village, a licensed mobile food
unit shall give notice in writing to the Orland Park Development Services
Department of its established route, listing each location within the
limitations set forth in subsection A of these regulations, wherein a mobile
food unit will sell or otherwise distribute food.  A mobile food unit shall
be required to give notice in writing to the Development Services Department
prior to any changes in its established route.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-5-3:  INSPECTIONS:



   It shall be the duty of the Development Services Department Director or
designee to regularly inspect all mobile food units.  The method and
frequency of such inspections shall be as deemed necessary by the Director. 



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-6:  SCAVENGER BUSINESS:



7-3-6-1:  BOND:



   No business license for a scavenger service shall be issued unless the
applicant maintains and agrees to maintain a five thousand dollar ($5,000.00)
surety-business license bond.



7-3-6-2:  VEHICLES:



   The vehicle or vehicles used by the scavenger in his business shall be
water-tight and shall be equipped with reasonably airtight covers for such
portions as are used for the transportation of garbage or refuse.



7-3-6-3:  SERVICING PROBLEMS:



   In the event a scavenger service is unable, for any reason, to make
scheduled pickup of refuse or garbage, the scavenger service shall notify the
Village's Department of Public Works of said  inability not later than the
end of the day on which pickup was scheduled.  (Ord. 1491, 12-16-85)



7-3-7:  FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION:



7-3-7-1:  DEALER LICENSE REQUIRED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
selling, or to sell or give away any firearm or firearm ammunition, as
defined in the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act, 430 ILCS 65/1.1,
without securing a firearm/firearm ammunition dealer license.  The license
required by this chapter shall be in addition to any other licensing required
by law or ordinance.



7-3-7-2:  NUMBER AND TERM OF LICENSES TO BE ISSUED:



   No more than one (1) firearm/firearm ammunition dealer license shall be
issued and in force at any one time and such license shall be valid for a
period of one (1) year from the date of its issuance.



7-3-7-3:  LICENSE APPLICATION:



   An application for a firearm/firearm ammunition dealer license shall be
made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for licenses.  The Village Manager, or his/her designee, shall
approve said application before a license shall be issued, and the Chief of
Police, or his/her designee(s), shall be authorized by the license applicant
to conduct a background investigation of any employee of a prospective
licensee who will participate in the sale or other disposition of firearms
and/or firearm ammunition.  A fee of ONE HUNDRED ($100.00) DOLLARS, or such
other amount as may be prescribed by the Board of Trustees, shall be paid to
the Village for each background investigation of an employee or prospective
licensee.



7-3-7-4:  LICENSE FEE:



   The annual fee for a firearm/firearm ammunition dealer license shall be
as set forth in Section 7-2-3 of this Title.



7-3-7-5:  REPORT OF SALES OR GIFTS:



   Every licensed firearm/firearm ammunition dealer shall make out and
deliver to the Chief of Police every calendar month, a legible and correct
report of every sale or gift made under the authority of his/her license
during the preceding calendar month, which report shall contain the date of
such sale or gift, the name of the purchaser or donee with his or her address
and age, the number, kind, description and price of such firearm, the number
of the purchaser's permit (Illinois Firearm Owner's Identification Card) and
the purpose given by such purchaser for the purchase of such firearm.



7-3-7-6:  REGISTER REQUIRED:



   Every licensed firearm/firearm ammunition dealer shall keep a register
of all such firearms and/or firearm ammunition sold, loaned, rented or given
away by such dealer.  Such register shall contain the date of the sale,
loaning, renting or gift, the number of the purchaser's/recipient's Illinois
Firearm Owners Identification Card, the serial number of the firearm, the
name and age of the person to whom the firearm or firearm ammunition is sold,
loaned, rented or given, the quantity of ammunition, the price of each item
and the purpose for which it is purchased or obtained.  The register shall
be kept open for inspection by the Orland Park Police Officer(s) at all
reasonable times during business hours.



7-3-7-7:  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREARM/FIREARM AMMUNITION DEALER
LICENSE:



   (a)   Definitions.  In this Section:



      (1)   A "handgun" means a firearm designed to be held and
fired by a single hand and includes a combination of parts from which such a
firearm can be assembled;



      (2)   "Semiautomatic assault weapon" means:



         (A)   any of the firearms or types, replicas, or
duplicates in any caliber of the firearms, known  as:



            (i)        Norinco, Mitchell, and Poly
Technologies Avtomat  Kalashnikovs (all models);



            (ii)   Action Arms Israeli Military Industries UZI
and Galil;



            (iii)   Beretta AR-70 (SC-70);



            (iv)   Colt AR-15;



            (v)   Fabrique Nationale FN/FAL, FN/LAR, and FNC;



            (vi)      SWD -10, -11, -11/9, and -12;



            (vii)   Steyr AUG;



            (viii)    INTRATEC TEC-9, TEC-DC9 and TEC-22; and



            (ix)    any shotgun which contains its ammunition
in a revolving cylinder, such as (but not limited to) the Street Sweeper and
Striker 12;



            (x)      any rifle having a caliber of 50 or
greater;



         (B)   a semiautomatic rifle that has an ability to
accept a detachable  magazine and has any of  the following:



            (i)   a folding or telescoping stock;



            (ii)   a pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously
beneath the action of the weapon;



            (iii)   a bayonet mount;



            (iv)   a flash suppressor or barrel having a
threaded muzzle; or



            (v)   a grenade launcher; or



         (C)   a semiautomatic pistol that has an ability to
accept a detachable magazine and has any of the following:



            (i)   an ammunition magazine that attaches to the
pistol outside of the pistol grip;



            (ii)   a barrel having a threaded muzzle;



            (iii)   a shroud that is attached to, or partially
or completely encircles the barrel, and that permits the shooter to hold the
firearm with the non-trigger hand without being burned;



            (iv)   a manufactured weight of 50 ounces or more
when the pistol is unloaded; or



            (v)   a semiautomatic version of an automatic
firearm; or



         (D)   a semiautomatic shotgun that has any of the
following:



            (i)   a folding or telescoping stock;



            (ii)   a pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously
beneath the action of the weapon;



            (iii)   a fixed magazine capacity in excess of 5
rounds; or



            (iv)   an ability to accept a detachable magazine;



               "Semiautomatic assault weapon" does not include:



                  (A)   any firearm that:



                     (i)   is manually operated by
bolt, pump, lever or slide action;



                     (ii)   is an "unserviceable
firearm" or has been made permanently inoperable; or



                     (iii)   is an antique or
muzzle-loading firearm; or



                  (B)   any semiautomatic rifle that
cannot accept a detachable magazine that holds more than 5 rounds of
ammunition; or



                  (C)   any semiautomatic shotgun that
cannot hold more than 5 rounds of ammunition in a fixed or detachable
magazine.



      (3)   (A)   "Large capacity ammunition feeding device"
means:



            (i)   a magazine, belt, drum, feed strip, or
similar device that has a capacity of, or that can be readily restored or
converted to accept, more than 10 rounds of ammunition; or



            (ii)   any combination of parts from which a
device described in subparagraph (i) can be assembled;



         (B)   "Large capacity ammunition feeding device" does
not include an attached tubular device  designed to accept, and capable of
operating only with, .22 caliber rimfire ammunition or any device that has
been made permanently inoperable.



      (4)   "Assault weapon attachment" means any device capable of
being attached to a firearm that is  specifically designed for making or
converting a firearm into any of the firearms listed in paragraph (2) of
subsection (a) of this Section.



      (5)   "Antique firearm" means:



         (A)   any firearm, including any firearm with a
matchlock, flintlock, percussion  cap, or similar type of ignition system,
manufactured in or before 1898, or



         (B)   any replica of any firearm described in
subparagraph (A) if the replica:



            (i)   is not designed or redesigned for using
rimfire or conventional centerfire fixed ammunition; or



            (ii)   uses rimfire or conventional centerfire
ammunition that is no longer manufactured in the United States and that is
not readily available in the ordinary channels of commercial trade; or



         (C)   any firearm (other than a machine gun), which,
although designed as a weapon, the Chief of Police finds by reason of the
date of its manufacture, value, design, and other characteristics is
primarily a collector's item and is not likely to be used as a weapon.



    (b)   No firearm/firearm ammunition dealer license shall be issued:



      (1)   To a person selling, giving away or otherwise dealing
in, or intending to sell, give away or otherwise deal in, handguns, handgun
ammunition, semiautomatic assault weapons, large capacity ammunition feeding
devices or assault weapon attachments.



      (2)   Except to a person who sells or otherwise deals in
firearms and/or firearm ammunition as ancillary to a retail business devoted
to products or services other than firearms or firearm ammunition and where
the floor area devoted to the sale or other disposition of firearms and/or
firearm ammunition does not exceed five percent (5%) of the total floor area
of such retail business accessible to the public;



      (3)   For the operation of a firearm range, such operation
being hereby strictly prohibited, unless operated solely for training of law
enforcement officers;



      (4)   To a person who has been convicted of a felony;



      (5)   To a person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor
involving the use of a firearm within five (5) years of the date of
application;



      (6)   To a person who does not possess a current Federal
license to sell firearms;



      (7)   To a person who does not hold a valid State of Illinois
Firearm Owners Identification Card;



      (8)   To a person who does not own or lease the premises where
the firearm/firearm ammunition dealership is to be located for at least the
term of the license.



      (9)   To a person who does not identify a specific premises
which has been inspected and approved by the Village or who does not identify
specific premises for which a special use permit has been issued pursuant to
the Land Development Code of the Village;



      (10)   To a person whose firearm/firearm ammunition dealer
license has been revoked for cause within the twelve (12) months preceding
the date of application;



      (11)   To a person who at the time of license renewal would
not be eligible for such a license;



      (12)   To a person whose business is conducted by a manager or
agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of an employee;



      (13)   To a person who has been convicted of a violation of
any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
firearms;



      (14)   To a person who has been a patient in a mental
institution within the past five (5) years;



      (15)   To a person who is addicted to a narcotic or any other
controlled substance as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code;



      (16)   To a person who has an intellectual disability
(intellectual developmental disorder);



      (17)   To a firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust
or any legal entity when any person holding more than a five percent (5%)
interest therein as a stockholder, general or limited partner or beneficiary
or otherwise, would not qualify for a license because of any of the foregoing
requirements.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-7-8:   FIREARM SECURITY MEASURES:



   (1)   Every hour of every day, the portion of the premises owned or
leased by a licensed firearm/firearm ammunition dealer devoted to the sale or
other disposition of firearms and/or firearm ammunition must be fully
monitored by a high-quality video taping system with the video tapes
resulting therefrom retained by the licensed dealer for not less than thirty
(30) consecutive days from the date of taping and made available for
inspection by any Orland Park Police Officer(s).



   (2)   All firearms on display on the premises owned or leased by a
licensed dealer must, except when being exhibited by the dealer's employee to
a potential purchaser, be kept inside a locked storage case or locked display
rack with the keys therefor available only to the licensed dealer's
authorized employees and, in addition, every firearm located on such premises
shall be equipped with a safety mechanism to hinder the use of the firearm by
unauthorized users.  Such devices shall include, but shall not be limited
to, trigger locks, combination handle locks, and solenoid use-limitation
devices.



      Safety mechanism means a design adaption or nondetachable
accessory that lessons the likelihood of unanticipated use of the firearm by
other than the owner of the firearm and those specifically authorized by the
owner to use the firearm.



      The trigger lock means a device that when locked in place by
means of a key, prevents a potential user from pulling the trigger of the
firearm without first removing the trigger lock by use of the trigger lock's
key.



      A combination handle lock means a device that is part of the
firearm which precludes the use of the firearm unless the combination
tumblers are properly aligned.



      A solenoid use-limitation device means a device which precludes,
by use of a solenoid, the firing of the firearm unless a magnet of the
appropriate strength is placed in proximity to the handle of the weapon.



   (3)   Every firearm sold or otherwise disposed by a licensed dealer
shall be equipped with at least one of the safety mechanisms defined in
7-3-7-8(2)(a), above, when delivered by the dealer to the purchaser or
recipient of such firearm;



   (4)   Possession of every firearm sold or otherwise disposed of by a
licensed dealer shall only be transferred by such dealer, or his or her
authorized employee, to the purchaser or recipient thereof when such
purchaser or recipient has left the dealer's business premises and has
arrived at the purchaser's or recipient's motor vehicle or other means of
transportation;



   (5)   No firearm/firearm ammunition dealer license shall be issued
to a person if the business premises to be used by the licensee for the sale
or other disposition of firearms or firearm ammunition is located within
one-quarter (1/4) mile of a public or private school building (including a
nursery, preschool, elementary or high school) or within one-quarter (1/4)
mile of a public park.



   (6)   All ammunition must be kept in locked cabinets that can only
be opened by the licensed dealer's employee(s).



7-3-7-9:  ADVERTISING OF FIREARM SAFETY INSTRUCTION:



   Every licensed firearm/firearm ammunition dealer shall advertise on
his/her business premises, and make available written information regarding,
firearm operation and hunting safety courses of instruction which may be
available for prospective firearm/firearm ammunition purchasers and
recipients.



7-3-7-10:  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:



   A firearm/firearm ammunition dealer's license may be suspended or
revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 7-1-16 of this
Title 7. (Ord. 3758 – 5-19-03)



7-3-8:  RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS FOR SECONDHAND DEALERS IN GOLD, SILVER,
PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS:



   Every secondhand dealer shall keep a record relating to transactions
involving the said items, which record system guidelines shall he established
in conjunction with the Chief of Police for the purpose of promoting
uniformity and accessibility to the Police Department with minimum
inconvenience to both the dealer and the Department.  However, under no
circumstances will a loose-leaf system be considered to be a proper medium
for record keeping.



   The record of all transactions shall be written in the English language
and in a clear legible manner.



   The record maintained by the secondhand dealer shall be made at the
time of the transaction and shall set forth the following information:



      (1)   Name, age, sex, distinguishing marks or characteristics,
as well as the individual's residence and his signature on the receipt and
permanent record kept by the dealer;



      (2)   Confirmation of identification, by also securing a
driver's license number along with the state of issuance of such license,
military identification card number and the account number of a major credit
card account, if used for purchases.  This number shall be recorded along
with the information herein above designated;



      (3)   The price or consideration paid or received at the time
of the transaction;



      (4)   A description of every article of gold, silver, precious
metals and gems received, purchased, sold, or exchanged by the dealer giving
the manufacturer's name and other marks of identification appearing on the
article including, but not limited to, the serial number, if any, on the
article;



      (5)   All entries in the record shall be signed by the person
making the entry; and



      (6)   Such records shall be retained for a period of one year
from the date of the transaction.



7-3-8-1:  REPORT TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS DISPATCHED AGENT:



   It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer to make out and make
available for the Chief of Police or his designated agent before the hour of
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, each Monday, a copy of the record required to be
kept under the terms of this Section, reflecting the completed transactions
of the previous seven (7) calendar day period.



7-3-8-2:  RECORD INSPECTION:



   The record book, the goods, articles or things purchased, received or
kept for sale or exchange, by every secondhand dealer, shall be open to
inspection of any member of the Police Department at all reasonable business
times upon notice, or any person duly authorized in writing for such purpose
by the Chief of Police.



7-3-8-3:  GOODS TO BE KEPT WITHOUT CONCEALMENT FOR SEVEN BUSINESS/WORKING
DAYS:



   Every dealer in secondhand goods must keep without concealment for a
period of seven (7) working/business days, subject to the reasonable
inspection by any police officer, all said goods, wares and merchandise,
purchased or received from any person, before selling, shipping or otherwise
disposing of the same.



   Proviso:  Any goods, wares, or merchandise purchased or received from
any person may be sold, shipped, or otherwise disposed of prior to the
expiration of the seven (7) working/business days holding period if the
goods, wares, or merchandise have been sooner inspected by the Chief of
Police or his designated agent and received written clearance for such
further disposition.



7-3-8-4:  MELTING, WRECKING AND REMODELING:



   No secondhand dealer shall melt any watch, watchcase, jewelry or other
identifiable article composed or manufactured in whole or in part of gold,
silver, platinum, or other precious metals until such dealer shall have made
a record of his intention to do so along with all other data required to be
recorded by the specific recordation provisions of this Section and shall
have reported the same to the Chief of Police or his designated agents within
the burglary and theft division and unless and until he shall have kept such
article intact in his licensed place of business, for inspection for seven
(7) working/business days after the report provided for in subsection A of
this Section has been made available to the Chief of Police or his designated
agent: Unless the identifiable article proposed to be melted down, wrecked or
remodeled has been sooner inspected by the Chief of Police or his/her
designated agent and received written clearance for such melting, wrecking or
remodeling from same.



7-3-8-5:  PURCHASING FROM MINORS:



   No secondhand dealer shall purchase, trade, or deal in secondhand
articles with a minor (an individual under the age of 18 years of age), or
receive any goods or articles from any minors. (Ord. 1981-A, 5-21-90)



7-3-9:  GREASE TRAP SLUDGE COLLECTORS AND TRANSPORTERS:



7-3-9-1:  DEFINITION:



   The term "grease trap sludge" shall mean the solid, lighter than water
fraction of wastewaters from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking
or consumption of food that are discharged to a pretreatment unit or device
commonly referred to as a grease trap.  The principal components of grease
trap sludge are fats, oils and greases.



7-3-9-2:  REGULATIONS:



   (A)   Each person, firm, corporation, association, institution,
commercial establishment or business entity who owns or operates a grease
trap in accordance with the Orland Park Plumbing Code shall cause collected
or trapped fats, oils and grease to be cleaned and removed from such device
on a periodic basis, and delivered to a facility authorized to use, treat or
dispose of such material.  Such cleanout and removal shall be accomplished
on a monthly basis unless the Village of Orland Park, upon receipt of proof
from the owner or operator or on the basis of its own inspection of the
grease trap, determines that a less or more frequent maintenance schedule is
required to achieve the purposes of this Chapter and to prevent the discharge
of fats, oils and grease into the Village of Orland Park's sewer system.



   (B)   No person, firm, corporation, association, institution,
commercial establishment or business entity shall introduce, nor allow the
introduction of physical, chemical or biological agents into grease traps for
the purpose of resuspending, dissolving, emulsifying or rendering soluble any
fats, oils, or grease removed from wastewater by such grease traps and
reintroducing them into the Village of Orland Park's sewer system.



   (C)   No person, firm, corporation, association, institution,
commercial establishment or business entity may cause or allow the discharge,
deposit or disposal of any grease trap sludge into a treatment works or into
any sewer owned by the Village of Orland Park.



7-3-9-3:  MANIFEST REQUIRED:



   No person, firm, corporation, association, institution,  commercial
establishment or business entity shall within the Village of Orland Park,
cause or allow the transportation or acceptance of grease trap sludge for
rendering, storage, treatment, or disposal away from the site where the
sludge was generated, unless the sludge is accompanied by a manifest as
prescribed in Section 7-3-9-6 below, and the transporter of the grease trap
sludge has the appropriate licenses as required by Section 7-3-9-4 below.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-9-4:  LICENSE REQUIRED:



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, association, institution,
commercial establishment or business entity shall, within the Village of
Orland Park, remove, transfer, or dispose of grease trap sludge without first
having obtained a grease trap sludge removal and transportation license and
the appropriate individual license for each vehicle transporting the grease
trap sludge as set forth in subsections (B) and (C) below.



   (B)   Each annual grease trap sludge removal and transportation
license shall be issued at a fee of $150.00 for persons, firms, corporations,
associations, institutions, commercial establishments or business entities
removing and/or transporting grease trap sludge away from the site where the
grease trap sludge was generated within the Village of Orland Park.



   (C)   In addition to the license fee required by subsection (B),
each vehicle used to transport grease trap sludge shall be separately
licensed at an annual fee of $75.00, provided, however, that as part of the
$150.00 annual fee required under subsection (B), each licensee shall also
receive one (1) of the licenses required under this subsection without the
payment of an additional $75.00. Not more than one vehicle shall be operated
under one license, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure
a license for each and every vehicle used to transport grease trap sludge. 
When any license required under this subsection (C) is issued after the first
day of January in any year, the license fee so provided for in this
subsection shall be prorated over the remainder of the year by dividing the
annual license fee required hereunder by twelve, which gives the amount of
the license fee per month, and deducting for the months already passed;
provided, however, that any license issued for a portion of a month shall be
considered a full month and included in the months remaining of the then
calendar year; and provided further that the applicant or licensee shall pay
in full and in advance the prorated amount for each month or parts of a month
remaining in the calendar year.  (Ord. 3892, 6-21-04)



   (D)   When issued, all licenses provided for in subsection (C) above
shall be evidenced by a fee emblem which shall be affixed prominently and
conspicuously to each vehicle for which it is issued.  Each such emblem
shall be issued only for a particular vehicle and may not be transferred or
used in any way whatsoever as the required emblem of any other vehicle
whether or not such other vehicle is a new or replacement vehicle for the
original vehicle.  If, however, the licensee wishes to transfer a license
which is required under subsection (C) above to a replacement vehicle for the
original vehicle, the licensee may transfer the license to a replacement
vehicle if all of the following conditions are met:



      (a)   The original vehicle is permanently removed from the
operation of transporting grease trap sludge within the Village of Orland
Park;



      (b)   The fee emblem is taken off the original vehicle and
returned to the village of Orland Park;



      (c)   The licensee is the record owner of the replacement
vehicle;



      (d)   The information and documentation issued under
subsection (B) as it applies to the replacement vehicle has been provided to
the Village of Orland Park;



      (e)   The replacement vehicle and licensee complies with and
meets all of the provisions and requirements of this Section;



         Once all of the above requirements have been met, the
Village of Orland Park will provide the licensee with a new replacement fee
emblem which shall be immediately affixed prominently and conspicuously to
the replacement device.



   (E)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she
is over twenty-one (21) years of age and a citizen of the United States.



   (F)   No refund shall be paid at any time to any licensee for fees
paid for any license required under this Section.



7-3-9-5:  LICENSE APPLICATION:



   (A)   Applications for a grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license shall be in a form supplied or approved by the Village
of Orland Park and shall be accompanied by the license fees as required
pursuant to Section 7-3-9-4. Applications for licenses shall be accepted only
from the record owner of the vehicle(s) used to transport the grease trap
sludge.



   (B)   An application for a grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license hereunder shall be filed in writing with the Village
Clerk on a form to be provided by the Village, accompanied by the proper
license fee(s) and the other documentation required in the subsections below,
and shall be subscribed to and sworn to under oath, and shall specify:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant,
and if a firm, corporation, association or partnership, the principal
officers thereof and their addresses; and if a corporation, all shareholders
of more than five (5%) percent, the corporate purpose, the corporate
recording numbers and registered agent.



      (2)   A list of each vehicle to be used in the grease trap
sludge removal and transportation operation.  Such list shall contain for
each vehicle the name of the vehicle owner, the address of the vehicle owner,
the telephone number of the vehicle owner, the make of the vehicle, the model
of the vehicle, the VIN number for the vehicle, the year of the vehicle, a
description of any tanks or other equipment which will hold the grease trap
sludge and the location of the facility at which each such vehicle will be
garaged.



      (3)   Sufficient proof of insurance and a copy of the
registration for each vehicle to be used in the grease trap sludge removal
and transportation operation.



      (4)   A copy of the driver's license for each person who will
be driving a vehicle in the grease trap sludge removal and transportation
operation.



      (5)   A statement as to whether or not any of the above
parties has ever been convicted of a felony.



      (6)   A declaration of the facilities to which such grease
trap sludge is to be delivered for use, treatment or disposal.



      (7)   Such other and further information as the Village may
require.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the truthfulness of the
statements made in the application and report to the Village Manager of
his/her results or findings.



   (D)   The Village Manager shall neither issue nor record a grease
trap sludge removal and transportation license with the Village Clerk if:



      (1)   Any of the parties requesting the grease trap sludge
removal and transportation license has been convicted of a felony.



      (2)   A false statement has been made on the application for a
license.



      (3)   The applicant is not the record owner of each of the
vehicles to be used in the grease trap sludge removal and transportation
operation.



      (4)   No other grease trap sludge removal and transportation
licenses are available.



      (5)   There are any items listed on the inspection report that
need to be remediated pursuant to Section 7-3-9-8 below.



      (6)   No license shall be issued to any person, firm,
corporation, association, institution, commercial establishment or business
entity if such person, firm, corporation, association, institution,
commercial establishment or business entity does not have all the valid waste
hauling permits that may be required by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and the Illinois Department of Agriculture.



      Such denial shall be in writing, and the Village Manager shall
promptly notify the applicant as to the basis of the denial.  No denial
shall be made on the basis of the applicant's race, creed, color, sex or
national origin.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-9-6:  MANIFEST INFORMATION:



   No licensee shall remove, transport or dispose of grease trap sludge in
the Village of Orland Park without the grease trap sludge being accompanied
by a manifest form which shall be completed as set forth below.  The Village
of Orland Park shall develop and make available the grease trap sludge
manifest.  The manifest shall contain at a minimum the following information:



   (a)   The name of the generator of the sludge;



   (b)   The address of the generator of the sludge;



   (c)   The telephone number of the generator of the sludge;



   (d)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the generator of the sludge;



   (e)   The street address of the grease trap;



   (f)   The volume of grease trap sludge removed;



   (g)   The date of the sludge removal;



   (h)   The name of the transporter of the sludge;



   (i)   The street address of the transporter of the sludge;



   (j)   The telephone number of the transporter of the sludge;



   (k)   Acknowledgment of the receipt of the sludge by the transporter;



   (l)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the transporter;



   (m)   The date of the collection of the grease trap sludge;



   (n)   The transporter's U.S. EPA I.D. number;



   (o)   The transporter's annual grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license number;



   (p)   The license number for the individual license issued by the
Village of Orland Park for the vehicle being used to transport the grease
trap sludge.



   (q)   The name of the facility receiving the sludge;



   (r)   The street address of the facility receiving the sludge;



   (s)   The telephone number of the facility receiving the sludge;



   (t)   An acknowledgment of the receipt of the sludge by the facility
receiving the sludge;



   (u)   The printed name and legible signature of an authorized
representative of the receiving facility;



   (v)   The date of the grease trap sludge receipt by the facility
receiving the sludge; and



   (w)   The disposal or receiving facility's U.S. EPA I.D. number. The
manifest shall be completed by the generator of the grease trap sludge.  The
generator must retain one copy of the manifest and deliver or mail by
certified mail one copy to the Department of Public Works for the Village of
Orland Park within 48 hours of shipment.  The other copies of the manifest
shall be given to the transporter.  Each transporter shall complete
applicable sections of the manifest, maintain one copy and provide the
facility receiving the sludge with the remainder of the manifest copies. The
receiving and management facility shall maintain one copy of the manifest,
send one copy to the generator and mail one copy to the Director of the
Department of Public Works for the Village of Orland Park.



7-3-9-7:  MANIFEST COPY TO BE RETAINED:



   The grease trap sludge generator, transporter and management facility
operator shall each retain a copy of the manifest for no less than two (2)
years, and shall produce such documents to the Village of Orland Park upon
request by the Village of Orland Park.



7-3-9-8:  INSPECTION PERMITTED:



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, institution, commercial
establishment or business entity that places an application for a grease trap
sludge removal and transportation license or renewal thereof, agrees to allow
the Village of Orland Park to inspect the condition of the facility or
equipment of any generator, transporter or receiving facility applying for
such license to determine if it is unsuitable for the intended grease trap
sludge operation or in need of repair.  If the inspector finds the condition
of the facility or equipment to be unsuitable for the intended grease trap
sludge removal and transportation operation or in need of repair, the
inspector shall issue a written report of his/her findings and shall send a
copy of the report to the applicant.  No grease trap sludge removal or
operator's licenses shall be issued to any applicant until all such items
listed on the inspection report are remediated.



7-3-9-9:  LICENSE TERM, RENEWAL; VILLAGE RIGHT TO REVOKE; NATURE OF LICENSE:



   Each grease trap sludge removal and transportation license required by
this Section shall be terminated on January 1 next following its issuance. 
No part of a license fee will be refunded if the license is revoked by the
Village Manager.



   Any licensee may retain his, her or its grease trap sludge removal and
transportation license at the expiration thereof, provided he, she or it is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises and the equipment for
which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and
provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the President and
Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within
its jurisdiction.



   Every grease trap sludge removal and operator's license issued under
this Section is subject to the Village's right, which is hereby expressly
reserved, to revocation of same, should the licensee directly or indirectly
permit the removal, transportation, disposal or placement of any grease trap
sludge contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, any other Village code
or Section or the laws of the State of Illinois.  Said license may be
revoked by the Village Manager after written notice to the licensee, which
notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee
is charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such
violations.  Ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the
licensee.  At such hearing, the licensee and his, her or its attorney may
present and submit evidence and witnesses in his, her or its defense.



   Any grease trap sludge removal and transportation license shall be
purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance
or until January 1st next following its issuance, whichever is first, unless
sooner revoked as in this Section provided, and shall not constitute
property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution,
nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or
subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.  Such license shall not descend
by the laws of testate or intestate devolution but it shall cease upon the
death of the licensee.



   Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall create any vested or property
right in any grease trap sludge removal and transportation license
whatsoever, nor shall it limit or restrict the right of the Village of Orland
Park to at anytime amend or repeal this Section.  (Ord. 2834, 2-5-96)



7-3-9-10:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, institution, commercial
establishment or business entity violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B
for each offense of which such person shall be convicted; and each day such
violation shall continue shall be regarded as a separate offense. In
addition, any violation hereof may result in having the violator's business
license subject to suspension or revocation.



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, institution, commercial
establishment or business entity who knowingly makes a false statement or
representation in any writing required to be prepared under the Section shall
be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each
submission of which such person shall be convicted.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-3-10:  TEENAGE CABARETS/JUICE BARS:



7-3-10-1:  DEFINITION:



   For purposes of the Section, a "teenage cabaret/juice bar" is defined
as a private commercial, recreational and entertainment facility, designed or
intended to be used primarily by, but not limited to patrons under the age of
twenty-one (21) years old, where patrons enjoy dancing, live and recorded
music and entertainment or where videotape presentations are shown.



7-3-10-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:



   It shall be unlawful to operate a teenage cabaret/juice bar within the
Village without first having obtained a license therefor as is herein
provided.



7-3-10-3:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:



   Application for such license shall be made to the Village Clerk and
shall include the following information:



   A.   Name and address of the owner/operator.  If a corporation, the
state of incorporation, as well as the names and addresses of all officers of
the corporation;



   B.   Name and addresses and positions of all employees and
nonemployee crowd control and supervision personnel.  Said information shall
be updated as new employees and nonemployee crowd control and supervision
personnel are hired;



   C.   The intended hours of operation; and



   D.   The maximum occupancy load of the building or premises to be
used, as determined by the Village and/or the Orland Fire Protection District
in accordance with the provisions of the latest edition of the BOCA Basic
National Building Code and Fire Prevention Code adopted by the Village.



   E.   Such other information as may be required by the Village from
time to time.



7-3-10-4:  LICENSE FEE:



   The fee for a teenage cabaret/juice bar license shall be as follows:



   A.   Initial license fee for issuance of a new license, ONE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED ($1,200.00) DOLLARS.



   B.   Subsequent renewal license annual fee, THIRTY-FIVE ($35.00)
DOLLARS per one thousand (1,000) square feet.



7-3-10-5:  GENERAL CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:



   All teenage cabaret/juice bar licenses shall be subject to the
following conditions:



   A.   The building and premises used must be in full compliance with
all applicable provisions of Village Codes and ordinances.



   B.   The licensee shall be required to supply at least one qualified
crowd control and supervision person for every one hundred (100) persons, or
portion thereof, permitted to be within the building or premises licensed. 
Persons qualified for crowd control shall be limited to off-duty police
officers.  Said qualified crowd control and supervision personnel shall be
responsible for crowd control both within the building used by the licensee
and the premises upon which said building is located.  In the event that the
licensee uses Village off-duty police officers for crowd control and
supervision, the licensee shall include the police officers in the worker's
compensation insurance policy for their employees only while employed
privately in connection with the teenage cabaret/juice bar and the Village
shall be named as an additional insured in the general liability insurance
policy covering the operation of said teenage cabaret/juice bar in an amount
of not less than ONE MILLION ($1,000,000.00) DOLLARS aggregate coverage.



   C.   All patrons shall enter at only one entrance and be properly
identified, and a count of those entering be kept; all persons and clothing
shall be checked to make sure that no dangerous implements are brought into
said licensed premises.  Once a person has been admitted such person shall
not leave and re-enter without again paying the admission charge and being
identified and checked.



   D.   No alcoholic beverages will be served or permitted on the
licensed premises.



   E.   The Manager of said teenage cabaret/juice bar shall be an
adult, preferably with experience in the administration of such facilities. 
All employees and nonemployee crowd control and supervision personnel of said
teenage cabaret/juice bar shall be checked by the Police Department for
previous criminal records.  Within three (3) days of the hiring of a new
employee or nonemployee crowd control and supervision person, the
owner/operator shall notify the Village Clerk in writing of the name of the
new employee or nonemployee crowd control and supervision person so that the
Police Department can perform the required criminal record check.



   F.   No license required by this Section shall be issued to an
establishment which has an employee, or has a nonemployee crowd control and
supervision person, who is a convicted felon, or has been placed on
supervision for, or been convicted of, a violation of Illinois Compiled
Statutes, Chapter 720, Act 5, Sections 11-6, 11-9, 11-9.1, 11-11, 11-14,
11-14.1, 11-15, 11-15.1, 11-16, 11-17, 11-18.1, 11-19, 11-19.1, 11-19.2,
11-20, 11-20.1, 11-21, 12-13, 12-14, 12-15 or 12-16.



   G.   The coat check area will be supervised and patrolled.



   H.   Building and Fire Code and other regulations shall at all times
be enforced.



7-3-10-6:  SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:



   All teenage cabaret/juice bar licenses shall be subject to the
following special conditions during any period of time when individuals under
the age of eighteen (18) years old are permitted on the licensed premises.



   A.   The hours of operation shall be limited to:



      1.   Fridays: Eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to Twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight.



      2.   Saturdays: Eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to Two o'clock
(2:00) A.M.



      3.   Evening preceding holidays: Eleven o'clock (11:00 A.M. to
Two o'clock (2:00) A.M.



      4.   Sunday through Thursday: Three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to Ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.



   B.   Notwithstanding the aforesaid hours of operation, no provisions
of law establishing a curfew for persons of the ages affected are hereby
modified or repealed and the licensee of said teenage cabaret/juice bar shall
cause to be audibly announced the curfew hours at lease one-half (1/2) hour
before said curfew shall become effective.



   C.   Each patron of the teenage cabaret/juice bar shall be at least
fourteen (14) years of age, and under the age of twenty-one (21) years of
age, and be the holder of a valid high school identification card or other
means of lawful identification, unless entry is limited on a particular day
or during particular hours to only individuals under the age of fourteen (14)
years of age.



   D.   The licensee shall make responsible efforts not to permit
persons under seventeen (17) years of age to enter or remain upon the
premises after Eleven Thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. on Friday, Saturday and
evenings preceding holidays.



   E.   The parents of patrons shall be admitted to observe and as part
of the operating schedule, open houses for parents shall be arranged.



   F.   No smoking or rough-dancing shall be permitted.  No matches,
lighters, cigarettes or tobacco products of any kind shall be allowed to be
brought onto the premises.  A sign shall be conspicuously posted informing
the patrons what items cannot be brought into said teenage cabaret/juice bar.



   The aforementioned special conditions shall be in addition to the
general conditions set forth in subsection 7-3-10-5 above.  Where the
special conditions of this Section are more restrictive than the general
conditions of subsection 7-3-10-5 above, the special conditions shall prevail.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-10-7:  PENALTY; REVOCATION:



   A.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this Section shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be convicted.



   B.   In addition to the fine provisions of subsection A above, the
general business license revocation provisions of the Village shall be
applicable to teenage cabaret/juice bar licensees.



(Ords. 2893, 5-20-96 and 2924, 8-5-96; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-3-11:  POOL AND BILLIARD TABLES:



7-3-11-1:  PROHIBITION OF UNLICENSED POOL AND BILLIARD TABLES:



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, association, establishment or
entity shall, within the Village of Orland Park, display for public patronage
or keep for use by patrons any pool and billiard tables, without first having
obtained a Billiard Parlor Operator's license as set forth in subsection (B)
below.



   (B)   There shall be issued no more than one (1) Billiard Parlor
Operator's License at the fee of $375.00 for persons, firms, corporations or
associations displaying for public patronage or keeping for use by patrons
any pool and billiard tables.  (Ord. 3892, 6-21-04)



   (C)   No license shall be issued to any person unless he or she is
over twenty-one (21) years of age and a citizen of the United States.



7-3-11-2:  APPLICATION:



   (A)   Application for a Billiard Parlor Operator's license hereunder
shall be filed in writing with the Village Manager on a form to be provided
by the Village, accompanied by the proper license fee, and shall be
subscribed to and sworn to under oath, and shall specify:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm,
corporation, association or partnership, the principal officers thereof and
their addresses; and if a corporation, all shareholders of more than 5%, the
corporate purpose, corporation recording numbers, and registered agent.



      (2)   The address(es) of the premises where the pool and
billiard tables are to be operated together with the character of the
business as carried on at such place.



      (3)   The number of pool and billiard tables to be used.



      (4)   A statement as to whether or not any of the above
parties have ever been convicted of gambling, tax evasion, any felony, or
have ever been denied a liquor license.



      (5)   A statement as to whether or not a liquor license has
been or will be issued.



      (6)   Such other and further information as the Village may
require.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the truthfulness of the
statements made in the application and report to the Village Manager his
results or findings.



   (C)   The Village Development Services Department shall review the
location where the pool or billiard tables are intended to be used, determine
if the same complies with the Zoning Ordinance and Land Development Code of
the Village and make recommendations to the Village Manager.



   (D)   The Village Manager shall neither issue nor record a Billiard
Parlor Operator's license with the Village Clerk if:



      (1)   The zoning is improper;



      (2)   Any of the parties requesting the Billiard Parlor
Operator's license have been convicted of gambling, tax evasion, or other
felony;



      (3)   A false statement has been made on the application for a
license; or 



      (4)   No Billiard Parlor Operator's license is available.



      Such denial shall be in writing and the Village Manager shall
promptly notify the applicant as to the basis of the denial.  No denial
shall be made on the basis of the applicant's race, creed, color, sex or
national origin.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-11-3:  RESTRICTIONS:



   (A)   No license issued hereunder shall permit the use of any pool
and billiard tables at any place or in any manner which will disturb the
peace or quiet of persons outside the licensed premises.



   (B)   No licensee shall operate an establishment wherein pool and
billiard tables are located in a manner which will encourage truancy.  Each
licensee shall monitor its pool and billiard tables so as to discourage
truancy, and shall prohibit the use of table(s) by persons under fifteen (15)
years of age unless that person is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.  In addition, during school hours, each licensee shall prohibit
the use of the table(s) by persons under sixteen (16) years of age and/or by
student(s) enrolled in grades 12 or under.



   (C)   No license shall be issued hereunder to an establishment
holding other than a Class "C" liquor license.  No Billiard Parlor
Operator's licensee holding a Class "C" liquor license shall admit upon the
licensed premises a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years unless that
person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, except that a person of
the age of eighteen (18) years or older may be admitted without being
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian upon that part of the licensed
premises separated from the bar area by a floor to ceiling wall or other
appropriate barrier.  (Ord. 4242, 5-7-07)



   (D)   No licensee shall permit or allow any patron or person to be
located on the premises wherein table(s) are located if said patron or person
is thereby violating any laws or Village ordinances or Village Code
provisions, including but not limited to those relating to a curfew for
minors.



   (E)   No licensee shall display for public patronage or keep for use
by patrons any pool or billiard table which requires the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate or disc.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the
public to any such establishment wherein pool and/or billiard tables are
located between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday
or between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on any other day of the
week.



(Ord. 3939, 10-4-04)



7-3-11-4:  TERM AND RENEWAL OF BILLIARD PARLOR OPERATOR'S LICENSE:



   Each Billiard Parlor Operator's license required by this Section 7-3-11
shall terminate on December 31 next following its issuance.  No part of a
license fee will be refunded if the license is revoked by the Village Manager.



   Any licensee may renew his, her or its Billiard Parlor Operator's
license at the expiration thereof, provided he, she or it is then qualified
to receive such a license and the premises for which such renewal license is
sought are suitable for such purpose; and provided, further, that the renewal
privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which
shall in any case prevent the President and Board of Trustees from decreasing
the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction.



7-3-11-5:  SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF DEVICES USED FOR GAMBLING:



   Nothing in this Section 7-3-11 shall in any way be construed to
authorize, license or permit any gambling whatsoever, and if the Chief of
Police shall have probable cause to believe any pool or billiard table is
being used as a gambling device, such table may be seized by the Police and
impounded until a hearing is held as herein provided.  A finding of guilty
shall result in the destruction of such table by the Police Department.  A
finding of innocent shall result in the return of said table to the licensee.



7-3-11-6:  REVOCATION OF LICENSE:



   Every Billiard Parlor Operator's License issued under this Section
7-3-11 is subject to the Village's right, which is hereby expressly reserved,
to revocation of same should the licensee directly or indirectly permit the
use of any pool or billiard table contrary to the provisions of this Section
7-3-11, other provisions of the Village Code, Village ordinances or the laws
of the State of Illinois.  Said license may be revoked by the Village
Manager after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the
ordinance, code section, or law violations with which the licensee is
charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such
violations.  Ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the
licensee.  At such hearing, the licensee and his, her or its attorney may
present and submit evidence and witnesses in his, her or its defense.



7-3-11-7:  TRANSFER OF LICENSE:



   A Billiard Parlor Operator's license shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance or on June 30 next
following its issuance, whichever is first, unless sooner revoked as provided
in



   this Section 7-3-11, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable
or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered
or hypothecated.  Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee if the
licensee is a person, or upon the dissolution or cessation of business if the
licensee is a firm, corporation or association.



   Nothing contained in this subsection shall create any vested or
property right in any Billiard Parlor Operator's license whatsoever, nor
shall it limit or restrict the right of the Village of Orland Park to, at any
time, amend or repeal this Section 7-3-11 or any subsection hereof.



7-3-11-8:  PENALTIES:



   Any person, firm, corporation, association, establishment, or entity
violating any of the provisions of this Section 7-3-11 shall be according to
the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person
shall be convicted; and each day such violation shall continue shall be
regarded as a separate offense.  In addition, any violation hereof may
result in having the violator's business and/or liquor license subject to
suspension or revocation.



(Ord. 3101, 2-2-98; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-3-12:  PET SHOP OPERATORS:



7-3-12-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Section, and the interpretation and
enforcement thereof, the following terms, phrases and words and their
derivation shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which
they are used shall indicate otherwise.  When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number
include the singular.  The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may"
is permissive.  Words not defined shall be given this common and ordinary
meaning.



      (1)   The term "ANIMAL" for purposes of this Code Section
shall mean a dog (canis familiaris) or cat (felis catus).



      (2)   The term "PET SHOP OPERATOR", means any "PET SHOP
OPERATOR", "DOG DEALER", "KENNEL OPERATOR" or "CATTERY OPERATOR" as defined
in the Illinois Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605/1, et seq.), as well as any
animal dealer or animal broker.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



7-3-12-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:



   No person shall engage in the business of a Pet Shop Operator without
having first obtained a Pet Shop Operator license under this Chapter.  All
Pet Shop Operator licenses must be approved by the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



7-3-12-3:  LICENSE APPLICATION:



   An application for a license shall be made in conformity with the
requirements of Chapter 1 of this Title 7, on a form prescribed by the
Development Services Department.  The Director of the Development Services
Department shall cause an investigation to be made of the proposed Pet Shop
Operator premises as named and described in the application for the purpose
of determining whether the requirements of this Code are fully complied with.



   The Village Board of Trustees shall not approve a Pet Shop Operator's
license, and the Development Services Department shall neither issue or
record a Pet Shop Operator's license, if:



      (1)   The applicable zoning does not permit a pet shop;



      (2)   The pet shop premises to be occupied by the applicant do
not meet Village building or health codes or ordinances;



      (3)   The applicant does not have a pet shop operator's
license issued by the Illinois Department of Agriculture or has been
disciplined by the Illinois Department of Agriculture for a violation of any
provision of the Illinois Animal Welfare Act; or



      (4)   A false statement has been made on the license
application.



   A denial of a Pet Shop Operator's license shall be in writing, and the
Development Services Department shall promptly notify the applicant of the
reason or reasons for the denial.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-3-12-4:  LICENSE - FEE:



   The annual fee for a Pet Shop Operator's license shall be as set forth
in Section 7-2-3 of this Code.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



7-3-12-5:  OPERATION:



   Every Pet Shop Operator, shall at all times operate the establishment
in full compliance with this Village Code Section, as said Code Section shall
be amended from time to time, as well as all state and federal laws relating
to animal health, sanitation and disease prevention.  All licensed premises
shall be kept free and clear of decaying food and filth of any kind and shall
be maintained under sanitary conditions at all times.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



7-3-12-6:  DISCLOSURES REQUIRED:



   (a)   Every Pet Shop Operator shall post the following written
disclosures for each animal in a conspicuous location on or near the animal's
holding cage or in a centrally located area in the pet shop where they may be
accessible, without request, by the public.  The written disclosures for
each animal shall include the following:



      (1)   The breed, approximate age, sex and color of the animal;



      (2)   The date and description of any inoculation or medical
treatment that the animal received while in the possession of the Pet Shop
Operator;



      (3)   Whether or not the breeder is a "hobby breeder" (less
than five (5) female animals);



      (4)   The average animal population for the prior calendar
quarter by the breeder.  This disclosure may be disclosed by category
ranges.  Range categories are 0-25 animal population, 2-50, 51-75, 75+
animal population.



      (5)   If the breeder is licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA), the license number of the breeder and any
other license number held by the breeder within the past five (5) years;



      (6)   A link to the USDA web site so consumers can conduct
their due diligence for USDA breeders.



      (7)   The breeder's business name, mailing and breeding
location addresses of the breeder, as well as any other name and business
address used by the breeder;



      (8)   The average number of female animals capable of
reproduction for the prior calendar quarter by the breeder.  This disclosure
may be disclosed by category ranges.  Range categories are 1-5 animals
capable of reproduction, 6-25 animals capable of reproduction, 26-50 animals
capable of reproduction 51-75 animals capable of reproduction, 76+ animals
capable of reproduction;



      (9)   The lineage (sire and dam) of the animal;



      (10)   The address of the location where the animal was born
as well as location(s) where the animal was housed after birth, if different
from the breeder's address, as listed in (7); and



      (11)   Any transfers of ownership of the animal prior to its
sale by an Orland Park Pet Shop Operator and, if the animal was returned by a
customer, the date and reason for the return.



   (b)   The disclosures required under this Subsection 7-3-12-6 shall
be verified in Good Faith through examination of the USDA official website,
documentation produced to the Pet Shop Operator by the breeder and
information determined by the Pet Shop Operator, in good faith, to be
accurate and shall be provided by the Pet Shop Operator to the customer in
written form and shall be signed by both the Pet Shop Operator and customer
at the time of sale.  There must be the contact information for the Orland
Park code enforcement agency written on the disclosure provided to the
customers.  The Pet Shop Operator shall retain the original form of such
disclosure, with a copy given to the customer, along with the customer's
acknowledgment, for a period of not less than two (2) years from the date of
sale.  The original disclosure and acknowledgment shall be made available
for inspection by any employee of the Village who is duly authorized by the
Village Manager to make such inspection or Code Enforcement Officer during
normal business operating hours following not less than a 48 hour in advance
request from said Village employee or Officer.



   (c)   The Village shall have the right to make inspections of the
business facilities of every Pet Shop Operator within the Village to assure
compliance with this Code, including the accuracy and delivery of the
information in the disclosures.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



7-3-12-7:  LICENSING:



   Each Pet Shop Operator must have a business license issued by the
Village of Orland Park in addition to the Pet Shop Operator license provided
for in this Chapter.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



7-3-12-8:  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:



   Any person or Pet Shop Operator violating any provision of this Code
Section or counterfeiting or forging any disclosure, certificate or permit or
resisting, impeding or obstructing any authorized officer in enforcing this
Code Section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person
shall be convicted.  Each person or Pet Shop Operator shall be guilty of a
separate offense for every day in which any violation of any of the
provisions of this Section 7-3-12 is committed or permitted to continue and
shall be punished as provided in this Section.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-3-12-9:  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PET SHOP OPERATOR AND BUSINESS
LICENSES:



   In addition to the penalties set forth in Subsection 7-3-12-8 above,
the Village Pet Shop Operator and business licenses of any Pet Shop Operator
may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section 7-1-16 of this Title 7 for failure to comply with the provisions of
this Section 7-3-12 of this Title 7.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



7-3-12-10:  RULES AND REGULATIONS; PROVISIONAL LICENSES:



   The Village Manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to
promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the effective
implementation and enforcement of this Code Section, including the authority
to issue a temporary provisional Pet Shop Operator's license to allow any pet
shop operator doing business at the time this Code Section becomes effective
to bring such business into compliance with the provisions of this Section
7-3-12.



(Ord. 4928, 9-15-14)



CHAPTER 4
RETAIL LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS



SECTION:



7-4-1:   Purpose



7-4-2:   Definitions



7-4-3:   Exceptions to Chapter



7-4-4:   Local Liquor Control Commissioner



7-4-4-1:   President Act As



7-4-4-2:   Powers and Duties



7-4-5:   License Required; Food Service; License Prohibited for Adult Use
Business



7-4-6:   Licenses, Classes and Fees, Limitation on Number of Licenses



7-4-7:   Payment of Fees



7-4-8:   Initial License Expense



7-4-9:   Application for License



7-4-10:   Bond and Forfeiture



7-4-11:   Investigations, Rejection or Approval of Applications for License



7-4-12:   Renewals of License



7-4-13:   Posting Licenses and Warnings



7-4-13a:   Display of Birth Defects Warning Sign



7-4-14:   Persons Ineligible for License



7-4-15:   Opening and Closing Hours



7-4-16:   License Limitations



7-4-17:   Retail Sales Prohibited in Certain Areas



7-4-18:   Sale or Discontinuance of Business; Continuation of License



7-4-19:   Change of Location



7-4-20:   Changes in Personnel



7-4-20a:   Change in Corporate Name



7-4-20b:   Change in Corporation



7-4-20c:   Change in Corporate Parent



7-4-20d:   Change in Corporate Officers After Change in Corporate Parent



7-4-20e:   Loss, Theft or Destruction of Liquor License



7-4-21:   Peddling Prohibited



7-4-22:   Sanitary Conditions



7-4-23:   Conduct of Licensee



7-4-24:   Sales to Persons Under Twenty One, Habitual Drunkards,
Spendthrifts and MentaI Incompetents



7-4-24-1:   Parental Responsibility



7-4-24-2:   Evidence of Age Required



7-4-25:   Revocation of License; Notice; Hearing



7-4-26:   Complaint of Violation; Hearing



7-4-27:   Licenses and Permits Previously Issued



7-4-28:   Prohibited Sale or Promotion of Alcoholic Beverages



7-4-29:   Wine, Beer and Spirits Sampling and Tasting



7-4-1:  PURPOSE:



   This Chapter shall be construed so that the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Village shall be promoted by the reasonable and
necessary regulation of the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor.



7-4-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   Unless specifically defined otherwise in this Chapter, the words and
phrases herein designated are defined for purposes of this Chapter as follows:



   ALCOHOL:  The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol.  It does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.



   SPIRITS:  Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by
distillation, mixed with water or other substances in solution, and includes
brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when
rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.



   WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined.



   BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:  Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.



   ORIGINAL PACKAGE:  Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked or capped,
sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to
convey any alcoholic liquor.



   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, club, association or corporation.



   RETAILER:  A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor
for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.



   SELL or SALE AT RETAIL:  "Sell at retail" and "sale at retail" refer
to and mean sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.



   SALE:  Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, for a
consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.



   TO SELL:  Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent
to sell.



   PACKAGE SALES: The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor in the original package and not to be consumed or in fact consumed in
whole or in part on the premises where sold.



   CONSUMPTION SALES:  The sale or offering for sale of retail of any
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold.



   SERVICE OF FOOD:  The service of meals for consumption only on the
premises in an adequate and sanitary kitchen as defined in any appropriate
health or food service ordinance of the Village.  The meals must consist of
more than the service or sale of packaged foods such as potato chips,
pretzels, peanuts, cheese and crackers, or frozen or premade foods, such as
pizza, hamburgers or sandwiches which can be prepared by being heated or
warmed in an oven.  The meals must be actually and regularly served at
either tables or a counter, and provide for eating at tables, including small
individual tables accompanying theater seats.



   TABLE SERVICE RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and
where meals are actually and regularly served at tables (as opposed to
counter service), without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity,
and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to
prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.



   CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owing, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and
adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a
sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and
meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application for a
license under this Chapter two (2) copies of a list of names and residences
of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of
any additional member his name and address; and, provided further, that its
affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and
that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or
the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general
revenue of the club.



   HOTEL:  Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay
to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in
which five (5) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such
guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to
such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in
the same building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.



   MOVIE THEATER:  Any building to which the public is invited and pays
consideration for the purpose of viewing motion pictures.



   COUNTER SERVICE RESTAURANT:  Any public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served at
the counter, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity, and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.



(Amd. Ord. 5413, 6-3-19; Amd. Ord. 5432, 9-3-19; Amd. Ord. 5454, 11-18-19)



7-4-3:  EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER:



   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the
manufacture of denatured alcohol, nor to any liquid or solid containing
one-half of one percent (0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume, nor shall the
provisions of this Chapter apply to flavoring extracts, concentrates, syrups
or medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary or toilet preparations, or
food products unfit for beverage purposes, but the provisions of this Chapter
shall not be construed to exclude or not apply to alcoholic liquor used in
the manufacture, preparation or compounding of such products.  The
provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to wine intended for use or used
by any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes, nor shall
anything herein contained prevent any duly licensed, practicing physician or
dentist from possessing or using any alcoholic liquor in the strict practice
of his profession or any hospital or other institution caring for sick and
diseased persons from possessing alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona
fide patients of such hospital or other institution or prevent any licensed
pharmacist from possessing and using alcoholic liquors in the preparation of
prescriptions prepared by duly licensed physicians.



7-4-4:  LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:



7-4-4-1:  PRESIDENT ACT AS:



   The President of the Village shall be the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner of the Village and shall be charged with the administration of
this Chapter.  He may designate one or more persons to assist him in the
exercise of such duties as he may deem necessary.  The compensation of the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be fixed by ordinance adopted by the
Board of Trustees.



7-4-4-2:  POWERS AND DUTIES:



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers,
functions and duties:



   1.   To grant, suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke
for cause, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, all local
licenses issued to persons for premises within his jurisdiction.



   2.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer or peace
officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder, to
determine whether any of the provisions of this Section or any rules or
regulations adopted by him or by any other agency having the authority to do
so have been or are being violated, and at the time of such entry to examine
such premises in connection therewith.



   3.   To receive complaints from any citizen that any of the
provisions of this Section, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, or any other applicable rules or regulations, have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided.



   4.   To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a
license to an applicant he has determined to be ineligible therefor.



   5.   To examine, or cause to be examined under oath any applicant
for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom
notice of revocation of suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter
provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of
any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his
information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue
subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this State.  For the
purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner under this Section, he may authorize his agent to act on
his behalf.



(Ord. 911, 12-18-78)



7-4-5:  LICENSE REQUIRED; FOOD SERVICE; LICENSE PROHIBITED FOR ADULT USE
BUSINESS:



   No person within the corporate limits of the Village shall sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor without first having obtained,
as herein and hereafter provided, a license.  A separate license shall be
required for:



   1.   Each place of business or location wherein alcoholic liquor
shall be sold or offered for sale, and for each separate building (should
there be more than one building at a location) wherein alcoholic liquor shall
be sold or offered for sale.



   2.   Each separate location within the same place of business or
premises regardless of the class of license, as set out in Section 7-4-6
hereof, required for each location.



   However, no person shall sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises unless such sale or offer to sell is
incidental and complimentary to the service of food as defined in Section
7-4-2 of this Chapter; provided, however, that the requirement of this
Section shall not be applicable to a Class F license or Class I license or
Class H license where the licensed premises are located in the ORI Mixed Use
Zoning District or a Class J license as hereinafter described.  In addition,
it shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class A license who also holds a
video gaming license issued pursuant to Chapter 18 of this Title 7 to cease
the service of food or to cease offering the service of food sooner than
three (3) hours prior to the earlier of a) the closing hour prescribed in
Section 7-4-15 of this Chapter, or b) the licensee's customary business
closing hour.



   No license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor
shall be issued to any person whose place of business is an “adult use”
as defined in Section 2-102 of the Village Land Development Code. 



(Ord. 911, 12-18-78; Amd. Ord. 3952, 11-15-04; Amd. Ord. 4030, 6-6-05; Amd.
Ord. 4893, 4-7-14; Amd. Ord. 4908, 6-16-14; Amd. Ord. 5330, 9-4-18; Amd. Ord.
5411, 5-20-19)



7-4-6:  LICENSES, CLASSES AND FEES, LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES:



   Licenses to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall be of the following
classes:  (Ord. 2103, 3-25-91)



   1.   Class A License: A Class A license shall entitle the licensee
to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor from the premises specified for
use or consumption on or off the premises where sold.  This license is
available at table service restaurants.  The license fee for a Class A
license shall be one thousand two hundred sixty dollars ($1,260.00) per 
annum for 2017, and then one thousand three hundred twenty dollars
($1,320.00) for 2018.  No more than sixty-seven (67) licenses of this class
shall be issued and in force at any one time.  (Ord. 4627, 3-7-11; Amd. Ord.
4699, 1-16-12; Amd. Ord. 4699, 4-2-12; Amd. Ord.  4750, 8-6-12; Amd. Ord.
4757, 9-4-12; Amd. Ord. 4761, 10-15-12; Amd. Ord. 4762, 11-5-12; Amd. Ord.
4778, 12-17-12; Amd. Ord. 4795, 2-4-13; Amd. Ord. 4814, 4-15-13; Amd. Ord.
4829, 7-1-13; Amd. Ord. 4831, 7-15-13; Amd. Ord. 4843, 9-16-13; Amd. Ord.
4848, 10-7-13; Amd. Ord. 4886, 2-3-14; Amd. Ord. 4890, 3-17-14; Amd. Ord.
4902, 5-19-14; Amd. Ord. 4916, 8-4-14; Amd. Ord. 4935, 10-6-14; Amd. Ord.
4941, 11-3-14; Amd. Ord. 5004, 7-6-15; Amd. Ord. 5021, 8-17-15; Amd. Ord.
5055, 12-21-15; Amd. Ord. 5091, 5-2-16; Amd. Ord. 5132, 10-3-16; Amd. Ord.
5136, 11-7-16; Amd. Ord. 5140, passed 11-21-16; Amd. Ord. 5199, passed
7-3-17; Amd. Ord. 5206, 8-7-17; Amd. Ord. 5227, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5249,
12-4-17; Amd. Ord. 5264, 1-15-18; Amd. Ord. 5276, 2-19-18; Amd. Ord. 5351,
11-19-18; Amd. Ord. 5428, 8-19-19; Amd. Ord. 5452, 11-18-19; Amd. Ord. 5454,
11-18-19)



   1.5   Class A-5 License: This license is available to counter
service restaurants. A Class A-5 license shall entitle the licensee to make
sales at retail of alcoholic liquor from the premises specified for use or
consumption on or off the premises where sold. Class A-5 1icensees are
ineligible for a video gaming terminal license under Chapter 18. The license
fee for a Class A-5 license shall be one thousand three hundred twenty
dollars ($1,320.00). No more than sixty-nine (69) licenses of this class
shall be issued and in force at any one time. (Ord. 5454, 11-18-19)



   2.   Class B License:  A Class B license shall entitle the licensee
to make package sales at retail of alcoholic liquor from the premises
specified for use and consumption off the premises or surrounding area of
said premises where sold.  The license fee for a Class B license shall be
seven hundred ninety dollars ($790.00) per annum for 2017, and then eight
hundred thirty dollars ($830.00) for 2018.  No more than twenty-nine
licenses of this class shall be issued and in force at any one time.  (Ord.
4677, 10-17-11; Amd. Ord. 4721, 4-2-12; Amd. Ord. 4734, 6-4-12; Amd. Ord.
4821, 6-3-13; Amd. Ord. 4848, 10-7-13; Amd. Ord. 4886, 2-3-14; Amd. Ord.
5055, 12-21-15; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16; Amd. Ord. 5194, 6-5-17; Amd. Ord.
5200, 7-3-17; Amd. Ord. 5233, 11-6-17; Amd. Ord. 5268, 2-5-18; Amd. Ord.
5299, 5-7-18; Amd. Ord. 5352, 11-19-18; Amd. Ord. 5416, 6-17-19; Amd. Ord.
5453, 11-18-19)



   3.   Class C License:  A Class C license shall entitle the licensee
to make sales at retail of wine and beer only from the premises specified for
use or consumption on or off the premises where sold. The license fee for a
Class C license shall be seven hundred ninety dollars ($790.00) per annum for
2017, and then eight hundred thirty dollars ($830.00) for 2018.  No more
than eleven (11) licenses of this class shall be issued and in force at any
one time. (Ord. 4481, 8-2-10; Amd. Ord. 4699, 1-16-12; Amd. Ord. 4750,
8-6-12; Amd. Ord. 4761, 10-15-12; Amd. Ord. 4762, 11-5-12; Amd. Ord. 4778,
12-17-12; Amd. Ord. 4848, 10-7-13; Amd. Ord. 4856, 11-4-13; Amd. Ord. 4886,
2-3-14; Amd. Ord. 4935, 10-6-14; Amd. Ord. 4941, 11-3-14; Amd. Ord. 5031,
10-19-15; Amd. Ord. 5055, 12-21-15; Amd. Ord. 5123, 9-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5132,
10-3-16; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16; Amd. Ord. 5207, 8-7-17; Amd. Ord. 5298,
5-7-18; Amd. Ord. 5324, 8-20-18; Amd. Ord. 5340, 10-1-18; Amd. Ord. 5422,
7-15-19)



   4.   Class D License:  A Class D license shall entitle the licensee
to make package sales at retail of beer and wine only for use and consumption
off the premises where sold.  The license fee for a Class D license shall be
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per annum for 2017, and then five hundred
thirty dollars ($530.00) for 2018.  No more than three (3) licenses of this
class shall be issued and in force at any one time.  (Ord. 4611, 12-20-10;
Amd. Ord. 4735, 6-4-12; Amd. Ord. 4795, 2-4-13; Amd. Ord. 4848, 10-7-13; Amd.
Ord. 4964, 2-16-15; Amd. Ord. 4982, 4-20-15; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16; Amd.
Ord. 5155, 12-19-16; Amd. Ord. 5226, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5369, 12-17-18; Amd.
Ord. 5378, 1-28-19; Amd. Ord. 5445, 10-21-19)



   5.   Class E License:  A Class E license shall be issued only to a
club and shall entitle the club licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic
liquor for use or consumption on the premises only of said club.  The
license fee for a Class E license shall be seven hundred ninety dollars
($790.00) per annum for 2017, and then eight hundred thirty dollars ($830.00)
for 2018.  No more than one license of this class shall be issued and in
force at any one time.



(Ord. 1931, 11-6-89; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16)



   6.   Class F License:  A Class F license shall be a temporary
permit for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor at any banquet, picnic,
bazaar, fair or similar assembly or Village-sponsored event where food or
drink is sold, served or dispensed.  Such temporary permit shall be issued
only to an organized church, society, fraternal or benevolent organization
organized or conducted not for pecuniary profit, or to the business employed
or engaged to cater said event, provided said business is currently licensed
to sell alcoholic liquor at retail within the Village.  Such temporary
permits shall not permit the sale of any alcoholic liquors in any place where
the sale thereof is prohibited by law or by ordinance of the Village.  Such
permits shall be issued for a specific location.  There shall be no fee for
such temporary permits, and said permits shall permit the licensee to sell at
retail said alcoholic liquors for a period of one week, said week to be
designated by dates in said license.



   Every application or a Class F license shall be accompanied by a
certificate of insurance issued by a company or companies acceptable to the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner evidencing the existence of the following
policies of insurance:



      (a)   Liquor liability insurance in accordance with the Dram
Shop Act of the State of Illinois with minimum limits of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) bodily injury, one person; three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) bodily injury, one occurrence; one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) loss of means of support; and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) property damage; and



         (b)   A comprehensive general liability policy of
insurance with minimum limits of two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00) bodily injury and property damage, as per person and per
occurrence. 



(Ord. 4641, 4-18-11)



   7.   Class G License; Convention Center License:



      A Class G license shall entitle the licensee, or its permittee,
to make sales at retail for consumption by the drink only on the premises
owned by the Orland Park Metropolitan Exposition, Auditorium and Office
Building Authority of Orland Park, Cook County, Illinois (the "Authority"),
provided that the Authority shall provide or cause to be provided dram shop
liability insurance coverage in amounts not less than the liability limits
established in Section 6 21 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act (Chapter 235,
Illinois Compiled Statutes, Act 5, Article 6, Section 6 21) so as to save and
hold harmless the Village and the Authority from financial loss, damage or
harm arising from the activities pursuant to the Class G license.  The
Authority shall comply with the provisions of Section 4-1 of the said
Illinois Liquor Control Act. If the event is being conducted on the Authority
property by a person (as defined in this Chapter) other than the Authority,
the person shall (a) receive approval from the Authority to conduct the event
and sell alcoholic liquor for a period of time not exceeding seven (7)
consecutive calendar days and (b) apply for and obtain a Temporary Class G
Convention Center license hereunder.  Any such person applying for a
Temporary Class G license shall provide the dram shop liability insurance as
specified above in this subsection 7.  The annual fee for a Class G license
shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00), and no more than one (1) Class G
license shall be issued for a license year and be in force and effect at any
one time.



      A Temporary Class G license may also be issued to a person
conducting a private (family and/or guest) event on Authority property at
which alcoholic liquor will be served but not sold, provided the person
conducting the event shall first receive approval from the Authority to
conduct the event for a period of one (1) day only.  One (1) Temporary Class
G license may be issued for each of the two (2) separate and distinct rooms
within the Orland Park Civic Center operated by the Authority.  There shall
be no charge or fee for a Temporary Class G license.  (Ord. 2154, 9-23-91;
Amd. Ord. 4973, 3-2-15; Amd. Ord. 5133, 10-3-16)



   8.   Class H License; Microbrewery and full service:  A Class H
License shall entitle the licensee to manufacture beer products on the
licensed premises and to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor, including,
but not limited, to the manufactured beer products, for consumption on or off
the licensed premises.  Nothing in the issuance of a Class H license
pursuant to this Section shall be considered to relieve the licensee of any
responsibility for complying with all applicable state and federal
regulations relating to the manufacture and/or sale of beer products or other
alcoholic beverages, and all applicable business and other regulations of the
Village.  The license fee for a Class H license shall be one thousand five
hundred eighty dollars ($1,580.00) per annum for 2017, and then one thousand
six hundred sixty dollars ($1,660.00) for 2018.  No more than one (1)
license of this class shall be issued and in force at any one time.  (Ord.
4307, 11-5-07; Amd. Ord. 4814, 4-15-13; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16; Amd. Ord.
5447, 11-4-19)



   9.   Class I License; Comedy Club:  A Class I license shall entitle
the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption only on the licensed premises where sold, from one (1) to Zero
(0), provided, however, that the sale of alcoholic beverages at a comedy club
shall be authorized only during and one hour before scheduled performances. 
Performances shall consist of one or more comedians and shall be not less
than 1.5 hours in length, with patrons paying a separate admission charge for
each performance.  After each performance, patrons shall be required to exit
before the next group of patrons is admitted for another performance. 
Performances shall be by professional comedians except that amateur
performances (open mike evenings) shall be permitted not more than one night
a week.



      Notwithstanding Section 7-4-5 of this Chapter, the requirement
that the service of alcoholic beverages be incidental and complementary to
the service of food as defined in Section 7-4-2 of this Chapter shall not
apply to a Comedy Club.  A Comedy Club shall have food service available,
but may offer packaged food such as chips and pretzels and frozen or pre-made
food such as pizza.  Other provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to
comedy clubs.



      The license fee for a Class I license shall be one thousand two
hundred sixty dollars ($1,260.00) per annum for 2017, and then one thousand
three twenty dollars ($1,320.00) for 2018.  No licenses of this class shall
be issued.



(Ord. 3952, 11-15-04; Amd. Ord. 4377, 6-16-08; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16)



   10.   Class J License; Winery:  A Class J license shall entitle the
licensee to manufacture, bottle and sell up to 50,000 gallons of wine by the
bottle from the licensed premises.  A Class J licensee may also conduct wine
sampling and tasting pursuant to Section 7-4-29 of this Code, without the
requirement of food service pursuant to Section 7-4-5.  A Class J license
shall also entitle the licensee to make package sales at retail of alcoholic
liquor from the premises specified for use and consumption off the premises
or surrounding area of said premises where sold. A Class J licensee may also
apply for a Class A or C license for the same or a portion of the premises
with a Class J license.  Nothing in the issuance of a Class J license shall
be considered to relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying
with all applicable state and federal regulations relating to the manufacture
and/or sale of wine or other alcoholic beverages and with all applicable
business and other regulations of the Village.  The license fee for a Class
J license shall be one thousand five hundred eighty dollars ($1,580.00) per
annum for 2017, and then one thousand six hundred sixty dollars ($1,660.00)
for 2018.  No more than one (1) license of this class shall be issued and in
force at any one time. 



(Ord. 4030, 6-6-05; Amd. Ord. 5031, 10-19-15; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16)



   11.   Class K License; Seasonal/Temporary License:  A Class K
License shall entitle a holder of a Class H or Class J license to make
package sales of beer and wine only or sales at retail as part of a gift
package of beer and wine only, not for consumption on the premises, for a
period not to exceed forty-five (45) days.  A Class H or Class J licensee
may only be granted one Class K License per calendar year.  Storage and
display of the wine and beer shall be in a manner to protect the product from
improper use.  Any person selling the product shall have completed a
mandatory alcohol awareness training program approved by the Village.  The
licensee fee for a Class K License shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
No more than 1 license of this class shall be issued and in force at any one
time. (Ord. 4509, 9-21-09)



   12.   Class L License; Congregate Elderly Housing:  A Class L
license shall entitle the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic
liquor for use or consumption on the premises of a congregate elderly housing
facility, as that term is defined in the Land Development Code of the Village
of Orland Park, as long as the facility also offers food during its hours of
selling alcoholic liquor.  Sales of alcoholic liquor by Class L licensees
shall be to residents of the facility and their guests only.  The facility
shall not be permitted to advertise or promote itself as containing a pub,
bar or tavern and shall not be permitted to have any exterior signage
regarding a pub, bar or tavern.  The area where sales at retail must be done
in a room that is separate from the other common areas of the facility and
the room must not have a door that is accessible from the outside of the
facility.  The license fee for a Class L license shall be seven hundred
ninety dollars ($790.00) per annum for 2017, and then eight hundred thirty
dollars ($830.00) for 2018. No more than two (2) licenses of this class shall
be issued and in force at any one time. 



(Ord. 4606, 12-6-10; Amd. Ord. 5132, 10-3-16; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16)



   13.   Class M License; Restaurant BYOB License:  A Class M license
shall entitle the licensee, a restaurant that does not sell alcoholic liquor,
to permit consumption of beer or wine only brought onto the premises of the
restaurant by a patron 21 years of age or older for personal consumption,
including consumption of their dining guests who are 21 years of age or
older, while the patron and dining guest(s) are being served a complete meal
in the restaurant, subject to the conditions in this Subsection.  The
consumption of beer and wine is restricted to the licensed premises.  The
restaurant may charge a corkage fee to the patron.  No more than one (1) 750
ml bottle of wine per patron or no more than thirty-six (36) ounces of beer
per patron (unopened) shall be permitted to be brought into the premises. 
The sale of beer, wine, spirits and all other types of alcoholic liquor to
patrons of the licensed premises shall be prohibited.  No package sales
shall be permitted.  The sale of beer, wine, spirits or other alcoholic
beverages (e.g., wine coolers, spirits, prepared mixed drinks, etc.) in
single cans or bottles, kegs or pitchers or any other form is prohibited. 
Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic liquor outside of the
premises, except for a re-corked wine bottle that has been sealed in a carry
out bag in accordance with state law.  235 ILCS 5/6-33.  The licensee,
on-site manager(s) or its BASSET- trained wait staff shall be responsible for
opening the beer or wine bottles or containers brought into the licensed
premises by patrons and may provide glasses to patrons as part of the service
of beer or wine to patrons.  The license fee for a Class M license shall be
two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00) per annum for 2017, and then two hundred
seventy dollars ($270.00) for 2018. No more than one (1) license of this
class shall be issued and in force at any one time.



(Ord. 4908, 6-16-14; Amd. Ord. 4964, 2-16-15; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16)



   14.   Class N License; Arts and Entertainment Studios:  A Class N
license shall entitle the licensee, an arts or entertainment studio, to
permit consumption of beer or wine only brought onto the premises of the arts
or entertainment studio by a patron 21 years of age or older for personal
consumption for consumption of other patrons who are 21 years of age or
older, while the patron(s) are also being served food.  The consumption of
beer and wine is restricted to the licensed premises. Such consumption shall
be limited to members of a group assembled on the premises for the purpose of
attending arts or crafts classes offered by an art studio, arts and crafts
school, while the licensee is conducting classes or a similar
leisure/entertainment business at which no classes are offered and
conducted.  No more than one (1) 750 ml bottle of wine per patron or no more
than thirty six (36) ounces of beer per patron (unopened) shall be permitted
to be brought into the premises.  The sale of beer, wine, spirits and all
other types of alcoholic liquor to patrons of the licensed premises shall be
prohibited.  No package sales shall be permitted. The sale of beer, wine,
spirits or other alcoholic beverages (e.g., wine coolers, spirits, prepared
mixed drinks, etc.) in single cans or bottles, kegs or pitchers or any other
form is prohibited.  Food must be served when alcoholic beverages are
available for consumption.  Such food may be prepared off site by a licensed
caterer or restaurant, and shall  be served in a manner which complies with
all applicable village codes and regulations.  The license fee for a Class N
license shall be two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00) per annum for 2017, and
then two hundred seventy dollars ($270.00) for 2018. No more than one (1)
license of this class shall be issued and in force at any one time.(Ord.
4908, 6-16-14; Amd. Ord. 4935, 10-6-14; Amd. Ord. 5136, 11-7-16; Amd. Ord.
5241, 11-20-17)



   15.   Class O License; Temporary Promotional License - Retail
Establishment:  A Class O license shall entitle the licensee, a retail
establishment that does not hold a liquor license, to serve beer or wine only
at a promotional or civic event.  Alcohol may only be served on the premises
owned or leased by the licensee.  All alcoholic beverage service and
consumption must take place within the area specified in the license.  There
may be no charge of any kind for the alcoholic beverage for non-profit civic
events.  Each event shall require a separate license and cannot last for
more than two (2) days.  No more than three (3) such promotions or events
for a particular licensee may be issued in any calendar year.  No employee
or other person under the age of twenty-one years of age may serve any
alcoholic beverage.  The licensee must execute a release and hold harmless
statement that is satisfactory to the Village and that absolutely releases
and absolved the Village, its officers, employees and agents from any
liability.  The license fee for a Class O license shall be $25.00 per day. 
No more than one (1) license of this class shall be issued and in force at
any one time. 



(Ord. 4908, 6-16-14; Amd. Ord. 4935, 10-6-14; Amd. Ord. 5412, 5-20-19)



7-4-7:  PAYMENT OF FEES:



   All license fees and initial license expense shall be payable in
advance, and at the time the application for the license is made.  Every
license shall expire on December 31 following its issuance, except the Class
F license which shall expire on the date therein specified.  Subject to the
initial license expense required under Section 7-4-8 of this Chapter, if
application is made after January 1 in any year for a new retail liquor
license, the sum required to be paid for the license for the balance of said
license year shall bear the same ratio to the sum required for the full year
that the number of months remaining, including the month of such application,
bears to the whole number of months in the license year, but in no instance
shall the adjusted license fee be less than one-half (1/2) of the total
applicable license fee.  All fees shall be paid to the office of the Village
President.  In the event a license is not issued, any license fees paid with
an application, except the initial license expense as required in Section
7-4-8 hereof, shall be refunded to an applicant.  All license fees collected
by the Village President shall be forthwith paid to the Village Treasurer and
the Village President shall keep a record of all licenses issued.



7-4-8:  INITIAL LICENSE EXPENSE:



   In connection with the first application of any person applying for a
license under this Chapter (whether or not the issuance of such license would
require an amendatory ordinance authorizing an increase in the number of
Class A, Class B, Class C and Class D licenses authorized to be issued), said
person shall pay at the time of such application a non-refundable initial
license expense of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in addition
to the license fees required in this Chapter.  The initial license expense
shall be for the purpose of defraying any and all costs which the Village may
incur as a result of the consideration and investigations of said
application.  The initial license expense shall be retained by the Village
regardless of whether or not the person is granted a license.



7-4-9:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:



   Every person desiring to engage in the business of selling alcoholic
liquor at retail shall make application for a license in writing on forms
furnished by the Village.  A separate application for each place of business
shall be made and filed with the Village President.  Each applicant shall
furnish under oath or affidavit the following information:



   1.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and respective addresses of the officers and directors.



   2.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.



   3.   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license.



   4.   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for
a similar other license on premises other than described in this application,
and the disposition of such application.



   5.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this Chapter, laws of this State or the ordinances of the
Village.



   6.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof,
or by the Federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.



   7.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws
of the State of Illinois or of the United States or any ordinance of the
Village in the conduct of his place of business.



   8.   The class of license desired by the applicant.



   9.   Whether applicant owns the premises for which a license is
sought, and if he does not, the name of his landlord and the period of his
lease, a complete and correct copy of the lease is to be attached to the
application.



   10.   Whether or not the applicant intends to manage and conduct the
business in person, and if not, the name of the manager or agent who is to
conduct the business to be carried on the premises for which the license is
sought.



   11.   In addition to the foregoing information, the application
shall contain such other information as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
may by rule or regulation prescribe. In addition, every application for a
license, whether new or renewal, shall be accompanied by a copy of the
applicant’s policy of dram shop insurance written by a responsible
insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in this state
insuring such applicant against liability as required under ILCS Ch. 235,
Act. 5, § 6-21, as amended from time to time. The applicant shall keep the
policy of insurance in full force and effect during the term of the license
(and any renewals), or shall provide a suitable substitute policy. Each such
policy shall contain a provision that it cannot be cancelled without ten
days’ prior written notice to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the
Village. Each such policy shall provide coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000, or such higher amounts as may be required by law. (Amd. Ord.
5368, 12-17-18)



   In case the application is made by a partnership, all partners must
sign the application and the information required by this Section shall be
furnished as to each partner.



   In case the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed
by the president and secretary of the corporation.



   Every application for a license, whether new or renewal, where the real
estate title of the premises is in a trustee, shall be accompanied by the
land trustee or a beneficiary of the trust, disclosing the names, residence
addresses and beneficial interest of each beneficiary as required by Illinois
Compiled Statutes, Act 765, chapter 405, section 2.



7-4-10:  BOND AND FORFEITURE:



   Each person desiring a Class H license or a Class J license under this
Chapter shall execute and submit with his application for such license a
penal bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) with a corporate
bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois as surety
thereon, said bond to name the Village as obligee and to be conditioned upon
the true and faithful compliance by said license with all provisions of this
Chapter.



   If a Class H or Class J licensee shall be convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter or his Class H or Class J license shall
be suspended for not more than thirty (30) days, as herein provided, or
revoked  and no appeal is taken from said order of suspension or revocation
or any appeal taken therefrom is decided adversely to the Class H or Class J
license, the bond required to be posted hereunder shall thereupon be
forfeited and the amount of said bond and costs thereon shall become due and
payable to the Village.



(Amd. Ord. 5408, 5-6-19)



7-4-11:  INVESTIGATIONS, REJECTION OR APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE:



   All applications for license under this Chapter shall be delivered to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.  It shall be the duty of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner to investigate and consider the application. 
For this purpose the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may enlist the aid of
the Chief of Police and any other Village officials or employees that he
deems necessary to complete the investigation.



   Upon completion of the investigation, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall approve or disapprove of the issuance of a license based
on said application.



7-4-12:  RENEWALS OF LICENSE:



   No license issued under the provisions hereof shall extend beyond
December 31 following the issuance thereof unless the same shall be renewed
upon the filing of an application for the renewal thereof and the approval of
such renewal in the manner provided in this Section.  Applications for the
renewal of licenses shall be filed with the Village President's office on or
before January 10, 1979, and thereafter, on or before



   November 15 preceding the expiration thereof.  Such application for
renewal shall be made under oath and shall be upon an application blank
prepared and furnished by the Village.  Each application for renewal shall
be treated and considered in the same manner as hereinabove provided for
original applications for license.



7-4-13:  POSTING LICENSES AND WARNINGS:



   Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and
hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises not later
than December 31 of each year for the next following year.  (Ord. 3493,
6-4-01)



   Every licensee shall post or cause to be posted in plain view, at every
location where alcoholic liquor is sold, a printed sign which shall read
substantially as follows:



      "WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS



      You are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the ordinances of
the Village of Orland Park if you purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic
liquor, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor."



      The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white
background and the letters of  "warning to persons under the age of 21
years" shall be at least one inch high.  (Ord. 3493, 6-4-01, Amd. Ord. 3595,
1-21-02)



7-4-13a:  DISPLAY OF BIRTH DEFECTS WARNING SIGN:



   Every holder of a retail license, whether the licensee sells or offers
for sale alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on or off the retail
license premises shall cause a sign with the message



      "GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN
SHOULD NOT DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF
BIRTH DEFECTS" to be framed and hung in plain view.  These signs shall be no
larger than 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches.  (Ord. 3493, 6-4-01)



7-4-14:  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:



   No license shall be issued to:



      (1)   A person who is not a resident of the village or the
county in which the premises covered by the license are located;



      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in
the community in which he resides;



      (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



      (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any
Federal or State law, unless the State Liquor Control Commission determines
that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust after considering matters set forth in such person's application and
the Commission's investigation;



      (5)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or
is keeping a house of ill fame;



      (6)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other
crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



      (7)   A person whose license issued under this Chapter or
state statute has been revoked for cause;



      (8)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of
any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a
first application;



      (9)   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or
any limited partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder;



      (10)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director
thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
5% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within
the Village;



      (10a)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois,
or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business
Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in Illinois;



      (11)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required by the licensee;



      (12)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any
Federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of this Act or has forfeited his
bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;



      (13)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued;(11/04)



      (14)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of
local liquor control commission, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city
council or commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any
member of a village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county
board; and no such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture,
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may be granted
to such official in relation to premises which are not located within the
territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of
such license is approved by the State Liquor Control Commission;



      (15)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business
to be operated by the licensee;



      (16)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense
as proscribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of Section 28-1
of, or as proscribed by Section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961,
or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions; and



      (17)   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has
been issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is
eligible to be issued a license under the Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull
Tabs and Jar Games Act.



      (18)   A person, firm or corporation whose place of business
is an “adult use” as defined in Section 2-102 of the Village Land
Development Code.



(Ord. 3493, 6-4-01; Amd. Ord. 4893, 4-7-14)



7-4-15:  OPENING AND CLOSING HOURS:



   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class A, C, E or F license, as
defined in Section 7-4-6 of this Chapter, to sell or offer for sale at retail
any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in the Village between:



      1.   The hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. on week days; and



      2.   The hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock
(11:00) A. M. on Sundays, except that the opening hour on Sundays for golf
courses shall be ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.  (Ord. 3593, 1-21-02; Amd. Ord.
5308, 6-18-18)



   It shall be unlawful for a holder of a Class B or Class D license, as
defined in Section 7-4-6 of this Chapter, to make any package sales of
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer at retail before seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. and
after eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. on weekdays and before nine o'clock (9:00)
a.m. and after eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. on Sundays.  It shall be unlawful
for a holder of a Class L license, Class N license or Class O license, as
defined in Section 7-4-6 of this Chapter, to sell, offer for sale at retail,
or permit patrons to consume alcoholic liquor in the Village between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) p.m. and eleven o'clock (11:00) a.m. It shall be
unlawful for a holder of a Class M license, as defined in Section 7-4-6 of
this Chapter, to permit patrons to consume alcoholic liquor in the Village
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on
week days and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock
(11:00) A. M. on Sundays. (Ord. 3593, 1-21-02; Amd. Ord. 4428, 11-3-08; Amd.
Ord. 4606, 12-6-10; Amd. Ord. 4908, 6-16-14)



   In the event the premises remain open after the prohibited hours to
conduct business other than the sale of alcoholic liquor, then during a
period of one hour after the prohibited hours for the sale of alcoholic
liquor, no person, licensee, agent or employee of any licensee, shall be
present or permitted behind any bar, counter or table where alcoholic liquor
is sold, dispensed or given away.  After the prohibited hours for the sale
of alcoholic liquor, every person on the premises of any licensee who has a
license to sell alcoholic liquor, shall have twenty (20) minutes to consume
any alcoholic liquor that has been served to them before closing hours. 
During this time there shall be allowed only one drink per person of any
alcoholic liquor.  After this twenty (20) minute period, it shall be the
responsibility of the licensee to clear all tables, bars or counters of any
alcoholic liquor, except that a movie theater licensee shall clear all tables
of alcoholic liquor within twenty (20) minutes following the conclusion of
the motion picture being viewed at the closing hour. 



The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may for special events and occasions
permit a licensee, upon written application of said licensee, to sell or
offer for sale at retail alcoholic liquor during the aforesaid prohibited
hours; provided, that said privilege shall at no time permit any licensee to
sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor between:



   1.   The hours of four o'clock (4:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. on week days; and



   2.   The hours of four o'clock (4:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. on Sundays. 



(Ord. 1375, 9-24-84; Amd. Ord. 5432, 9-3-19)



7-4-16:  LICENSE LIMITATIONS:



   Any license issued hereunder shall be purely a personal privilege to
expire not later than December 31 next after the issuance unless sooner
revoked as provided in this Chapter, and such license shall not constitute
property nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution nor
shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, nor
shall it be subject to be encumbered or hypothecated.  Such license shall
not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall
cease and terminate upon the death of the licensee.  Such license shall also
cease and terminate upon the insolvency or bankruptcy of any licensee. 
Provided, however, that the executor or administrator of the estate of any
deceased licensee or the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business
of the sale at retail of such alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate
court and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or
bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or insolvency or
bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but no longer than six (6)
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such license.  (Ord.
911, 12-18-78)



7-4-17:  RETAIL SALES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS:



   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church; school other than an
institution of higher learning; hospital; home for veterans, their spouses or
children; or any military or naval station provided that this prohibition
shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic
liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business
so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to the taking
effect of this Section, nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at
retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any
church or school where such church or school has been established within such
one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license.  In all
the cases enumerated in this Section, the distance of one hundred feet (100')
shall be measured from the nearest part of any building and not to property
boundaries.



   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority
of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business
transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks
for such minors.  (Ord. 3493, 6-4-01; Amd. Ord. 4606, 12-6-10)



7-4-18:  SALE OR DISCONTINUANCE OF BUSINESS; CONTINUATION OF LICENSE:



   In the event any licensee shall sell the business or discontinue
operation for a period of more than thirty (30) days (except closings for
remodeling and repairs), or any partnership or corporation shall be
dissolved, such license shall terminate forthwith.  Except however, other
than in the case of the termination of a partnership or the dissolution of a
corporation, a licensee may continue said license in full force and effect;
provided, that the Local Liquor Control Commissioner is notified by the
licensee within forty (40) days from the date of the sale of said business or
its discontinuance of a desire to maintain said license, and the licensee
otherwise complies with all applicable provisions of this Chapter and
designates a location within the Village acceptable to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner as the address or location of said license.



7-4-19:  CHANGE OF LOCATION:



   A retail liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only
in the premises described in the application and license.  Such locations
may be changed only upon the written application to make such change and
approval thereof issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.  No change
of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper
one for retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this State and the
ordinances of the Village.  (Ord. 911, 12-18-78)



7-4-20:  CHANGES IN PERSONNEL:



   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly, beneficially or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership
or control, more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest,
or managers of establishments licensed under this Chapter, shall be reported
in writing to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within ten (10) days of
the change.  All new personnel shall meet all the standards of this Chapter
and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license.  All such changes in
personnel shall be subject to review by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.



   Upon notification of any change in partnership, officers, directors,
persons holding directly, beneficially or through any form of indirect or
concealed ownership or control, more than five percent (5%) of the stock or
ownership interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this
Chapter, the Local Liquor Control



   Commissioner shall, at his discretion, investigate and consider the
changes in personnel, to determine whether they qualify to hold a liquor
license.  The licensee shall be required to pay to the Village, as and for
the investigation, the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each change
in partnerships, officers, directors and persons holding directly,
beneficially or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership or
control, more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest.  A
licensee shall further be required to pay the sum of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) for the investigation of each and every manager of
establishments licensed under this Chapter when a change in personnel occurs.



   Upon investigation and review by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner,
any changes in personnel shall be subject to the following:



      1.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a
change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is
not eligible to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate.



      2.   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a
change takes place in officers, directors, persons holding directly,
beneficially or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership or
control, more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest, or
managers of establishments, to one who is not eligible for a license, said
license shall terminate.



      3.   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no
longer eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.  (Ord. 1496,
1-13-86)



7-4-20a:  CHANGE IN CORPORATE NAME:



   In the event that a corporation holding a liquor license shall change
its name or the name under which it does business in the Village, it shall
file an Application for Change of Corporate/Business Name with the Liquor
Control Commissioner with a fee of $25.00.  (Ord. 3861, 4-5-04)



7-4-20b:  CHANGE IN CORPORATION:



   In the event that a corporation holding a liquor license shall be
dissolved and a new corporation formed with the same or different officers,
the license held by the dissolved corporation shall be terminated and the new
corporation shall apply for a new liquor license pursuant to this Chapter and
pay the initial license fees.  To the extent that the officers of the new
corporation are the same as the officers of the terminated corporation, the
initial license fees established in Section 7-4-8 of this Chapter may be
reduced by the Liquor Control Commissioners.  (Ord. 3861, 4-5-04)



7-4-20c:  CHANGE IN CORPORATE PARENT:



   In the event that a corporation holding a liquor license is a
subsidiary of a parent corporation and the parent corporation's officers
change or the parent corporation changes but the corporation holding the
liquor license does not change and its officers do not change, a letter
stating the changes in the parent corporation or its officers shall be filed
with the Liquor Control Commissioner.  (Ord. 3861, 4-5-04)



7-4-20d:  CHANGE IN CORPORATE OFFICERS AFTER CHANGE IN CORPORATE PARENT:



   In the event that, after a change in a corporate parent as set forth in
7-4-20c, above, there is a change of 5% or more of the corporate officers of
the corporation holding the liquor license, the license shall be terminated,
a new application shall be filed, and the initial license fees shall be
paid.  (Ord. 3861, 4-5-04)



7-4-20e:  LOSS, THEFT OR DESTRUCTION OF LIQUOR LICENSE:



   In the event that a valid liquor license is stolen or destroyed, the
licensee shall submit to the Liquor Control Commissioner an Affidavit of Loss
and a fee of $15.00, and a new license, valid for the same activities and
time period as the lost, stolen or destroyed license, shall be issued. 
(Ord. 3861, 4-5-04)



7-4-21:  PEDDLING PROHIBITED:



   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village.



7-4-22:  SANITARY CONDITIONS:



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in full compliance with
the Village ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the
storage or sale of food for human consumption.



7-4-23:  CONDUCT OF LICENSEE:



   Every person and club licensed under this Chapter shall be subject to
the following regulations:



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to tend bar and/or draw, pour, open or mix alcoholic liquor in any
licensed retail premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years to dispense, sell or deliver any alcoholic
liquor in the original package, bottle or case for consumption off the
premises of any licensed establishment.  Except for the provisions in this
Section, it shall be lawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or
older to work in a licensed premises, and to serve alcoholic liquor.



   Every licensee shall conduct his place of business in a quiet, decent
and respectable manner and shall eject therefrom or refuse admittance thereto
all persons rendering themselves objectionable or undesirable by reason of
undue noise or other acts disturbing the peace.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member,
agent, representative or employee of such licensee to give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor or intoxicating beverages to a person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.  Soliciting of drinks or prostitution is prohibited.



   Every licensee, officer, associate, member, agent, representative or
employee of such licensee shall immediately report to the Village police any
act by a person or patron rendering himself objectionable, causing undue
noise or disturbance, breach of peace or unusual conduct.



   No licensee, officer, associate, member, agent, representative or
employee of such licensee shall allow any loud or boisterous talking, or
obscene or profane language, quarreling, singing, fighting or other
disturbance of persons passing along any street or public square in the
vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the peace and quiet of persons
doing business or residing in the neighborhood thereof.



   All licensees, officers, associates, members, agents, representatives
or employees of such licensee dispensing or serving food or alcoholic liquor
shall be decently clothed.  Topless or similar type of attire is prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter, waitress
or entertainer to:



      1.   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or



      2.   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or



      3.   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any waiter,
waitress or entertainer to commit any of the unlawful acts in this Section. 
A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if such
person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is
paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the
activity is performed.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of,
any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be unlawful for
any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in
or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit any species
of gambling in his premises or any part thereof or any place adjacent thereto
under his control. 



   It shall be unlawful for anyone not having a license which provides for
consumption on the premises where sold, to offer for sale, deliver or donate
any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, or to permit the same
to be consumed on the premises where sold, delivered or donated. 



   It shall be unlawful to consume or permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor in public restaurants, catering establishments or other places of
public gathering not having the appropriate liquor license. Any person, firm,
corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to
comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this
Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B for each offense. 



(Ord. 4908, 6-16-14; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-4-24:  SALES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE, HABITUAL DRUNKARDS, SPENDTHRIFTS
AND MENTAL INCOMPETENTS:



   No licensee nor any officer, shareholder, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine to any intoxicated person or to any
person known by him to be an habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally
ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment.  No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty one
(21) years except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.



   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such
alcoholic liquor nor have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.



   The possession and dispensing to, or consumption by, a minor of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, is
not prohibited by this Section. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists
enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction
be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each
offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-4-24-1:  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:



   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase,
receive or accept as a gift, nor consume any alcoholic liquor, or have any
alcoholic liquor in his or her possession within the Village; provided
however, the possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under the
age of twenty one (21) years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony is not prohibited by this Section.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located
within the Village to allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to remain on such premises while in possession of alcoholic liquor or while
consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this Section.



   It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years to allow such person to purchase,
receive, consume or possess alcoholic liquor in violation of this Section
upon either public or private property within the Village.



   Each violation with respect to possession and/or consumption by a
person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be punishable by a fine
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted.



(Ord. 3595, 1-21-02; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-4-24-2:  EVIDENCE OF AGE REQUIRED



   Each licensee and any officer, shareholder, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee shall refuse to sell, deliver or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21
years.  "Adequate written evidence" shall be a document issued by a federal,
state, county or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof,
including but not limited to a motor vehicle operator's license or an
identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces.  If a person
presents a motor vehicle operator's license from a state other than Illinois,
a second form of identification shall be shown.  The second form may be a
school, library, employee identification or similar card and must be
consistent with the motor vehicle license shown.  (Ord. 3595, 1-21-02)



7-4-25:  REVOCATION OF LICENSE; NOTICE; HEARING:



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend for not more than
thirty (30) days, or revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of the Liquor Control Act of the State of Illinois or the
provisions of this Chapter or any applicable rules or regulations established
by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission or any applicable rules or
regulations established by said Local Liquor Control Commissioner.



   No such license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public
hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a three (3) day written
notice sent to the licensee prior to the hearing affording said licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend; provided, however, that if the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason
for such conclusion and without notice or hearing order the licensed premises
closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity
to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be
engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed
premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses.



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within ten (10) days after
such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be
revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a
written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of the order
within ten (10) days upon the licensee.



   The licensee, after the receipt of the order of suspension or
revocation shall have the privilege within a period of twenty (20) days after
the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation of appealing the order
to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, and upon the filing of such an
appeal by the licensee he may resume his business until such time as the
Illinois Liquor Control Commissioner shall render a decision either
sustaining the order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or reversing
the order.



7-4-26:  COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION; HEARING:



   Any five (5) residents of the Village shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner stating that any
licensee licensed hereunder has been or is violating the provisions of the
Liquor Control Act of the State of Illinois or the provisions of this Chapter
or any rules or regulations issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining.  The complaint
shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have
been violated and the facts in detail upon which such belief is based.  If
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged, there is
reasonable cause for such belief, he shall set the matter for hearing and
shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing
and of the particular charge in the complaint.



7-4-27:  LICENSES AND PERMITS PREVIOUSLY ISSUED:



   All licenses and permits for the sale of alcoholic liquor issued and in
force on the effective date hereof are continued in force for the period and
for the purpose for which they were issued, subject to the regulatory
provisions and conditions of this Chapter.  (Ord. 911, 12-18-78)



7-4-28:  PROHIBITED SALE OR PROMOTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:



   All licensees selling alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on
the licensed premises are prohibited from engaging in any of the following
enumerated practices:



      1.   No licensee, employee or agent of a licensee shall:



         (a)   Sell, offer or deliver to any person or persons
any drinks sold on the basis of two (2) or more drinks for the price of one
drink.



         (b)   Sell, offer or deliver to any person an unlimited
number of drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the public or full meal (banquet packages) and
hors d'oeuvres packages which are open to the public.



         (c)   Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages
contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price charged for
such drink during the same calendar week.



         (d)   Encourage or permit any game or contest which
involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes on the licensed
premises.



   2.   No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether
within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited
under this Section.



      The prohibition contained herein shall not prohibit liquor
licensees from:



      (a)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time.



      (b)   Including a drink as part of a meal package.



      (c)   Free wine tastings.



      (d)   Offering room services to registered guests in hotels
licensed for such services.



   Licensees should make nonalcoholic beverages available for purchase by
any person, and licensees should make coffee available for purchase by any
person during the licensee's hours of operation. 



   3.   No licensee, employee, independent contractor or agent of a
licensee shall:



      (a)   Sell, offer or deliver to any person or persons any
alcoholic beverages by way of "on  demand" delivery as defined in section
7-4-28.3(b).



      (b)   "On demand" delivery is hereby defined to include any
intrastate delivery service whereby consumers order goods, either directly
from a vendor or through a third party, for delivery to a location and the
delivery is effectuated within twelve (12) hours after the order was made.



(Ord. 1831, 12-5-88; Amd. Ord. 5203, passed 7-17-17)



7-4-29:  WINE, BEER AND SPIRITS SAMPLING AND TASTING



   1.   Class B



   Any Class B licensed retail location may conduct wine, beer or spirits
sampling or tasting for its bona fide customers upon application to the Local
Liquor Commissioner and payment of a $250.00 fee for a wine/beer/spirits
sampling license.  A wine, beer or spirits sampling license shall authorize
the holder to give or sell to bona fide customers up to twelve ounces of wine
a day, up to twelve ounces of beer a day, or up to .75 ounces of spirits a
day.  Product sampling shall be conducted in an area of the license location
that shall not exceed 150 square feet or 10% of the location's area,
whichever is smaller.



   A Class B licensed retail location with a wine/beer/spirits sampling
license may conduct group wine tasting, group beer tasting or group spirits
tasting events at which a single admission fee permits customers to taste up
to twelve samples of wine over a three hour period, each sample not to exceed
one ounce; to taste up to twelve samples of beer over a three hour period,
each sample not to exceed one ounce; or to taste up to three samples of
spirits over a three hour period, each sample not to exceed 1/4 (0.25) ounce.



   A Class B licensee may conduct a one-day wine sampling event, a one-day
beer sampling event or a one-day spirits sampling event at its licensed
premises or any other licensed premises upon application to the Local Liquor
Commissioner and payment of a $25.00 fee for a one-day wine sampling license,
one-day beer sampling license or one-day spirits sampling license.  Not more
than two one-day licensed wine sampling, beer sampling or spirits sampling
events may be held in any one calendar year.



   2.   Class D



   Any Class D licensed retail location may conduct wine or beer sampling
or tasting for its bona fide customers upon application to the Local Liquor
Commissioner and payment of a $250.00 fee for a wine/beer sampling license. 
A wine or beer sampling license shall authorize the holder to give or sell to
bona fide customers up to twelve ounces of wine a day, or up to twelve ounces
of beer a day.  Product sampling shall be conducted in an area of the
license location that shall not exceed 150 square feet or 10% of the
location's area, whichever is smaller.



   A Class D licensed retail location with a wine/beer sampling license
may conduct group wine tasting or group beer tasting events at which a single
admission fee permits customers to taste up to twelve samples of wine over a
three hour period, each sample not to exceed one ounce or to taste up to
twelve samples of beer over a three hour period, each sample not to exceed
one ounce.



   A Class D licensee may conduct a one-day wine sampling event or a
one-day beer sampling event at its licensed premises or any other licensed
premises upon application to the Local Liquor Commissioner and payment of a
$25.00 fee for a one-day wine sampling license or one-day beer sampling
license.  Not more than two one-day licensed wine sampling or beer sampling
events may be held in any one calendar year.



   3.   Other regulations



   Notwithstanding Section 7-4-5 of this Chapter, the service of food
shall not be required during wine sampling, beer sampling, spirits sampling,
group wine tasting, group beer tasting, or group spirits tasting events. 
Other provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to wine sampling and
wine tasting licenses and events, to beer sampling and beer tasting licenses
and events, and to spirits sampling and spirits tasting licenses and events.



   For purposes of this Section, the phrase "bona fide customer" shall
mean a customer whom the licensee reasonably expects will make a purchase of
wine, beer or spirits in the near future.



(Ord. 3725, 1-20-03; Amd. Ord. 4473, 4-6-09; Amd. Ord. 4739, 6-18-12; Amd.
Ord. 4907, 6-16-14)



CHAPTER 5
SOLICITORS



SECTION:



7-5-1:   Definitions



7-5-2:   Licensing of Soliciting: Required; Exemptions



7-5-3:   Application for License



7-5-4:   Issuance and Denial of Licenses



7-5-5:   License Fees



7-5-6:   Regulation of Solicitors for Funds (Repealed by Ord. 5420,
7-15-19)



7-5-7:   Badge Required



7-5-8:   Policy on Soliciting



7-5-9:   Restrictions Applicable to All Soliciting



7-5-10:   Street Solicitation (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-1:   Exception (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-2:   Eligibility (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-3:   Age; Vest Required (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-4:   Dates Permitted (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-5:   Locations; Hours (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-6:   Application (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-7:   Number of Solicitations (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-8:   Locations to be Indicated (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-9:   Permits (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-10:   Regulations Added to Others (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-11:   Penalty (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-11:   Revocation of Licenses



7-5-12:   Penalties



7-5-13:   Street Solicitation



7-5-13-1:   Exception



7-5-13-2:   Eligibility



7-5-13-3:   Age; Vest Required



7-5-13-4:   Dates Permitted



7-5-13-5:   Locations; Hours



7-5-13-6:   Application



7-5-13-7:   Number of Solicitations



7-5-13-8:   Locations to be Indicated



7-5-13-9:   Permits



7-5-13-10:   Regulations Added to Others



7-5-13-11:   Penalty



7-5-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   Canvasser: Any person going from door-to-door to engage in purely
expressive speech such as advocacy for a particular religion, philosophy,
ideology, political party, issue, candidate, or other case.



   Charitable Purpose: Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
eleemosynary purpose and includes the conduct described in Section 480.20(c)
of The Charitable Trust Act (14 Ill. Adm. Code 480).



   Person: Person shall mean any individual, organization, group,
association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any combination thereof.



   Political Purpose: Any activity in support of bona fide candidates for
public office, or any matter related to the election, nomination, or
performance of public officials, or issues presented to the electorate at any
election.



   Residence: Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied
for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any
type of building or structure and the yard or grounds upon which such
structure is located.



   Solicitor: Any person, firm or corporation traveling by foot, vehicle,
or any type of conveyance who goes from residence to residence, business to
business, or place to place, within the Village and without appointment, for
the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, subscriptions, or services of any kind,
characters or description whatsoever; peddling (providing the article or
thing at the time of any transaction); making or requesting appointments,
procuring interviews, or arranging for demonstrating or explanations
preliminary to any actual solicitation of orders, selling, peddling or
hawking; or engaging in other similar activities involving commerce or trade,
or the sale of any commercial item. This definition also includes any person
who, without invitation, goes upon private property to request contribution
of funds or anything of value, or to sell goods or services for political,
charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes.



   Street Solicitation: The act of any person standing in or on any
street, roadway, highway, or intersection within the Village of Orland Park
for the purpose of requesting directly or indirectly, money, credit,
property, financial assistance, or other thing of value from the occupant of
any vehicle.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-2:  LICENSING OF SOLICITING; REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:



   A.   Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in the business of soliciting in the Village without
first having a license as herein provided.  Notwithstanding the fact that a
group may have several solicitors in the Village at one time, a separate
application shall be filled out and submitted to the Village for each
individual solicitor and each individual solicitor shall be required to
obtain a separate license. A license shall not be issued to any individual
under the age of fourteen (14).



   B.   The following are exempt from the licensing provisions set out
in 7-5-2:



      1.   A person seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any
resident or business, an indication of the occupant’s belief in regard to
any political or religious matter;



      2.   A person conducting a survey or poll, or seeking
signatures of Village residents for a petition, such as a zoning or election
petition;



      3.   A person engaging in solicitation at the invitation or
request of the person the solicitor contacts;



      4.   A person carrying, conveying, delivering, or transporting
goods, wares, foodstuff, merchandise, newspapers, or services on regularly
established routes or to the premises of any person who had ordered such
products or goods and is entitled to receive them;



      5.   Minors engaged in fundraising activities to support: (1)
a federally chartered charitable organization (such as Girl Scouts or Boy
Scouts of America); (2) an activity organized and operated by a public or
private school or unit of local government; (3) an organization organized as
a Not For Profit entity and registered with the State of Illinois as a
Charitable Organization; or (4) a similar Not For Profit organization that
has a chapter or club based in the Village of Orland Park, as approved by the
Village Manager; and



      6.   A canvasser.



   C.   Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations
set forth in this Chapter or from the payment of a license fee shall cite to
the Village Clerk the statute or other legal authority under which exemption
is claimed and shall present the Village Clerk proof of qualification for
such exemption.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-3:  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:



   A.     Any person desiring a solicitation license shall initially
submit an application in writing to the Chief of Police.



   B.   The application for a license shall be made under oath upon a
form provided by the Chief of Police.  Each original application shall be
completed by the applicant in full and shall set forth:



      1.   The applicant's name, address and zip code, a copy of the
applicant's current driver's license or state issued identification card,
date of birth, sex, and a physical description of the applicant;



      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the person,
firm, corporation, association or organization whom the applicant is employed
by or represents, and the length of time of such employment or representation;



      3.   A description sufficient for identification of the
subject matter of the soliciting in which solicitor applicants will engage.



      4.   The period of time (not to exceed 30 days) for which the
license is applied.



      5.   Evidence that the applicant is authorized to solicit for
the organization represented;



      6.   Evidence of compliance with the Illinois Solicitation for
Charities Act, as applicable;



      7.   Information, including the date(s), regarding any prior
application or use of a solicitation license by the applicant in the Village,
and any revocation of a previously issued solicitation license by the Village;



      8.   Information as to whether a solicitation license has been
previously issued to the applicant by any other jurisdiction, and if so,
whether the license was ever revoked;



      9.   Information regarding any conviction of a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter, its predecessor, or the ordinance of
any other Illinois municipality, or any Illinois Statute, regulating
soliciting;



      10.   Information regarding any conviction of any felony or
misdemeanor involving dishonesty, theft, fraud, false statements, a threat to
public safety, or a crime involving a sex offense, or offenses involving
bodily harm against persons under the laws of this State or any other state
or federal law of the United States within five (5) years of the date of the
license application.



      11.   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same,
together with license number or other means of identification.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-4:  ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF LICENSES:



   A.   Upon receipt of a completed application, the Chief of Police
shall review the application and all supporting documentation, and shall
cause an investigation to be made as to the applicant's criminal record, if
any, and compliance with all of the applicable laws and ordinances of the
State and the Village. 



   B.   Within ten (10) working days of receiving the application, the
Chief of Police shall issue a solicitation license if a determination is made
that:



      1.   The material statements made in the application are true;



      2.   The applicant had not been convicted of any felony or
misdemeanor involving dishonesty, theft, fraud, false statements, a threat to
public safety, or a crime involving sex offense, or offenses involving bodily
harm against persons under the laws of this State or any other state or
federal law of the United States within five (5) years of the date of the
permit application;



      3.   The applicant has not had a previously issued
solicitation license revoked by the Village or by any other municipality
within five (5) years of the date of the application.



   C.   If the Chief of Police determines and finds that the applicant
has not met one (1) or more of the above conditions, the Chief of Police
shall deny issuance of the solicitation license and shall give written
notification of such denial to the applicant. Such notice shall be delivered
in person or by U.S. mail, addressed to the residence address set forth in
the license application, stating the action taken and the reasons supporting
such action.



   D.   If the Chief of Police fails, within ten (10) business days of
receipt of the license application, to act on the application, then, provided
that the license fee has been paid, as applicable, the application shall be
considered granted. 



   E.   The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his or her office
an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with
all other information and data pertaining thereto and all licenses issued
under the provisions of this Chapter, and of the denial of applications. 
Applications for licenses shall be numbered in consecutive order, as filed,
and every license issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the
application upon which it was issued.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-5:  LICENSE FEES:



   To reimburse the Village for the cost of a criminal background check
and the cost of administering the solicitation licensing process, the fee
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), each license to be valid for no more
than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance. The validity of the license
originally issued may be extended up to two (2) times, in thirty (30)
increments, for a total duration of no more than ninety (90) days. Each
thirty (30) day extension must be applied for in writing, or by email, to the
Police Department prior to the expiration of a thirty (30) day license
period. The extension will be granted unless the Chief of Police determines
that the solicitor has committed a violation of a provision of this Chapter
as hereinafter provided. A solicitor whose license has expired may apply for
a new license in accordance with this Chapter and presentation of his/her
badge to the Police Department for inspection.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-6:  REGULATION OF SOLICITORS FOR FUNDS:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-7:  BADGE REQUIRED:



   It shall be the duty of any person engaging in soliciting within the
Village to wear in a conspicuous place on his or her outer garment the badge
issued by the Chief of Police.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in soliciting within the Village without wearing and displaying such
badge.  Every solicitor shall, prior to engaging in soliciting regulated
under this Chapter, be issued a badge bearing the words "Registered Orland
Park" or words of similar impact, together with a serial number, which number
shall be registered by the Chief of Police.  As a condition to receiving
such badge and to secure its return, such solicitor shall deposit with the
Village the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00).  Each solicitor, upon expiration
of his/her license to solicit in the Village, shall surrender the badge to
the Chief of Police and upon doing so the Village shall refund the fifty
dollar ($50.00) dollar deposit.  If the badge is not so returned, or is
returned in damaged condition to the extent that it cannot be reused, said
deposit shall be forfeited to the Village.  In the event any such badge is
lost, stolen or destroyed, a report of such fact shall be made to the Chief
of Police and the deposit shall be forfeited to the Village.  Failure to
return a badge or returning it in a damaged condition shall be cause for the
Chief of Police to deny a future solicitor license to the solicitor for a
period of up to one (1) year and to increase the deposit for future badges to
one hundred dollars ($100.00).Failure to report the loss or destruction of a
badge shall be cause to deny a future license to solicit.



(Ord. 3784, 8-4-03; Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-8:  POLICY ON SOLICITING:



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the corporate authorities of
the Village that the occupant or occupants of the residences in the Village
shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be,
invited to their respective residences.  If no determination is made, as is
provided in Section 7-5-8 hereof, then, in the event, the solicitation is
permitted.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-9:  RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITING:



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person:



      1.   To continue soliciting or canvassing upon any premises or
residence located thereon after having been requested by the owner or
occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence.



      2.   To solicit or canvass upon any premises or residence
located thereon if such premises or residence posted against solicitation, or
against certain types of solicitation, by means of a notice, prominently
displayed upon which is printed the legend:



         "Only Solicitors Registered in Orland Park Invited"



         or



         "No Solicitors Invited" (A limited supply of “No
Solicitors Invited” Notices are available for Village Residents at the
front desk of the Police Department for no charge.)



         or



         “No Canvassers”



         or



         "Charitable Organization Solicitors Only"



         or



         "Not For Profit Organization Solicitors Only"



         For purposes of the preceding sentence, a dwelling house,
apartment or other place of residence shall be deemed to be posted against
solicitation or posted against certain types of solicitation, if there is
exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near the
main door to any residence located thereon, a sign at least three inches (3")
by four inches (4") in size and with letter at least three-eights inch (3/8")
in height, which bears one of the above legends.



      3.   To use any plan, scheme or ruse, or to make any
statements, which indicates or implies that the purpose of such person's
solicitation is other than to obtain orders for or to make sales of goods or
services.



      4.   To misrepresent the right of a buyer to rescind or cancel
a sale under the provisions of applicable law.



      5.   To cheat, deceive, or fraudulently misrepresent, whether
through himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the
Village.



      6.   To interfere with vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
traffic on any public right-of-way, or within one hundred feet (100') of the
intersection of any public right-of-way or driveway.



   B.   It shall not be unlawful for any person regardless of having a
license under this Chapter to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon
or near any door of a residence located thereon or rap or knock upon the door
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, as herein defined, prior
to nine o'clock (9:00) a.m. or after seven o'clock (7:00) p.m. Monday through
Saturday or at any time on a Sunday or a State or National holiday.



   C.   It shall be unlawful for a person engaging in soliciting in the
Village or Orland Park to hide or fail to conspicuously display his/her
registration badge.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-10:  STREET SOLICITATION:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-1:  EXCEPTION:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-2:  ELIGIBILITY:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-3:  AGE; VEST REQUIRED:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-4:  DATES PERMITTED:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-5:  LOCATIONS; HOURS:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-6:  APPLICATION:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-7:  NUMBER OF SOLICITATIONS:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-8:  LOCATIONS TO BE INDICATED:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-9:  PERMITS:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-10:  REGULATIONS ADDED TO OTHERS:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-10-11:  PENALTY:



   (Repealed by Ord. 5393, 3-8-19)



7-5-11:  REVOCATION OF LICENSES:



   A.   The Village Manager and/or Chief of Police may revoke a
solicitation license after finding that any of the following causes exists,
but not before the licensee or registrant has been given at least ten (10)
days' notice of hearing on the violations and revocation of the license.  At
said hearing the licensee and his or her attorney may present and submit
evidence and witnesses in licensee's defense.



      1.   Violates any of the provisions of this Chapter;



      2.   Has made a false statement or misrepresentation in the
license application;



      3.   Perpetrates a fraud or misrepresentation in the course of
conducting solicitation activities;



      4.   Transfers any solicitation license to a person other than
the person for whom the license was issued;



      5.   Uses or allows the use of a solicitation license by any
person other than the person to whom the license was issued;



      6.   Conducts solicitation activities in an unlawful manner or
in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or in such a way as to
constitute a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public; or



      7.   Is convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving
dishonesty, theft, fraud, false statements, a threat to public safety, or a
crime involving sex offense, or offenses involving bodily harm against
persons under the laws of this State or any other state or federal law of the
United States subsequent to the issuance of a solicitation license.



   B.   In addition, in the event that the Chief of Police becomes
aware that any licensee under this Chapter has been charged with any offense
that would have disqualified that applicant from receiving a license, the
Chief of Police shall notify the licensee of the Village's intent to conduct
a hearing to revoke the license in question.



(Amd. Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-12:  PENALTIES:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17; Amd .Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13:  STREET SOLICITATION:



   Except as expressly permitted below, no person may stand in or on any
street, roadway, highway, or intersection within the Village of Orland Park
for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-1:  EXCEPTION:



   A permit may be granted as outlined below, to certain charitable
organizations to solicit contributions from the occupants of stopped vehicles
at certain signalized intersections within the Village of Orland Park.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-2:  ELIGIBILITY:



   Charitable organizations eligible to apply for solicitation permits
shall be (1) registered with the Attorney General as a charitable
organization as provided by the Illinois Solicitation for Charities Act, 225
ILCS 460/1 et seq.; (2) engaged in a statewide fund raising activity; and (3)
liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation
which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting
agent.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-3:  AGE; VEST REQUIRED:



   Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be eighteen (18)
years of age or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-4:  DATES PERMITTED:



   No charitable organization may conduct more than one (1) street
solicitation fundraiser of up to two (2) consecutive days in length per year.
Permits may only be requested for dates between April 1 and November 15,
inclusive.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-5:  LOCATIONS; HOURS:



   Based on the safety of potential solicitors and the safety of
motorists, and considering the safe and orderly flow of traffic,
solicitations may be permitted during daylight hours, but not later than
seven o'clock (7:00) p.m. Central Time, and only at signalized intersections
within the corporate limits of the Village. 



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-6:  APPLICATION:



   Applications for permits for street solicitation shall be made at least
thirty (30) days, but no more than one (1) year, in advance of the earliest
date requested.  Applications shall be submitted to the Village Clerk, upon
the form designed by the Clerk therefor.  Applications shall be accompanied
by indications of compliance with the eligibility requirements above and a
certificate of insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 per
claim and $2,000,000.00 per occurrence, indemnifying and holding the Village
of Orland Park harmless for negligent acts of the organization's solicitors
resulting in injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which
is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting
agent.  The certificate of insurance covering the actual date(s) of
solicitation must be provided to the Village Clerk at least thirty (30) days
before the earliest requested solicitation date.  Applications shall include
the name, address and local telephone number of the applying organization and
the name and telephone number of the local contact person.  The Village
Clerk may from time to time amend the application and/or permit forms within
the limitations of this Section 7-5-13.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-7:  NUMBER OF SOLICITATIONS:



   No more than one (1) qualifying organization may be granted a permit to
solicit contributions from the occupants of stopped vehicles on any date.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-8:  LOCATIONS TO BE INDICATED:



   Applications for permits shall indicate the locations at which
solicitations are proposed, and the date(s) requested.  Solicitation shall
not occur at any time or in any location not indicated in the permit issued.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-9:  PERMITS:



   The Village Clerk shall issue a permit to organizations meeting the
application requirements of this Section, subject to the limitations above. 
However, if two (2) or more organizations apply for permits for the same
dates, the Clerk shall resolve the conflict, based upon the date and time of
application.  All solicitors for organizations shall carry, and show on
request, a copy of their organization's permit for street solicitation.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-10:  REGULATIONS ADDED TO OTHERS:



   The requirements of this Section shall be in addition to and not in
place of any other charitable solicitation permit requirements of the Village
of Orland Park and this Code.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



7-5-13-11:  PENALTY:



   Any person or organization, charitable or other, violating the
prohibition of this Section against street solicitation except as expressly
permitted shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.  Each day of
violation, and each violating solicitor at each violating location shall be
considered a separate offense under this Section.  Prior violations shall be
considered valid cause to deny subsequent permit applications.



(Ord. 5420, 7-15-19)



CHAPTER 6
AMUSEMENT DEVICES



SECTION:



7-6-1:   Definition



7-6-2:   License; Fees; Emblem



7-6-3:   Application



7-6-4:   Restrictions



7-6-5:   Inspections



7-6-6:   Term and Renewal of Automatic Amusement Device Operators License



7-6-7:   Seizure and Destruction of Devices Used for Gambling



7-6-8:   Revocation of License



7-6-9:   Transfer of License



7-6-10:   Penalties



7-6-1:  DEFINITION:



   The term "automatic amusement device" shall mean any machine or device
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or via
payment of any form may be operated by the public generally for use primarily
as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. 
It shall include, but not be limited to, such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, billiard, virtual reality gaming, bagatelle, pigeon-hole or
pool tables, video games, games played with any number of balls, spheres or
electronically operated devices that are actuated by said balls or spheres or
electrical contacts, electrical impulse and/or cathode tube games, and all
games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name by
which they may be indicated or identified.  Each payment location shall
indicate a separate device. However, said term shall not include juke boxes
and other music box devices where the sole purpose of the device is to
produce or reproduce any vocal or instrumental sounds which are controlled by
the deposit of a coin or token.  "Automatic Amusement Device" does not
include a video gaming terminal as defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act
(230 ILCS 40/5) and lawfully licensed and operated in accordance with Chapter
18, Title 7 of this Code and pursuant to the said Act.



   Nothing in this Chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license or permit movie and video booths or stands or any gambling machine or
device whatsoever, including, but not limited to, a bingo device, a card game
device, or any class of mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device, or in any way prohibited by law, provided, however, that
devices or mechanisms used for games licensed by the State of Illinois and in
compliance with the Village Codes and Ordinances shall not be considered
gambling.



   Notwithstanding contrary provisions of this paragraph, video gaming
terminals lawfully licensed by the State of Illinois and lawfully licensed
and operated in accordance with Chapter 18, Title 7, of this Code shall be
considered gambling and are permitted as provided in Chapter 18 of this Title
7.



(Ord. 4529, 12-7-09; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5319, 8-6-18; Amd.
Ord. 5429, 9-3- 19)



7-6-2  LICENSE; FEES; EMBLEM:



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, association or entity shall,
within the Village of Orland Park, display for public patronage or keep for
operation by patrons any automatic amusement device(s), as defined herein
without first having obtained an automatic amusement device operators license
and the appropriate individual automatic amusement device current year's
emblem or certificate as set forth in subsections 2(B) and 2(C) below.



   (B)   For the issuance of no more than twenty-five (25) automatic
amusement device operators licenses at the fee of $100.00 for persons, firms,
corporations or associations displaying for public patronage or keeping for
operation by patrons any automatic amusement devices.



   (C)   In addition to the one-time license fee required by subsection
2(B), each automatic amusement device shall be charged a separate annual fee
of $50.00. In the event that an emblem is issued, the current year's emblem
shall be affixed prominently and conspicuously to each device for which it is
issued. In the event that an amusement device certificate is issued, the
certificate shall be prominently displayed near the business license. Each
such emblem or certificate shall be issued only for a particular device and
may not be transferred or used in any way whatsoever as the required emblem
or certificate of any other device whether or not such other device is a new
or replacement device for the original device. Each and every device must
have such an emblem or certificate issued for its particular use after the
payment of the required fee. In the event any employee of the Village locates
an amusement device that does not have the current year's emblem affixed or
certificate displayed, the Village retains the right to unplug said device
and deem it unusable until the current year's emblem is prominently affixed
or certificate displayed.



   (D)   No refund shall be paid at any time to any licensee for fees
paid for any emblem or certificate provided for in subsection 2(C) above. If,
however, the licensee wishes to transfer an emblem or certificate which is
required under subsection 2(C) above to a replacement device for the original
device, the licensee may transfer the emblem or certificate to a replacement
device if all of the following conditions are met:



      (a)   The original device is permanently removed from display
for public patronage and is made unavailable for operation by patrons; and



      (b)   The fee emblem is taken off the original device and
returned to the Village of Orland Park; or the certificate is remitted to the
Village of Orland Park; and



      (c)   A transfer fee of $50.00 for each device is paid to the
Village of Orland Park.



      Once all of the above requirements have been met, the Village of
Orland Park will provide the licensee with a new replacement fee emblem or
certificate which shall be immediately displayed per subsection 2(C) above.



   (E)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she
is over twenty-one (21) years of age.



   (F)   All new automatic amusement device operators licenses must be
approved by the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 4580, 8-2-10; Amd. Ord. 5107, 7-5-16; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16; Amd. Ord.
5339, 10-1- 18; Amd. Ord. 5429, 9-3-19)



7-6-3:  APPLICATION:



   (A)   Applications for an automatic amusement device operators
license shall be in a form supplied or approved by the Development Services
Department and shall be accompanied by the license fees as required pursuant
to Section 2.



   (B)   Application for an automatic amusement device operators
license hereunder shall be filed in writing with the Development Services
Department on a form to be provided by the Development Services Department,
accompanied by the proper license fee, and shall be subscribed to and sworn
to under oath, and shall specify:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm,
corporation, association or partnership, the principal officers thereof and
their addresses; and if a corporation, all shareholders of more than 5%, the
corporate purpose, corporation recording numbers, and registered agent.



      (2)   The address of the premises where the licensed devices
are to be operated together with the character of the business as carried on
at such place.



      (3)   The trade name and general description of the device or
devices to be used, the name of the manufacturer, the serial number, and the
number of devices to be used.



      (4)   A statement as to whether or not any of the above
parties have ever been convicted of gambling, tax evasion, any felony, or
have ever been denied a liquor license.



      (5)   A statement as to whether or not a liquor license has
been or will be issued.



      (6)   Such other and further information as the Village may
require.



   (C)   The Development Services Department shall inspect all wiring
and connections to the machines to determine if the same complies with the
Village Electrical Code.



   (D)   The Development Services Department shall review the location
where the automatic amusement devices are intended to be operated, and
determine if the same complies with the Zoning Ordinance and Land Development
Code of the Village.



   (E)   The Development Services Department shall neither issue nor
record an automatic amusement device operators license if:



      (1)   The zoning is improper;



      (2)   There are electrical code violations;



      (3)   Any of the parties requesting the automatic amusement
device operators license have been convicted of gambling, tax evasion, or
other felony;



      (4)   A false statement has been made on the application for a
license; or



      (5)   No other automatic amusement device operators licenses
are available.



   Such denial shall be in writing and the Development Services Department
shall promptly notify the applicant as to the basis of the denial. No denial
shall be made on the basis of the applicant's race, creed, color, sex, or
national origin.



(Ord. 4580, 8-2-10)



7-6-4:  RESTRICTIONS:



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit the
playing of an automatic amusement device within 100 feet of any parcel of
real estate or tract of land on which there is located a church, school, or
park.



   (B)   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of any
automatic amusement device at any place or in any manner which will disturb
the peace or quiet of persons outside the licensed premises. It shall be
unlawful for a licensee to allow a degree of noise to develop which would
cause a disturbance to the adjacent or surrounding uses such that normal use
of said adjacent or surrounding uses would be damaged or unreasonably
disturbed.



   (C)   No licensee shall operate an establishment wherein automatic
amusement devices are located in a manner which will encourage truancy. Each
licensee shall monitor its devices to discourage truancy, and shall prohibit
operation of the devices by persons under eighteen (18) years of age, unless
that person is accompanied by an adult at least twenty-one (21) years of age
who is responsible for not more than six (6) such minors.



   (D)   The Village of Orland Park has adopted the American Amusement
Machine Association Parental Advisory System rating system. All games rated
"green" shall be permitted in the Village when properly licensed. All games
rated "yellow" shall be permitted in the Village when properly licensed but
the Village Board shall maintain the right to revoke.  No games rated "red"
shall be permitted. Games which are not rated shall be permitted only after
specific Village Board approval and licensing.



   (E)   No automatic amusement device shall be placed in any required
exit path of travel.



   (F)   All licensees shall:



      (a)   Keep their premises clean and sanitary;



      (b)   Provide waste receptacles;



      (c)   Insure that all sidewalks and/or walkways outside the
premises are clean and open to pedestrian traffic; and



      (d)   Maintain and keep all automatic amusement devices in
good repair and operating condition.



   (G)   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of any
automatic amusement device unless the premises where the automatic amusement
devices are located has a distinct and primary business use other than the
offering of automatic amusement devices.



(Ord. 4580, 8-2-10; Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-6-5:  INSPECTIONS:



   Any person, firm, corporation or association who places an application
for an automatic amusement device operators license, or renewal thereof,
agrees to allow the Development Services Department to inspect the premises
to ascertain whether or not the equipment is in compliance with the Village
Electrical Code.



   Authorized representatives of the Orland Park Police Department,
including sworn peace officers and other individuals as the Chief of the
Orland Park Police Department may designate from time to time, may, in the
course of their inspections hereunder, also inspect for the presence of video
gaming terminals prohibited under Chapter 18, Title 7 of this Code.  (Ord.
4529, 12-8-09; Amd. Ord. 4580, 8-2-10)



7-6-6:  TERM AND RENEWAL OF AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE OPERATORS LICENSE:



   Each automatic amusement device emblem required by this Chapter shall
be deemed expired on January 1 next following its issuance.  No part of a
license or emblem fee will be refunded if the license is revoked by the
Village Manager.



   Any licensee may renew his, her or its emblem at the expiration
thereof, provided he, she or it is then qualified to receive such an emblem
and the premises for which such renewal emblem is sought are suitable for
such purpose; and provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein
provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case
prevent the President and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-6-7:  SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF DEVICES USED FOR GAMBLING:



   If the Chief of Police shall have probable cause to believe any
automatic amusement device is used as a gambling device, such device may be
seized by the Police and impounded until a hearing is held as herein
provided.  A finding of guilty shall result in the destruction of such
device by the Police Department.  A finding of innocent shall result in the
return of said device to the licensee.



7-6-8:  REVOCATION OF LICENSE:



   Every automatic amusement device operator's license issued under this
Chapter is subject to the Village's right, which is hereby expressly
reserved, to revocation of same should the licensee directly or indirectly
permit the operation of any automatic amusement device contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter, any other Section of this Village Code or any
Ordinance of the Village or the laws of the State of Illinois. Said license
may be revoked by the Development Services Department after written notice to
the licensee, which notice shall specify the code section, ordinance or law
violations with which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the
licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. The licensee shall be
given notice of the hearing ten (10) days in advance of the hearing.  At
such hearing the licensee and his, her or its attorney may present and submit
evidence and witnesses in his, her or its defense.  (Ord. 4580, 8-2-10)



7-6-9:  TRANSFER OF LICENSE:



   An automatic amusement device operators license shall be purely a
personal privilege, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable
or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered
or hypothecated.  Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution but shall cease upon the death of the licensee.



   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall create any vested or property
right in any automatic amusement device operators license whatsoever, nor
shall it limit or restrict the right of the Village of Orland Park to at any
time amend or repeal this Chapter.



(Amd. Ord. 5119, 9-6-16)



7-6-10:  PENALTIES:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Ord. 2776, 9-18-95; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES



SECTION:



7-7-1:   Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax



7-7-2:   Municipal Service Occupation Tax



7-7-3:   Municipal Use Tax



7-7-4:   Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax



7-7-5:   Municipal Automobile Renting Use Tax



7-7-6:   Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax And Home Rule
Municipal Service Occupation Tax:



7-7-7:   Hotel Operator's Accommodations Tax:



7-7-7-1:   Title:



7-7-7-2:   Definitions And Construction:



7-7-7-3:   Tax Imposed:



7-7-7-4:   Tax Borne By Lessor, May Be Charged To Lessee:



7-7-7-5:   Collection:



7-7-7-6:   Proceeds:



7-7-7-7:   Records:



7-7-7-8:   Payment And Penalty For Nonpayment:



7-7-7-9:   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses:



7-7-7-10:   Penalties:



7-7-7-11:   Severability:



7-7-7-12:   Time of Effect:



7-7-1:  MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in this Village at the rate of
one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of
such business while this Section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of section 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.



   Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on
or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by section three of the Retailers Occupation
Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.



   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month.  (Ord. 408, 9-8-69)



7-7-2:  MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this Municipality
in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said
servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the
provisions of section 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code.



   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal Service
Occupation Tax for the benefit of this Municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by section nine of the Service Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS
115/1 et seq.



   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.  (Ord. 409, 9-8-69)



7-7-3:  MUNICIPAL USE TAX:



   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section
5/8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of using in the
Municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered at a location
within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park with an agency of
Illinois government.  The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act, 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.



   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for
all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.



(Ord. 615, 10-14-74)



7-7-4:  MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in this Village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while
this Section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
5/8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code.



   Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on
or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by sections two (2) and three (3) of the
Retailers Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.



   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



   This Section shall be effective on the first day of the calendar month
next following publication as provided in Municipal Code section 5/1-2-4. 
Certified proof of publication shall be forwarded to the Illinois Department
of Revenue along with the certified copy of this Section.  (Ord. 1151,
1-4-82)



7-7-5:  MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:



   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privileges of using in this Village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of this State's government in this Village at
the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while
this Section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
5/8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code.



   The tax provided for in this Section shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being in this Village.



   The tax imposed by this Section shall be paid to the Illinois
Department of Revenue.



   This Section shall be effective on the first day of the second calendar
month following publication as provided in the Municipal Code section
5/1-2-4.  Certified proof of publication shall be forwarded to the Illinois
Department of Revenue along with the certified copy of this Section.  (Ord.
1152, 1-4-82)



7-7-6:  HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND HOME RULE 
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property,



   other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered
with an agency of this State's government, at retail in this municipality at
the rate of three-fourths of one percent (3/4%) of the gross



   receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
ordinance is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged
in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate
of three-fourths of one percent (3/4%) of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of
service.  Such "Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax" and the "Home
Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax" shall not be applicable to the sales
of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where
it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has
been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.



   The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the "Illinois
Municipal Code" (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5).



   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS
5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5.  The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.  (Ord. 3544,
7-27-01)



7-7-7:  HOTEL OPERATOR'S ACCOMMODATIONS TAX:



7-7-7-1:  TITLE:



   This Section shall be known and cited as the "Orland Park Hotel
Operator's Accommodations Tax" and the tax herein imposed shall be known and
cited as the "Orland Park Hotel Accommodations Tax."



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-2:  DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION:



   A.   For the purposes of this Section, whenever any of the following
words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the following
meaning:



      (1)   Village:  The Village of Orland Park



      (2)   Finance Director:  The Finance Director of the Village
of Orland Park



(5/18)



      (3)   Hotel Accommodations:  A room or rooms in any building
or structure located in the Village and kept, used or maintained as or
advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment
hotel, lodging house, dormitory or place, where sleeping, rooming, conference
or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or
without meals, in which ten (10) or more such accommodations are used or
maintained for guests, lodgers or roomers.  The term "Hotel Accommodations"
does not include an accommodation which a person occupies, or has the right
to occupy, as his domicile and permanent residence.



      (4)   Person:  Any natural person, receiver, administrator,
executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm,
partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, for
profit, nonprofit or otherwise.  Whenever the term "Person" is used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms as applied to
corporations shall include the officers thereof, and as applied to any other
entity, the owners or part-owners thereof.



      (5)   Hotel Operator:  Any person operating hotel
accommodations.



   (6)   Gross Rental Receipts: The total amount of consideration for
occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature,
including, but not limited to, amounts charged for the making, servicing or
facilitating reservations.



   B.   In this Section, unless the text otherwise requires, words in
the singular number include the plural and in the plural include the
singular; words of the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter;
and when the sense so indicates, words in the neuter gender may refer to any
gender.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-3:  TAX IMPOSED:



   There is hereby imposed and shall accrue, as set forth herein, and be
collected a tax, as set forth herein, upon the rental, leasing, making,
facilitating, or servicing the leasing or renting of any Hotel Accommodations
at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental or leasing charge.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18; Amd. Ord. 5364, 12-3-18)



7-7-7-4:  TAX BORNE BY LESSOR, MAY BE CHARGED TO LESSEE:



   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall
be borne by the hotel owner, manager, operator, facilitator, or servicer of
such Hotel Accommodations. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any
and all other taxes.  Hotel owners, managers, operators, facilitators or
servicers may reimburse themselves for the tax liability for such tax by
charging the lessee or tenant of such Hotel Accommodations by separately
stating such tax as an additional charge on the lessee's or tenant's
statement of charges.  It shall be the duty of every owner, manager,
operator, facilitator, or servicer of Hotel Accommodations to secure said tax
from the lessee or tenant of said Hotel Accommodations and pay over to the
Finance Director said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the
Finance Director and as otherwise provided by this Section.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-5:  COLLECTION:



   The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager,
operator, facilitator, or servicer from the lessee or tenant when collecting
the price, charge or rent to which it applies.  Every lessee or tenant shall
be given a bill, invoice, receipt or other statement or memorandum of the
price, charge or rent payable upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall
be stated, charged and shown separately. The Hotel Accommodations tax amounts
so collected shall be paid to the Finance Director or the authorized
representative of that office on a quarterly basis. The tax shall be due on
or before the 15th day of the months of January, April, July and October,
representing the tax collected in the quarters ending at the end of December,
March, June and September immediately preceding the due date.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-6:  PROCEEDS:



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
Section, including penalties, shall be distributed within thirty (30) days
after their collection as follows:



   A.   Twenty five percent (25%) of the gross tax collected shall be
paid to the Chicago Southland Convention and Visitors Bureau for the sole
purpose of promoting tourism and conventions.



   B.   The remainder over twenty five percent (25%) of the gross tax
collected shall be retained by the Village for such corporate purposes as the
corporate authorities shall determine from time to time.



   C.   In the event the Village increases the tax collected pursuant
to Section 3 hereof, the Bureau shall only be entitled to twenty five percent
(25%) of the amount of tax collected based on the first four percent (4%) of
the tax imposed.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-7:  RECORDS:



   Every owner, manager, operator, facilitator, or servicer of Hotel
Accommodations shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents or
charges made or charged, and occupancies taxable under this Section. The
Finance Director, or his designee, shall at all reasonable times have full
access to said books and records.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-8:  PAYMENT AND PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT:



   A.   Every owner, manager, operator, facilitator, or servicer of
Hotel Accommodations shall file a sworn tax return on a quarterly basis with
the Finance Director showing tax receipts received with respect to Hotel
Accommodation space rented or leased during the preceding quarterly period,
upon forms prescribed by the Finance Director.  At the time of filing said
tax return, the owner, manager, operator, facilitator, or servicer of Hotel
Accommodations shall pay to the Finance Director all taxes due for the period
to which the tax return applies.



   B.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at
the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains
unpaid shall be added and collected.  Whenever any person shall fail to pay
any tax as herein provided, upon the request of the Finance Director, the
Village Attorney shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent
jurisdiction with the cost of such enforcement to be borne by the owner,
manager, operator, facilitator, or servicer of the Hotel Accommodations.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-9:  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES:



   If the President, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that
any Person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this Section,
he may suspend or revoke all Village licenses held by said tax evader. The
owner, manager, operator, facilitator, or servicer of the Hotel
Accommodations shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing shall
not be held less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the
hearing, addressed to the owner, manager, operator, facilitator, or servicer
at his last known place of business.  The suspension or revocation of any
license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager, operator,
facilitator, or servicer of Hotel Accommodations from civil liability for the
payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-10:  PENALTIES:



   Any Person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting,
or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this Section, except when otherwise specifically
provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine according to
the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person
shall be convicted.  A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as
committed each day upon which each Person shall continue any such violations.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-11:  SEVERABILITY:



   If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this
Section, or application thereof to any person, firm, corporation, public
agency or circumstance, shall for any reason, be adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, said judgment shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this Section and the
application of such provision to other persons, firms, corporations, public
agencies or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the
provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered
and to the person, firm, corporation, public agency, or circumstances
involved.  It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the Village
Board of Trustees that this Section would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof not been included.



(Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



7-7-7-12:  TIME OF EFFECT:



   The tax herein imposed shall be collected as set forth herein from and
after November 1, 2003.



(Ord. 3828, 10-20-03; Amd. Ord. 5290, 4-16-18)



CHAPTER 8
TAXICABS



Is hereby repealed in its entirety.  (Ord. 4881 - 2-3-14)



CHAPTER 9
TELECOMMUNICATIONS



SECTION:



7-9-1:   Name



7-9-2:   Definitions



7-9-3:   Grant of Franchise



7-9-4:   Extension of Service



7-9-5:   Activities Prohibited



7-9-6:   Franchise Fee



7-9-7:   Records



7-9-8:   General Operational Standards



7-9-9:   System Specifications and Local Programming Requirements



7-9-10:   Customer Service



7-9-11:   Supervision of A Company



7-9-12:   Telecommunications Advisory Board



7-9-13:   Liability, Insurance and Indemnity



7-9-14:   Performance Bond



7-9-15:   Public Buildings



7-9-16:   Compliance with Local, State and Federal Jurisdiction; No Waiver
by Municipality for Failure to Enforce An Agreement; Judicial Remedies



7-9-17:   Assignment or Transfer



7-9-18:   Revocation of Franchise



7-9-19:   Renewal



7-9-20:   Removal of Cable; Purchase by Municipality



7-9-21:   Equal Employment Opportunity



7-9-22:   Municipality Engineering Department Duties and Authority



7-9-23:   Reservation of Rights



7-9-24:   Construction



7-9-1:  NAME:



   This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Village of Orland
Park Cable Television regulatory provisions.



7-9-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purpose of this Chapter the following words, phrases and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein.  When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in present tense include the future; words in
the plural number include the singular number.  The word "shall" is
mandatory, and "may" is permissive.



   (a)   "Channel" means a frequency in the electromagnetic spectrum
capable of carrying an audio-data or an audio-visual television signal, as
defined by FCC rules and regulations.



   (b)   "Company" means a company, corporation, partnership or other
entity granted a franchise by the Corporate Authorities.



   (c)   "Corporate Authorities" means the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Orland Park, Cook and Will Counties, Illinois.



   (d)   "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, established
by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and shall include any
successor agency or other agency with respect to the federal regulation and
licensing in connection with the subject matter of this Ordinance.



   (e)   "Franchise Area" means the corporate limits of the Village of
Orland Park, including all territory hereafter annexed by the Village.



   (f)   "Gross Revenues" shall mean all amounts received, directly or
indirectly, by a Company from the operation or use of the System in the
Village, including but not limited to revenue received from regular
subscriber service fees, premium programming fees, installation fees,
reconnection fees, subscriber revenues, revenues for security monitoring
services, leased channel fees, converter rentals, studio rental, production
equipment fees, workshop fees and advertising revenues; provided, however,
that Gross Revenues does not include revenue derived from the sale of company
assets (except that revenue from retail sales shall be included in "Gross
Revenues"), any franchise fees imposed by this Chapter and collected by a
Company for Subscribers, or any taxes on services furnished by a Company
herein imposed directly upon any Subscriber by the state, local or other
governmental units and collected by a Company on behalf of said governmental
unit.  With respect to nonSubscriber revenues (e.g., studio rental revenue,
leased access revenue and advertising revenue), Gross Revenues shall include
only a pro-rated portion of such revenues, with such pro-rated amount based
on the ratio of number of subscribers served by a Company who reside in the
Village and the total number of subscribers served by the System who do not
reside in the Village.



   (g)   "Grant" means the right, privilege and franchise provided in
Subsection (a) of Section 3 of this Chapter.



   (h)   "Village" means The Village of Orland Park, Cook and Will
Counties, Illinois.



   (i)   "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, limited
partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.



   (j)   "Potential Subscribers" means those Persons within the
Franchise Area who are not Subscribers.



   (k)   "Public Rights-of-Way" means all sidewalks, streets and alleys
in the Village which are dedicated to the Village for street, highway,
sidewalk, lighting, drainage, utility or cable television purposes, and all
public ways and places contiguous thereto.



   (l)   "Subscriber" means any Person lawfully receiving service from
or using the System under the Grant pursuant to a Franchise Agreement.



   (m)   "System" means the cable communications system owned by a
Company and used to serve the Village and composed of, without limitation,
antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, conductors, converters,
equipment or facilities designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of
providing: (i) one-way transmission to Subscribers of video programming or
other programming services, any Subscriber interaction that is required for
the selection of such video programming or other programming services, and
(ii) any other lawful communications services.



7-9-3:  GRANT OF FRANCHISE:



   (a)   The Village may grant, pursuant to the terms of a Franchise
Agreement, the right, privilege and franchise within the Franchise Area: to
establish, construct, operate and maintain the System in, upon, over and
under the Public Rights-of-Way and within easements or other rights to use
property which are effective for the purposes of the Grant; to extend the
System to and offer the services of the System to all Potential Subscribers;
to acquire by lease, license, purchase or other right to use equipment,
facilities and improvements, and land constituting all or part of the System;
to connect Subscribers to the System; and to repair, replace, enlarge and
extend the System. 



   (b)   The term of a Grant shall be as stated in the Franchise
Agreement.



   (c)   Grant shall not be exclusive. The Village may make a grant to
any other Person on terms no less burdensome and no more favorable than the
terms of this Chapter.



7-9-4:  EXTENSION OF SERVICE:



   (a)   A Company shall be required to extend the System to and to
offer the services of the System to Potential Subscribers where there are at
least a total of thirty-five (35) residential dwelling units and/or "occupied
commercial or industrial structures" per linear mile.  Further, in the event
that a tract or tracts within the Franchise Area is undeveloped at the time
of a Grant, a Company shall, upon development of said tract or tracts, be
required to extend the System (subject to the foregoing density requirement)
in cooperation with public utilities servicing the tract or tracts.



   (b)   Notwithstanding a Grant, a Company shall obtain all necessary
federal, state and local government permits, licenses and other required
authorizations in connection with the establishment, construction, operation
and maintenance of the System.



   (c)   Where adverse terrain or other factors render extension of the
System and offer of services impractical or technically unfeasible, or
creates an economic hardship, the Corporate Authorities shall, upon petition
of a Company, either waive the extension of the System into such areas, or
allow the extension and offer of services on such special terms, conditions
and provisions as are reasonable and fair to the Village, a Company and
Potential Subscribers in such areas.



7-9-5:  ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:



   A Company shall not allow the System to interfere with television
reception by Persons not served by a Company, nor shall the System interfere
with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of the various
utilities serving the residents of the Village.



7-9-6:  FRANCHISE FEE:



   (a)   A Company shall pay to the Village for the right, privilege
and franchise set forth in the Grant, an amount equal to five percent (5%) of
the Gross Revenues derived from the operation of the System in the Village. 
Such franchise fee is to be payable quarterly within 45 days of the end of
each calendar quarter based on the Gross Revenues for such calendar
quarter.  Each payment shall be accompanied by a statement certified by an
official or representative of a Company having the requisite knowledge to
make such a statement setting forth the Gross Revenues upon which the
franchise fee is based.



   (b)   Delinquent payments shall bear interest at the allowable legal
rate, with the minimum delinquency being a one (1) month interest charge.



(c)   Within ninety (90) days of the end of each fiscal year of a Company,
a Company shall file with the Corporate Authorities an annual report prepared
in the normal course of business, the accuracy of which is verified by a
   duly authorized officer of the corporation, showing the financial
status of a Company and the Gross Revenues of a Company for the report period.



7-9-7:  RECORDS:



   (a)   All financial records of a Company in connection with its
activities within the boundaries of the Village, shall be maintained in a
manner which permits, to the extent reasonably practicable, distinguishing
revenues earned within the Village from revenues earned by a Company in other
municipalities.



   (b)   The Village shall have the right, upon reasonable notice to a
Company and at reasonable times, hours, dates and frequencies, to inspect all
or any part of a Company's records and documents, planning records and
documents, and engineering records and documents of every kind in connection
with the Grant, the System and a Company's undertakings with respect to a
Franchise Agreement.



   (c)   Upon the request of the Village, a Company shall file with the
Village a copy of applications or files submitted by a Company with any
governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matter
affecting the System or a Company's undertakings with respect to a Franchise
Agreement.



   (d)   At least thirty (30) days prior to any rebuild or upgrade of
any part of the System in the Public Rights-of-Way, a Company shall file with
the Village copies of maps, plats or other drawings which accurately show the
nature of the proposed construction or improvements.



   (e)   A Company shall, upon the request of the Village, make
available to the Village copies of all rules, regulations, terms and
conditions, excepting proprietary information, established or imposed by a
Company in connection with the establishment, construction, operation and
maintenance of the System.



7-9-8:  GENERAL OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:



   (a)   Use.  All structures, wires, cables, equipment and facilities
erected or maintained by a Company within the Village shall be located so as
to cause minimum interference with the proper and intended use of the Public
Rights-of-Way and with the rights or reasonable convenience of the owners or
occupiers of property which adjoins any of such Public Rights-of-Way.



   (b)   Restoration.  The surface of any Public Rights-of-Way
disturbed by a Company in laying, constructing, maintaining, operating,
using, extending, removing, replacing or repairing its System shall be
restored by a Company as soon as possible after the completion of the work,
at a Company's cost and expense, to substantially the same condition as
before the commencement of the work.  If there is an unreasonable delay by a
Company in restoring and maintaining the Public Rights-of-Way after such
excavations or repairs have been made, the Village shall have the right
without further notice to restore or repair the same and to require a Company
to pay the reasonable cost of such restoration or repair.



   (c)   Relocation.  Whenever by reason of the construction, repair,
maintenance, relocation, widening, raising or lowering of the grade of any
Public Rights-of-Way by the Village or by the location or manner of
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of any public property,
structure or facility by the Village, it shall be deemed necessary by the
Village for a Company to move, relocate, change, alter or modify any of its
facilities or structures, such change, relocation, alteration or modification
shall be promptly made by a Company, at its cost and expense.



   (d)   Temporary Removal of Wire for Building Moving.  Upon written
request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Village,
a Company shall remove, raise or lower its wires and cables temporarily to
permit the moving of houses, buildings or other structures.  The reasonable
expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the
benefitted person, and a Company may require such payment in advance, a
Company being without obligation to remove, raise or lower its wires and
cables until such payment shall have been made.  A Company shall be given
not less than seventy-two (72) hours advance written notice to arrange for
such temporary wire and cable adjustments.



   (d)   Tree Trimming.  Except when in conflict with a current or
future Village Code, ordinance, or other regulation, a Company shall have the
authority, upon obtaining the prior written consent of the Village Manager,
to trim trees upon or overhanging Public Rights-of-Way to the same extent
that the Village has such authority, in order to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming into contact with the System.  When so directed by the
Village, said trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of
the Village or in compliance with any policies or ordinances that the Village
may have regulating the trimming or removal of trees on or along Public
Rights-of-Way.



   (f)   Safety Reg. Requirements. A Company shall put, keep and
maintain all parts of the System in good and standard condition throughout
the entire period of the Grant.  Construction, installation, and maintenance
of the System shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner.  All
such work shall be performed in substantial compliance with applicable FCC or
other federal, state, and local regulations.  The System shall not
unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of Persons or property in
the Franchise Area.



7-9-9:  SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS AND LOCAL PROGRAMMING REQUIREMENTS:



   (a)   Channel Capacity.  During the term of a Grant, a System shall
at all times have a minimum capacity of at least 54 Channels.



   (b)   Technological Developments.  A Company shall continuously
monitor developments in cable technology.  At the Village's request, at any
time during the fifth year of the term of the Grant, the Franchisee shall
prepare and deliver a report describing developments in cable technology and
whether and when a Company plans to incorporate such developments into
System.  Based on this report, the Village may determine that the System or
a Franchise Agreement should be updated, changed, revised, or that additional
services should be provided, but only if such update, change, revision or
provision of additional services is economically feasible for a Company. 
Economic feasibility shall be mutually determined by the Village and a
Company in good faith following an evaluation of a Company's financial
condition, economic waste, if any, that would occur should the changes be
made, the remaining term of the Grant, and the rate of return on a Company's
investment (both prior investment and proposed future investment) in the
System.  Upon the mutual consent of the Village and a Company, a Franchise
Agreement shall be amended to incorporate the determinations made as a result
of this process.



   (c)   Leased Access.  A Company shall provide leased access
channels on a System in accordance with applicable requirements of federal
law and the regulations of the FCC.



   (d)   No Obscenity.  Within the limits of federal, state and local
law, a Company shall not offer or permit a System to present obscene material.



   (e)   Emergency Alert System.  In the event of an emergency or
disaster, a Company shall, upon request of the Village, make available the
System for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster and
shall use its best efforts to provide such personnel as may be necessary to
operate the System under the circumstances.  A Company shall be deemed to be
in compliance with the requirements of this subsection (e) so long as it is
in compliance with the regulations promulgated by the FCC relating to the
Emergency Alert System (47 C. F. R. Part 11), as amended from time to time.



   (f)   Local Studio.  During the term of a Grant, a Company shall
maintain a studio within the Village for local programming.  To improve the
quality of such programming, a Company shall purchase and install, equipment
as provided in the Franchise Agreement.  Upon request, the local studio
shall be made available from time to time to the Village, its agencies,
public service organizations, local producers and schools lying wholly or
partly within the Village for production of community-related programming. 
A Company shall establish and disseminate a procedure for reserving studio
time and use of the studio.  Additionally, a Company shall hold training
classes for interested persons at least twice each calendar year, or more
often if there are at least eight interested people registered at any given
time.  The availability of the training classes will be publicized on a
Company's local origination channel.



   (g)   Local Origination Programming.  During the term of a Grant, a
Company shall maintain at least one Channel on the System for the carriage of
local origination programming.  Local origination programming shall consist
of programming (i) produced or acquired by a Company and of local interest to
the Village and its residents, (ii) produced by residents of the Village,
subject to a Company's editorial control, and (iii) character generated
programming, which will include information and public notices submitted by
the Village.  A Company shall make up to 25 hours per week of the local
origination channel's program schedule available for programming produced by
residents of the Village, at least 10 hours of which would be aired between
6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.



   (h)   Production Internships.



      i)   During the term of a Grant, a Company and its affiliates
serving communities in the south suburban area shall sponsor an internship
program for college students and qualified residents who are pursuing degrees
and/or careers in the telecommunications industry.  Between two and four
internships per trimester shall be offered to college students residing in
the south suburban area as part of this program, and the program shall be
conducted in substantially the same manner as the college internship program
offered in 1995.



      ii)   During the term of a Grant, a Company shall establish
and maintain a production internship program for high school seniors.  A
Company shall offer two internships per school semester. The program shall
include the following elements:



         *   Eligibility: High school seniors, at least 16 years
of age and a resident of a community served by the System, with an interest
in a career in the telecommunications industry.



         *   Commitment:  Five to ten hours weekly for the
length of the school semester.  A Company shall work with the, high schools
to determine whether the internship would merit substantial credit for the
intern.



         *   Responsibilities:  Shall be determined by a
Company, but may include training as a camera operator (studio and remote),
character generator operator, videotape editor, sports statistician, audio
operator, feature news writer or on-camera anchor or reporter.



         *   Benefits:  The internships shall be paid minimum
hourly wages; however, in addition to possible school credit and practical
experience, a Company will assist interns in assembling a video resume reel.



   (i)   Scholarship Program.  During the term of a Grant, a Company
shall establish and fund a scholarship program for graduating high school
students in the Village.  A Company shall fund two $500 scholarships each
year to be awarded by the Village to two graduating high school students who
have plans to enroll in a four-year college program or similar media-related
training program and are interns with a Company.  A Company shall work with
the Village to establish the scholarship application and selection process.



7-9-10:  CUSTOMER SERVICE:



   (a)   A Company shall establish, operate and maintain in the Village
a business office and agent for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests
and complaints concerning all aspects of the establishment, construction,
maintenance and operation of the System, and the payment of Subscribers'
service charges.  The office shall have a listed local telephone number, and
shall be open and sufficiently manned during reasonable business hours.  A
Company shall have a local listed telephone number for service calls, and
such telephone service shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven
(7) days a week.  Said number shall be made available to the Subscribers and
the general public.



   (b)   Customer Service.  During the term of a Grant, a Company
shall provide customer service in concert with the standards established by
the FCC.  To validate agreement with these standards, a Company shall keep
maintenance service records that will indicate the nature of all service
complaints, date and time the complaint was received, the disposition of such
complaints and the time and date thereof.  These records shall be available
for inspection by the Village.  A Company shall maintain all service
complaint records for a minimum period of three years.



7-9-11:  SUPERVISION OF A COMPANY:



   (a)   Unless otherwise provided in a Franchise Agreement, or unless
the Corporate Authorities shall otherwise specify, all administrative actions
required to be taken or which shall or may be taken by the Village in
connection with the System, shall be taken by the Village President and Board
of Trustees.



   (b)   Unless specifically otherwise provided in a Franchise
Agreement, or unless the Corporate Authorities shall otherwise provide, all
filings with the Village required by this Chapter shall be made with the
Village Manager.



7-9-12:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS ADVISORY BOARD



   A Telecommunications Advisory Board (the "Commission") for the Village
is established. (See Title 2, Chapter 11 of this Code)



7-9-13:  LIABILITY, INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY:



   (a)   A Company shall indemnify, defend and save whole and harmless
the Village and its officers and employees from liabilities and related
expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) of any kind which may arise
out of or from the establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of
the System, or the execution and implementation of a Franchise Agreement and
any related Ordinance.  The Village shall notify a Company in the event any
person shall in any way notify the Village of any claim or demand in
connection with the System or a Franchise Agreement or any related Ordinance,
from which a Company may be subject to liability under this Section or
otherwise.  The undertaking in connection with this subsection (a) includes
liability with respect to property damage, personal injury, invasions of the
right of privacy, defamation of any person, the violation or infringement of
any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other
right of any person, and failure of a Company to comply with the provisions
of any federal, state or local statute, ordinance, rule or regulation
applicable to a Company in connection with a Franchise Agreement or any
related Ordinance.  The obligations of a Company under this Section 13 shall
survive the termination of a Franchise Agreement regardless of the reason for
or the method of termination.



   (b)   A Company shall keep a System continuously insured against
such risks as are customarily insured against by businesses of like size and
type, including but not limited to:



      i)   Insurance to the extent of $2,000,000 per occurrence
against liability for bodily injury including death, and to the extent of
$500,000 per occurrence against liability for damage to property, including
loss of use occurring on, arising out of or in any way related to the System.



      ii)   During any period of construction, adequate coverage to
meet liability under the Illinois Structural Work Act (prior to repeal
thereof).



      iii)   Worker's Compensation Insurance within statutory
limits, and Employer's Liability Insurance of not less than $500,000.



      iv)   Comprehensive Automobile Liability Insurance to the
extent of $2,000,000 per occurrence against liability for bodily injury
including death, and to the extent of $300,000 per occurrence against
liability for damage to property, including loss of use occurring on, arising
out of, or in any way related to the System.



      This subsection (B) shall not be a limit on a Company's
undertaking provided in subsection (A) of this Chapter.



   (c)   A Company shall have the Village included as co-insured on all
insurance policies referred to in this Section.  A Company shall file with
the Village, certificates of insurance for such policies.  All such policies
shall provide that the issuing insurance company will not cancel them without
at least ten days prior notice to a Company and the Village.  All such
policies shall be taken out and maintained with generally recognized,
responsible insurance companies.



7-9-14:  PERFORMANCE BOND:



   A Company shall, within thirty days subsequent to the effective date of
a Franchise Agreement, post a performance bond with the Village, written by
an approved corporation surety in the amount of $50,000, and in a form
satisfactory to the Village, guaranteeing a Company's continued operation of
the System within the Village for the period specified in a Franchise
Agreement.  All damages which may be directly occasioned by the failure of a
Company to perform under a Franchise Agreement or related Ordinance, shall be
recoverable from the principals and sureties of said bond by the Village.



   If a Company shall be in violation of any provision of a Franchise
Agreement or any related Ordinance and not remedy such violation within
thirty days after having received written notice from the Village to do so,
then the Village, at its discretion, may declare a portion of the bond
equivalent to the amount of damages sustained by the Village which are
directly attributable to such breach forfeited, and Company shall thereupon
by required:



      (1)   To remedy the breach immediately; and



      (2)   Within thirty days of such forfeiture, replace the
forfeited portion of the bond.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained in this subsection
shall serve to absolve a Company of any of its obligations under a Franchise
Agreement or any related Ordinance or the rules and regulations of the FCC.



   No recovery by the Village of any sum by reason of the bond required
hereunder shall be any limitation upon the liability of a Company to a
Village, except that any sum received by a Village by reason of such bond
shall be deducted from any recovery which a Village may have against a
Company.



   A Company shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond, and shall
keep the same in full force and effect at all times throughout the term of a
Franchise Agreement and during the removal of all poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other conductors, converters, equipment
and fixtures subsequent to the termination of a Franchise Agreement.  The
bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise
allowed to expire prior to thirty days written notice given to the Board of
Trustees of the Village.



7-9-15:  PUBLIC BUILDINGS:



   A Company shall provide, without installation charges or monthly
service fee, one basic converter and one installation for one line basic
service connection to the Village Hall, to all firehouses, public work
buildings and any other municipal buildings designated by the Board of
Trustees; to all library buildings, to all park district buildings, and to
all public and parochial elementary, secondary and college level schools
located within the Village.  A Company shall make such connections at the
location designated by the Village for municipal buildings or by the other
appropriate officer for other public buildings.  The public buildings so
serviced shall be responsible for all internal wiring from such energized
connection source.



7-9-16:  COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL JURISDICTION; NO WAIVER BY
VILLAGE FOR FAILURE TO ENFORCE AN AGREEMENT JUDICIAL REMEDIES:



   (a)   A Company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the
System, subject to the reasonable supervision of the Village, and in strict
compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.



   (b)   If at any time the powers of the Village, state or federal
government or any agency or official thereof in connection with the System
are duly transferred to or later reside in any other board, authority, agency
or official, such board, authority, agency or official shall have the power,
rights and duties previously vested, in addition to any other which they may
acquire.



   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of a Franchise Agreement
or any related Ordinance, a Company shall at all times comply with all state
and federal laws, rules and regulations, or any administrative agency
thereof; provided, however, if any such ordinance, law, rule or regulation
shall require a Company to perform any service or shall permit a Company to
perform any service in conflict with the provisions and terms of a Franchise
Agreement or any related Ordinance or of any law, rule or regulation, then as
soon as possible following knowledge thereof, a Company shall notify the
Village of the point of conflict believed to exist.  If the Village
determines that a material provision of a Franchise Agreement or any related
Ordinance is affected by such action, the parties shall have the right to
modify or amend any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be
necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of a Franchise Agreement
and any related Ordinance.



   (d)   A Company or other parties shall not be excused from complying
with any of the terms or conditions of a Franchise Agreement or any related
Ordinance by any failure of the Village upon any one or more occasions to
insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions.



   (e)   In addition to all remedies herein provided, the parties shall
have the right to apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to secure such
judicial relief as it shall deem proper.



7-9-17:  ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER:



   (a)   A Company may not assign or transfer the its rights under a
Franchise Agreement without the prior written consent of the Village, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.  Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the Village's consent shall not be necessary (i) for the assignment or
transfer of a Company's rights under a Franchise Agreement to any affiliate
of a Company which has the same or greater technical ability, financial
condition and legal qualifications as a Company, or (ii) for the granting of
a security interest in, or the mortgage or pledge of, all of the Franchise's
rights, powers and privileges under this Ordinance to such lending
institution or institutions as may be designated by a Company.



   (b)   The consent or approval of the Village to any such assignment,
lease, transfer, sublease, pledge or mortgage shall not constitute a waiver
or release of the rights of the Village in and to public rights-of-way.



7-9-18:  REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:



   (a)   In addition to all other rights, powers or remedies pertaining
to the Village in connection with a Franchise Agreement or otherwise, the
Village reserves the right to terminate, cancel and revoke the franchise and
all rights and privileges of a Company under a Franchise Agreement in the
event a Company:



      (i)   Violates any material provision of a Franchise Agreement
or any rule, order or determination of the Village made pursuant to a
Franchise Agreement, except where such violation, other than of subsection
(ii) and (iii) below, is without fault of a Company or through excusable
neglect; or



      (ii)   Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; or



      (iii)   Fails for a substantial time to provide cable
television service to Subscribers, except as a result of strikes, war, civil
commotion, Acts of God or other causes beyond the reasonable control of a
Company.



   (b)   The Village may make a written demand that a Company comply
with any such provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to a
Franchise Agreement.  If the violation by a Company continues for a period
of thirty days following such written demand without written proof that the
corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, the Village may consider the issue of terminating the Grant,
provided that the Village shall cause to be served upon a Company, at least
twenty day prior to the date the Village is to consider the issue of
termination, a written notice of intent to request such termination, and the
time and place of the meeting.  Public notice shall be given of the meeting
and issue which the Village is to consider.



   (c)   The Corporate Authorities shall hear and consider the issue,
and shall hear any Person interested therein, and the Corporate Authorities
shall determine, in their discretion, whether or not any violation by a
Company has occurred.



   (d)   If the Corporate Authorities shall determine the violation by
a Company was the fault of Company and within its control, the Corporate
Authorities may, by resolution, declare that the Grant shall be terminated
and revoked unless there is compliance within such period at the Corporate
Authorities may fix; such period shall not be less than ten days, provided
that no opportunity for compliance need be granted for fraud or
misrepresentation.



   (e)   Upon expiration of the time set for compliance by a Company in
subsection (d) and in the event that there has not been full and complete
compliance, the issue of revocation and termination shall be determined at
the first regular meeting of the Corporate Authorities following said
expiration, without further notice to a Company, and in accordance with
Illinois law.



7-9-19:  RENEWAL:



   A Grant to a Company may be renewed on such terms and conditions as the
parties may agree, in accordance with and subject to the renewal provisions
of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended.



7-9-20:  REMOVAL OF CABLE; PURCHASE BY VILLAGE:



   Upon the termination or revocation of a franchise granted, a Village
shall have the option, to be exercised within ten days thereof, of accepting
ownership of the System's facilities by paying to a Company the fair market
value of the System, as determined from appraisals by appraisers approved by
the parties, or the option to require the sale of such assets to a succeeding
company on said terms.



   Upon notice from the Village that it is not exercising either of the
aforesaid options a Company shall, at its own expense, remove all designated
portions of the System from all streets and public property within the
Village, and shall repair and restore the surface of all streets and public
property within the Village to the original condition, within a reasonable
period of time specified by the Village.



7-9-21:  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY:



   In carrying out the construction, operation, maintenance, service and
repair of a System, a Company shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or
discharge from employment, nor discriminate against in compensation or in
terms, conditions or privileges of employment, any Person in violation of any
statute or the Constitution of either the United States or the State of
Illinois.



7-9-22:  VILLAGE ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:



   Unless otherwise specifically stated in a Franchise Agreement or any
related Ordinance, it shall be the duty of the Village's Engineering
Department to assure, by inspection or otherwise, that a Company at all times
shall comply with the requirements of a Franchise Agreement in connection
with the construction, erection, operation, modification and maintenance of
the System within the Village.



7-9-23:  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS:



   (a)   The right is hereby reserved to the Village to adopt and
enforce, in addition to the terms, conditions and provisions contained in a
Franchise Agreement and in other applicable ordinances, such additional
ordinances, rules and regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise
of the police powers; provided that such ordinances, rules and regulations
shall be reasonable and not in material or substantial conflict with the
rights herein granted.



   (b)   In addition to the specific rights of inspection otherwise
provided for in a Franchise Agreement, the Village shall also have the right
to make such reasonable inspections as it shall find necessary to insure
compliance with the terms, provisions and conditions of a Franchise Agreement
and other relevant provisions of law.



7-9-24:  CONSTRUCTION:



   Principles concerning the construction and interpretation of a
Franchise Agreement shall be as follows:



      (a)   Agreement to any extent, each provision of a Franchise
Agreement being a separate, distinct and independent part.



      (b)   Words in the present tense include the future.



      (c)   Words importing the singular number may extend to and
include plural; words importing the plural number may extend to and include
the singular; and words in masculine gender shall include female gender.



      (d)   If any provision of a Franchise Agreement or the
application thereof is for any reason held invalid, illegal, unconstitutional
or unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the remainder of  Franchise
A Company shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms,
conditions and provisions of a Franchise Agreement by any failure of the
Village upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance
with any such terms, conditions or provisions.



      (e)   The specification in this Section of principles to apply
in the construction and interpretation of a Franchise Agreement shall not be
a limitation as to others.



CHAPTER 9.5
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE



SECTION:



7-9.5-1:   Definitions



7-9.5-2:   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed



7-9.5-3:   PEG Access Support Fee Imposed



7-9.5-4:   Applicable Principles



7-9.5-5:   No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder



7-9.5-6:   Audits of Cable/Video Services Provider



7-9.5-7:   Late Fees/Payments



7-9.5-1:  DEFINITIONS



   As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:



      (a)   "Cable service" means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(6).



      (b)   "Commission" means the Illinois Commerce Commission.



      (c)   "Gross revenues" means all consideration of any kind or
nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video
system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable
service or video service area within the Village.



         (1)   Gross revenues shall include the following:



            (i)    Recurring charges for cable or video
service.



            (ii)   Event-based charges for cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and
video-on-demand charges.



            (iii)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable
service or video service equipment.



            (iv)   Service charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation,
installation, and repair charges.



            (v)   Administrative charges related to the
provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to
service order and service termination charges.



            (vi)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient
funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of
collecting delinquent payments.



            (vii)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived
by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service within the Village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the Village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement.



            (viii)   Compensation received by the holder that
is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable
service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the
holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or
services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar
channel, subject to subsection (ix).



            (ix)   In the case of a cable service or video
service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services,
capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue
attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be
included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the
division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept
in the regular course of business.



            (x)   The service provider fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b).



         (2)    Gross revenues do not include any of the
following:



            (i)    Revenues not actually received, even if
billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).



            (ii)   Refunds, discounts, or other price
adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder
of the State-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit,
or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.



            (iii)   Regardless of whether the services are
bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video
service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service
or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues 
attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in
accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards, or orders.



            (iv)   The sale of cable services or video
services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service
provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser
certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the Village and
pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.



            (v)   Any tax or fee of general applicability
imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, State, federal, or
any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the State-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes.



            (vi)   Security deposits collected from
subscribers.



            (vii)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home
shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping
channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.



         (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be
included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of
the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect
of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



      (d)   "Holder" means a person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



      (e)   "PEG" means public, education and governmental.



      (f)   "PEG access support fee" means the amount paid under
this Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the Village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



      (g)   "Service" means the provision of "cable service" or
"video service " to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the
person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or
video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



      (h)   "Service provider fee" means the amount paid under this
Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a Village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



      (i)    "Video service" means video programming and subscriber
interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video
programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities
located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to
delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology.  This
definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial
mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users
to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered
over the public Internet.



7-9.5-2:  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED



   (a)   Fee Imposed.  A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the Village.



   (b)   Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.



   (c)   Notice to the Village. The holder shall notify the Village at
least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer
cable service or video service in the Village. 



   (d)   Holder's Liability.  The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the Village.  The holder's liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30)
days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Chapter by the holder. 
The ordinance adopting this Chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid,
to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220
ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village.



   (e)   Payment Date.  The payment of the service provider fee shall
be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the
calendar quarter.  If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.



   (f)    Exemption.  The fee hereby imposed does not apply to
existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing
franchise agreement with the Village in which a fee is paid.



   (g)   Credit for Other Payments.  An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under Section
7-9.5-2(b).



7-9.5-3:  PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED



   (a)   PEG Fee Imposed.  A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed
on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to Section 7-9.5-2.



   (b)   Amount of Fee.  The  amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or,
if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators
pay to the Village or its designee for PEG access support in the Village.



   (c)   Payment.  The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to
the Village or to the entity designated by the Village to manage PEG
access.  The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall
commence on the date set forth in Section 7-9.5-2(d).



   (d)   Payment Due.  The payment of the PEG access support fee shall
be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the
calendar quarter.  If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.



   (e)   Credit for Other Payments. An  incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for
PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the
agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section.  All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under Section 7-9.5-3(b).



7-9.5-4:  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES



   All determinations and calculations under this Chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



7-9.5-5:  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER



   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any
tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service.  A State-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
Village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder.  A State-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



7-9.5-6:  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER



   (a)    Audit Requirement.  The Village will notify the holder of
the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers
to submit to an audit of its books and records.  The holder shall comply
with the same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or
video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and
records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the Village.  If all local franchises between the Village
and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted
by the Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights
Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.  No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.



   (b)    Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the Village's submission of an
invoice for the sum.



7-9.5-7:  LATE FEES/PAYMENTS



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by this Village pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.



(Ord. 4323, 12-17-07)



CHAPTER 10
TRADE PRACTICES; CONSUMER PROTECTION



SECTION:



7-10-1:   Definitions



7-10-2:   Deception in the Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuel



7-10-3:   Availability of Scales



7-10-4:   False Weights



7-10-5:   Deceptive Practices



7-10-6:   Penalty



7-10-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   ADVERTISEMENT:  Includes the attempt by publication, dissemination,
solicitation or circulation to induce directly or indirectly any person to
enter into any obligation or acquire any title or interest in any merchandise
and includes every work device to disguise any form of business solicitation
by using such terms as "renewal", "invoice", "bill", "statement", or
"reminder", to create an impression of existing obligation when there is
none, or other language to mislead any person in relation to any sought after
commercial transaction.



   MERCHANDISE: Any objects, wares, goods, commodities, intangibles, real
estate or services.



   PERSON:  Any natural person or his legal representative, partnership,
corporation (domestic and foreign), company, trust, business entity or
association, and any agent, employee, salesman, partner, officer, director,
member, stockholder, associate, trustee or cestui que trust thereof.



   SALE:  Any sale, offer for sale, or attempt to sell any merchandise
for cash or on credit.



7-10-2:  DECEPTION IN THE SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL:



   No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale at retail,
gasoline or petroleum products for motor vehicle use, in any manner which
deceives or tends to deceive a purchaser or prospective purchaser as to
price, quality or identity of the product.  The pump, dispensing device or
container shall have the name, brand, symbol, mark and minimum research
octane rating or minimum research cetane rating affixed to it of the gasoline
or petroleum product sold or offered for sale, and the product therein cannot
be substituted, mixed or adulterated.  For the purpose of this Section,
"Research Octane Rating" or "Research Cetane Rating" shall mean the research
octane rating as described in the American-Society for Testing Materials
(ASTM) 'Standard Specifications for Gasoline' (D439-70), or "Standard
Classification of Diesel Fuel Oil", (D 975-68).



7-10-3:  AVAILABILITY OF SCALES:



   Every person selling or offering for sale any service, commodity,
produce or article of merchandise, sold by weight, shall keep and maintain in
a conspicuous place on his premises, scales suitable for weighing such
commodity, product, or article of merchandise, and shall, whenever requested
by the buyer and in the buyer's presence, weigh the commodity, produce or
article of merchandise sold or offered for sale.



   Wherever meat, poultry, edible fish, produce or other articles of
merchandise sold by weight and prepared or wrapped in advance of being sold,
by the retailer, are being offered for sale, an accurate computing scale of
adequate capacity shall be placed or set no more than thirty feet (30') from
the prepackaged display counter or service area.  A prominent and
conspicuous sign shall be placed on or adjacent to the computing sale, such
sign shall read "For Customer Use" in a type size no less than two inches
(2") in height.  Where the prepackaged merchandise is marked with weight
expressed in the standard avoirdupois pound and decimal fractions thereof, a
conversion chart showing the correlation between the decimal fractions and
common fractions of the avoirdupois pound, in a type size no less than twelve
(12) point, shall be prominently and conspicuously displayed.



7-10-4:  FALSE WEIGHTS:



   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of sale,
any goods or commodity in quantities or enumeration of less weight or measure
than that represented upon such sale or offer for sale by the vendor or his
agent or employer; nor shall any person sell or offer for sale any commodity
in any receptacle or container having a smaller capacity than is represented
at the time of such offer or sale.  No person shall sell or offer for sale
any article of dry or liquid measurement in other than the legal type of
measure required therefor.



   No person weighing or measuring any goods or commodity for sale by dry,
liquid, lineal or superficial measurement, or by any unit of enumeration used
in determining or measuring quantity, or by weight, shall falsify the measure
or weight of such goods or commodity by representing the measure or weight of
the same to be either more or less than the true measure or weight thereof.



   No person who performs services upon any commodity and determines the
charge for such services according to the measure or weight of the commodity
upon which the services are performed, shall falsify the measure or weight of
the same by representing the measure or weight to be more than the true
measure or weight thereof.



   No person shall deliver to the purchaser or prospective purchaser any
goods or commodity in quantities or enumeration of less weight or measure
than that offered for sale.



7-10-5:  DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:



   No person shall act, use or employ any deception, fraud, false
pretense, false promise, misrepresentation, or to conceal, suppress, or omit
any material fact with intent that others rely upon such concealment,
suppression or omission, in connection with the sale for cash or on credit or
the advertisement of any merchandise, whether or not any person has in fact
been misled; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall apply to
the owner or publisher of newspapers, magazines, publications or printed
matter wherein such advertisement appears or to the owner or operator of a
radio or television station which disseminates such advertisement when the
owner, publisher or operator has no knowledge of the intent, design or
purpose of the advertiser; and provided, further, that nothing herein
contained shall apply to any advertisement which is subject to and complies
with the rules and regulations of, and the statutes administered by the
Federal Trade Commission or by the State of Illinois.



   A person engages in a deceptive trade practice when, in the course of
his business, vocation or occupation, he:



      (1).   Represents that merchandise is new, if it is
deteriorated, altered, reconditioned, reclaimed, used or secondhand;



      (2).   Represents that merchandise or services are of a
particular standard, grade or quality, or that merchandise is represented to
be of a particular style or model, if they are of another;



      (3).   Fails to deliver ordered merchandise within a period of
sixty (60) days from the date of order or contract, unless otherwise provided
therein, unless the customer is notified in writing of the reason for the
delay and such merchandise is delivered in less than a total of ninety (90)
days, or a refund is offered within ninety (90) days of the date of the order
or contract;



      (4).   Makes false or misleading statements of fact concerning
the reasons for, existence of, or amounts of price reductions, or engaging in
any other pricing conduct causing confusion or misunderstanding;



      (5).   Represents that merchandise or services are those of
another, when, in fact, they are not;



      (6).   Causes likelihood of confusion or misunderstanding
concerning the source, sponsorship, approval or certification of merchandise
or services;



      (7).   Causes likelihood of confusion or misunderstanding as
to affiliation, connection or association with, or certification by another;



      (8).   Represents that merchandise or services have
sponsorship, approval, characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits or
quantities that they do not have or that a person has a sponsorship approval
status, affiliation or connection that he does not have;



      (9).   Fails to state a material fact, if such failure tends
to deceive or mislead;



      (10).   Charges a higher amount of tax than the legal rate set
forth by laws and regulations existing at the time of sale; or



      (11).   Advertises for sale at a stated price any merchandise
when sufficient quantities of said advertised items are not readily available
to be sold to purchasers at the advertised price during the effective period
of the advertisement for sale.  For the purposes of this subsection,
"readily available" shall mean available to the customer in an area of the
store normally used to display this type of merchandise, except in a case
where the space available for the items is limited, a sample of the items may
be placed in a prominent location, accompanied by a prominent, written notice
clearly stating that the items are in stock and may be obtained upon request
and, "sufficient quantities" shall mean available in quantities sufficient to
meet reasonably expected customer demand through medium response.  (Ord.
1429, 4-1 5-85)



7-10-6:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 11
FAIR HOUSING PRACTICES



SECTION:



7-11-1:   Purpose



7-11-2:   Construction



7-11-3:   Definitions



7-11-4:   Prohibited  Acts - Real Estate Transactions



7-11-4-1:   Refusal to Negotiate or Deal



7-11-4-2:   Qualification Criteria



7-11-4-3:   Discriminatory Terms



7-11-4-4:   Withholding of Dwellings



7-11-4-5:   Eviction



7-11-4-6:   Discriminatory Advertisements, Signs or Notices



7-11-4-7:   Listings



7-11-4-8:   Multiple Listing Services



7-11-4-9:   Participating in Discrimination



7-11-4-10:   Varying Rents/Sale Price



7-11-4-11:   Qualification Criteria



7-11-5:   Prohibited  Acts - Handicap



7-11-5-1:   Discriminate Specifically Because of Handicap



7-11-5-2:   Accommodations in Rules



7-11-5-3:   Modification of Unit



7-11-5-4:   New Construction



7-11-5-5:   Guide, Hearing or Support Dogs



7-11-6:   Prohibited  Acts - Financial Services



7-11-7:   Prohibited  Acts - Blockbusting



7-11-7-1:   Solicitation



7-11-7-2:   Statements



7-11-7-3:   Creating Alarm



7-11-7-4:   Steering



7-11-8:   Prohibited  Acts - General



7-11-9:   Exemptions



7-11-9-1:   Private Sales or Rentals of Single-Family Houses



7-11-9-2:   Rental of Apartments



7-11-9-3:   Private Rooms



7-11-9-4:   Religious Organizations



7-11-9-5:   Private Clubs



7-11-9-6:   Maximum Number of Occupants



7-11-9-7:   Sex



7-11-9-8:   Housing for Older Persons



7-11-9-9:   Persons Convicted of Drug-Related Offenses



7-11-9-10:   Persons in Business of Furnishing Appraisals



7-11-9-11:   Financial Institutions



7-11-10:   Residential - Care Homes



7-11-11:   Congregate Elderly Housing Facilities



7-11-12:   Administration by Community Relations Commission



7-11-12-1:   Powers and Duties of Commission



7-11-12-2:   Recording Secretary



7-11-12-3:   Staff



7-11-12-4:   Initiation of Complaint



7-11-12-5:   Notice



7-11-12-6:   Investigation



7-11-12-7:   Report



7-11-12-8:   Conciliation



7-11-12-9:   Injunctive (Temporary) Relief



7-11-12-10:   Hearing on Complaint



7-11-12-11:   Hearing Decision



7-11-12-12:   Recommended Actions



7-11-12-13:   Appeal Procedure



7-11-12-14:   Judicial Review



7-11-13:   Penalty



7-11-1:  PURPOSE:



   The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the sale and rental of
dwelling units for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and
welfare. lt is also the purpose of this Chapter to assure fair housing and
freedom from discrimination throughout the Village, to protect Village
residents from the effects of residential segregation by race, color,
religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
familial status, disability or physical or mental handicap, and to secure to
its residents the economic, social and professional benefits of living in a
stable and integrated society.



7-11-2:  CONSTRUCTION:



   This Chapter shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and
policies stated herein.  The preamble of Ordinance 2153, on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, shall be incorporated by reference into the text
of this Chapter as it fully set forth herein.



7-11-3:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall
have these specified meanings:



   ANSI A177.1 - 1986: The 1986 Edition of the American National Standard
Institute for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability
for physically handicapped people, as hereafter amended from time to time.



   ACCESSIBLE: The public and common use areas of the multi-family
dwellings can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical
handicaps.



   ACCESSIBLE ROUTE:  A continuous unobstructed path that connects
accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be
negotiated by a person using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and
usable by people with other disabilities.  A route that complies with the
requirements of the American National Standards Institute's (ANSI)
A117.1-1986, the Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Admin. Code. Sec.
400.350 [e] [1-6]) or a comparable standard shall be considered an
"accessible route".



   AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING:  Attempting to attract all prospective buyers
and renters with special efforts to attract persons of a race that is
under-represented in residency demand and traffic.



   AGE:  The chronological age of a person.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON:  Any person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes that such a person will be
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES:  The President and Board of Trustees of the Village
of Orland Park.



   BROKER: Any person authorized to perform an action on behalf of another
person regarding any matter related to the sale or rental of dwellings,
including offers, solicitations or contracts and the administration of
matters regarding such offers, solicitations or contracts or any residential
real estate related transactions.



   COMMON USE AREAS:  Those rooms, spaces or elements inside or outside
of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building
or their guests.  These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry
rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas and passageways among and
between buildings.



   COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION:  The Village of Orland Park Community
Relations Commission.



   CONCILIATION:  The attempted resolution of issues raised by a
complaint, or by the investigation of such complaint, through informal
negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent and the Community
Relations Commission.



   CONGREGATE ELDERLY HOUSING: A building or a use housing more than one
family, with or without separate dwelling units for each family, the
occupancy of which is limited to persons who are at least fifty five (55) 
years of age (or, if 2 or more persons occupy a unit, at least one shall be
55 years of age or more), and which provides coordinated social and support
services to residents, such as meals, housekeeping, laundry, recreation,
education and transportation.



   DISCRIMINATE:  To treat any person differently from others because of
race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, familial status, disability or physical or mental handicap.



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE:  An act that is unlawful under
Sections 7-12-4 through 7-12-8 of this Chapter.



   DISCRIMINATORY NOTICES, STATEMENTS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:  Include, but
are not limited to, the following actions that are based on race, color,
religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
familial status, disability or physical or mental handicap:



      (1).   Using words, phrases, photographs, illustrations,
symbols or forms which convey that dwellings are available or not available
to a particular group of persons;



      (2).   Expressing to agents, brokers, employees, prospective
sellers or renters or to any other persons a preference for or limitation on
any purchaser or renter;



      (3).   Selecting media or locations for advertising the sale
or rental of dwellings which deny particular segments of the housing market
information about housing opportunities; and



      (4).   Refusing to publish advertising for the sale or rental
of dwellings or requiring different charges or terms for such advertising.



   DWELLING:  A building or portion of a building designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family and
multiple-family dwellings, but not including mobile homes or other trailers
and lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY:  Four (4) or more dwelling units, including
modular homes, attached along and sharing one or more common walls between
any two (2) units and/or stacked one above another.



   DWELLING UNIT:  One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or
used as living quarters for one family only.  Individual bathrooms and
complete kitchen facilities that are permanently installed to serve the
entire family shall always be included within each dwelling unit.



   FAMILIAL STATUS:  One or more individuals who have not attained the
age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with a parent or another person
having legal custody of such individual(s) or the designee of such parent or
other person having such custody with the written permission of such parent
or other person.



   FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a
group of not more than six (6) persons not related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION:  A bank, credit union, savings and loan
association or other similar entity or organization which makes or purchases
loans or provides other financial assistance which operates or has a place of
business in the State of Illinois.



   HANDICAP: With respect to any person; 1) a physical or mental
impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life
activities; 2) a record of having such an impairment; or 3) being regarded as
having such an impairment.  The term "handicap" does not include current,
illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in section
102 of the Controlled Substances Act. (21 U.S.C. 802)



   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION:  Includes any improved or unimproved real
property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one
or more individuals.



   LEASE:  Any sublease, assignment, or rental and any contract to enter
into any of the foregoing.



   MARITAL STATUS:  The legal status of being married, single, separated,
divorced or widowed.



   MODIFICATION:  Any change to the public or common use areas of a
building or any change to a dwelling unit.



   NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which a person or one of his or her
ancestors was born.



   NURSING HOME:  A home for the elderly, chronically ill, infirm, or
incurable persons, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders,
in which three (3) or more persons, not members of a family residing on the
premises, are provided with food, lodging and medical care, but not including
hospitals, clinics or life care communities (even though a life care
community may include a nursing home as one of its components).



   OFFER:  Includes every attempt by means of written or oral
communications to present for acceptance or rejection, to hold out or
proffer, to make a proposal to, or to exhibit real estate that may be taken
or received with the intention of ultimately entering into a real estate
transaction.



   OWNER: A person or persons recorded on such official records and
includes a duly authorized agency or notary, a trustee, a purchaser, or a
devisee; any person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in
question.



   PERSON:  An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business,
trust estate, partnership, two (2) or more persons have joint or common
interest, or any other legal entity.



   PERSON IN THE BUSINESS OF SELLING OR RENTING DWELLINGS:  A person:



      (1).   Who has, within the preceding twelve (12) months,
participated as a principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the
sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2).   Who has, within the preceding twelve (12) months,
participated as an agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal
residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental
services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or



      (3).   Who is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended
for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families.



   PUBLIC USE AREAS: Interior and exterior rooms or spaces of a building
that are made available to the general public.  Public use may be provided
at a building that is privately or publicly owned.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESPERSON:  A person, whether licensed or not,
who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or
herself out as engaged in these.



   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: Includes the purchase, sale, fee, equitable
title to, beneficial interest in, or rental or lease of any real property, or
an option to do any of the foregoing, or any negotiation, listing, contract
or agreement in connection therewith.  The term "real estate transaction"
also includes the selling, brokering or appraising of residential real
property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining
a dwelling or secured by residential real estate.



   REAL PROPERTY:  Includes building, structures, real estate, lands,
tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums,
and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.



   RELIGION: Includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as
well as belief.



   RESIDENTIAL-CARE HOME:  A dwelling in which staff persons provide
care, education, and participation in community activities for a group of
unrelated individuals who have long-term mental, intellectual, developmental
or physical disabilities, and who are unable to live independently but are
capable of community living if provided with an appropriate level of
supervision, assistance and support services, but who do not require on-site
medical or nursing facilities, with the primary goal of developing or
exercising basic skills for daily living.  This does not include dwellings
for persons whose primary reason for placement in the dwelling is the abuse
of alcohol or controlled substances, or the need for continuous nursing or
medical care, or treatment for a communicable disease, or for persons who
have recently been released from incarceration, or dwellings which serve as
an alternative to incarceration for persons convicted of criminal offenses or
declared criminally insane or dangerous.



   SEX:  The status of being either male or female.



   STEERING:  Influencing or attempting to influence by words or acts the
choice or location of housing of a prospective purchaser, occupant, or
tenant, in connection with viewing, buying, leasing, or occupying real estate
based on race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex,
marital status, familial status, disability or physical or mental handicap so
as to promote or maintain segregation.



   TO RENT:  Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to
grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the
occupant.



7-11-4:  PROHIBITED ACTS-REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to engage in the
following proscribed conduct:



7-11-4-1:    REFUSAL TO NEGOTIATE OR DEAL:



   Discriminate against any person by refusing to sell or rent (when any
dwelling is available for sale or rental), after the making of a bona fide
offer, or by refusing to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person.



7-11-4-2:  QUALIFICATION CRITERIA:



   Discriminate against any person by using different qualification
criteria or applications, or sale or rental standards or procedures, such as
income standards, application requirements, application fees, credit analysis
or sale or rental approval procedures.



7-11-4-3:  DISCRIMINATORY TERMS:



   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith.



7-11-4-4:  WITHHOLDING OF DWELLINGS:



   Discriminate against any person by representing that any dwelling is
not available for inspection, sale or rental, when such dwelling is in fact
available, or by failing to bring a property listing to his or her attention,
or by refusing to permit him or her to inspect such real property.



7-11-4-5:  EVICTION:



   Discriminate against any person by evicting a tenant(s) because of
either the tenant's or the tenant's guest's race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status,
disability or physical or mental handicap.



7-11-4-6:  DISCRIMINATORY ADVERTISEMENTS, SIGNS OR NOTICES:



   Discriminate against any person by making, printing, circulating, or
publishing, or causing to be made any Discriminatory Notices, Statements or
Advertisements or printed, published, written or oral notice, statement or
advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates
any preference, limitation or discrimination, or an intention to make such
preference, limitation or discrimination.



7-11-4-7:  LISTINGS:



   Discriminate against any person by offering, soliciting, accepting,
using or retaining a listing of real property with knowledge that unlawful
discrimination in a real estate transaction is intended.



7-11-4-8:  MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICES:



   Discriminate against any person by denying that person access to or
membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate
brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings or discriminate against any
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation.



7-11-4-9:  PARTICIPATING IN DISCRIMINATION:



   Discriminate against any person by acting or undertaking to act as a
real estate broker, salesperson, or agent with respect to any dwelling the
disposition of which requires said person to participate in discrimination.



7-11-4-10:  VARYING RENTS/SALE PRICE:



   Impose different sales prices or rental charges for the sale or rental
of a dwelling upon any person because of race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status,
disability or physical or mental handicap.



7-11-4-11:  QUALIFICATION CRITERIA:



   Use different qualification criteria or applications, or sale or rental
standards or procedures, such as income standards, application requirements,
application fees, credit analysis or sale of rental approval procedures or
other requirements, because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status, disability or
physical or mental handicap.



7-11-5:  PROHIBITED ACTS - HANDICAP:



   In addition to the discriminatory acts prohibited in Section 7-12-4
above, it shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to engage in
the following proscribed conduct:



7-11-5-1:  DISCRIMINATE SPECIFICALLY BECAUSE OF HANDICAP:



   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection with such dwelling, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a
dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:



      (1).   That buyer or renter;



      (2).   A person residing in or intending to reside in that
dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



      (3).   Any person associated with that buyer or renter.



7-11-5-2:  ACCOMMODATIONS IN RULES:



   Discriminate against any handicapped person by refusing to make
reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when
such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity
to use and enjoy a dwelling.



7-11-5-3:  MODIFICATION OF UNIT:



   Discriminate against any handicapped person by refusing to permit, at
the expense of that person, reasonable modifications of existing premises
occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be
necessary to afford such person the full enjoyment of the premises.  In the
case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so,
condition his or her permission of a modification on the renter agreeing to
restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted.  However, where it is
necessary to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to
pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may
negotiate as part of such a restoration agreement a provision requiring that
the tenant pay into an interest bearing escrow account, over a reasonable
period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the
restorations.  The interest in any such account shall accrue to the benefit
of the tenant.  A landlord may condition permission for a modification on
the renter providing a reasonable description of the proposed modifications
as well as reasonable assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike
manner and that any required building permits will be obtained.



7-11-5-4:  NEW CONSTRUCTION:



   Discriminate against any handicapped person by failing to design and
construct multi-family dwellings constructed after March 13, 1991, in such a
manner that:



      (1).   The public use areas and common use areas of such
multi-family dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped
persons;



      (2).   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within
such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons
in wheelchairs; and



      (3).   All premises within such dwellings contain the
following features of adaptive design: (a) an accessible route into and
through the dwelling; (b) light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
other environmental controls in accessible locations; (c) reinforcements in
bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and (d) usable
kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver
about the space.



   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1 or the
Illinois Accessibility Code for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people shall suffice
to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.



7-11-5-5:  GUIDE, HEARING OR SUPPORT DOGS:



   Discriminate against any handicapped person by refusing to sell or rent
after the making of a bonafide offer, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental of, or in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with
such dwelling, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a property to any buyer
or renter because such person has a guide, hearing or support dog or require
an extra charge in a lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or
sale, other than for actual damage done to the premises by the dog.



7-11-6:  PROHIBITED ACTS - FINANCIAL SERVICES:



   In addition to the discriminatory acts prohibited in Sections 7-12-4
and 7-12-5 above, it shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to
engage in the following proscribed conduct:



      (1).   Borrowing or Lending:  Discriminate against any person
in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting
mortgages, or otherwise financing a real estate transaction.



      (2).   Lending Terms:  Discriminate against any person by
delaying the processing or by denying or varying the terms of a loan or other
financial assistance that will be used for the purpose of purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or
discriminate in the fixing of that amount, interest rate, duration or other
terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance.



      (3).   Other Financial Services:  Discriminate against any
person by denying such person any of the services normally offered by a
financial institution or by providing such person with any service which is
different from, or provided in a different manner than that which is provided
to other similarly situated persons.



      (4).   Appraisal/Insurance:  Discriminate against any person
in appraising the value of real estate or in the sale of insurance in
connection with a real estate transaction.



      (5).   Brokerage Services:  Discriminate against any person
by denying such person access to or membership or participation in any
multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings, or discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of
such access, membership or participation.



7-11-7:  PROHIBITED ACTS - BLOCKBUSTING:



   In addition to the discriminatory acts prohibited in Sections 7-12-4,
7-12-5 and 7-12-6 above, it shall be unlawful for any person within the
Village to engage in the following proscribed conduct:



7-11-7-1:  SOLICITATION:



   Discriminate against any person by soliciting for sale, rental, lease,
listing or purchase any residential real estate on the grounds of loss of
value due to the present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the
properly involved of any person(s) of any particular race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status,
disability or physical or mental handicap.  Solicit any owner to sell or
rent or list residential property at any time after such person has notice
that such owner does not desire to sell, rent, or list such residential
property.  For the purposes of this subsection, notice must be provided as
follows:



      (1).   The notice may be given by the owner personally or by a
third party in the owner's name, either in the form of an individual notice
or a list, provided it complies with subsection 2 below.



      (2).   Such notice shall be explicit as to whether each owner
on the notice seeks to avoid both solicitation for listing and sale, or only
for listing, or only for sale, as well as the period of time for which any
avoidance is desired.  The notice shall be dated and either of the following
shall apply:



         (a).   Each owner shall have signed the notice; or



         (b).   The person or entity preparing the notice shall
provide an accompanying affidavit to the effect that all the names on the
notice are, in fact, genuine as to the identity of the persons listed and
that such persons have requested not to be solicited as indicated.



      (3).   The individual notice or notice in the form of a list
with the accompanying affidavit shall be served personally or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested.



7-11-7-2:  STATEMENTS:



   Discriminate against any person by distributing or causing to be
distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of
residential real estate to sell or lease his or her property because of any
present or prospective changes in the race, color, religion, creed, ancestry,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status, disability or
physical or mental handicap of residents in the vicinity of the property
involved.



7-11-7-3:  CREATING ALARM:



   Discriminate against any person by intentionally creating alarm among
residents of any community by transmitting communications in any manner,
including a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby ensues, with
a design to induce any owner of residential real estate to sell or lease his
or her property because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity
of the property involved of any person(s) of any particular race, color,
religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
familial status, disability or physical or mental handicap.



7-11-7-4:  STEERING:



   Discriminate against any person by steering his or her choices in
connection with seeking, negotiating for, buying or renting a dwelling so as
to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or by
discouraging or obstructing choices in a community, neighborhood or
development.  Prohibited actions under this subsection, which are generally
referred to as unlawful steering practices, shall include, but are not
limited to:



      (1).   Discouraging any person from inspecting, purchasing or
renting a dwelling because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status, disability or
physical or mental handicap or because of the race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status,
disability or physical or mental handicap of persons in a community,
neighborhood, or development.



      (2).   Discouraging the purchase or rental of a dwelling
because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex,
marital status, familial status, disability or physical or mental handicap by
exaggerating drawbacks or failing to inform any person of desirable features
of a dwelling or of a community, neighborhood or development.



      (3).   Communicating to any prospective purchaser that he or
she would not be comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a
community, neighborhood or development because of race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status,
disability or physical or mental handicap.



      (4).   Assigning any person to a particular section of a
community, neighborhood or development, or to a particular floor of a
building, because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin,
age, sex, marital status, familial status, disability or physical or mental
handicap.



7-11-8:  PROHIBITED ACTS - GENERAL:



   In addition to the discriminatory acts prohibited in Sections 7-12-4
through 7-12-7 above, it shall be unlawful for any person within the Village
to engage in the following generally proscribed conduct:



      (1).   Aiding or Abetting:  Discriminate against any person
by aiding or abetting acts performed in violation of this Chapter.



      (2).   Interfering, Coercing or Intimidating:  Discriminate
against any person by coercing, intimidating, threatening or interfering in
the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this Chapter.



      (3).   Excluding Children:  Discriminate against any person
by requiring, as a condition precedent to the rental of a housing
accommodation, that the prospective tenant shall not have, at the time the
application for rental is made, one or more children under the age of
fourteen (14) years or insert in any lease or agreement for the rental of any
housing accommodation a condition terminating the lease if there shall be one
or more children under the age of fourteen (14) in the family of any person
holding the lease and occupying the housing accommodation.  Any agreement or
lease which contains a condition of the type described in this subsection
shall be void as to that condition.



7-11-9:  EXEMPTIONS:



   The following actions shall be exempted from the terms of this Chapter:



7-11-9-1:  PRIVATE SALES OR RENTALS OF SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSES:



   The sale or rental of any single-family house sold or rented by a
private individual owner, provided that:



      (1).   Such owner does not own or have a beneficial interest
in more than three (3) single-family houses in the Village at any one time;



      (2).   The owner or a member of his or her family was the last
current resident of the home;



      (3).   The home is sold without the use in any manner of the
sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker or
salesperson, or of any employee or agent of any real estate broker or
salesperson;



      (4).   The house is sold or rented without the use, in any
manner, of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate
broker, agent, salesperson or other person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings.  Nothing in this subsection 4, however, shall prohibit
the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other
such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title;
and



      (5).   The house is sold or rented without publication,
posting or mailing, of any advertisement or written notice of the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national
origin, age, sex, marital status, familial status, disability or physical or
mental handicap.



7-11-9-2:  RENTAL OF APARTMENTS:



   The rental of housing accommodations in a building which contains
housing accommodations for not more than five (5) families living
independently of each other, if the lessor or a member of his or her family
resides in one of the housing accommodations.



7-11-9-3:  PRIVATE ROOMS:



   The rental of a room(s) in a private home by an owner if he or she or a
member of his or her family resides therein or, while absent for a period of
not more than twelve (12) months, if he or she or a member of his or her
family intends to return to reside therein.



7-11-9-4:  RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS:



   The sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings owned or operated for other
than a commercial purpose by a religious organization, association or
society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or
society to persons of the same religion.  These organizations shall also not
be prohibited from giving preference to such persons in the sale,



   rental or occupancy of such lodgings unless membership in such religion
is restricted on account of race, color or national origin.



7-11-9-5:  PRIVATE CLUBS:



   The rental or occupancy of lodgings owned or operated by a private club
not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary
purpose(s) provides lodgings for other than a commercial purpose to its
members.  These private clubs shall also not be prohibited from giving
preference to its members in the rental or occupancy of such lodgings unless
membership in such club is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin.



7-11-9-6:  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS:



   The application of local, State or Federal restrictions regarding the
maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling.



7-11-9-7:  SEX:



   The restriction of the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to
persons of one sex.



7-11-9-8:  HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS:



   The application of provisions in this Chapter regarding familial status
with respect to congregate elderly housing facilities.



7-11-9-9:  PERSONS CONVICTED OF DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES:



   The application of local, State or Federal regulations with regard to
conduct against a person(s) convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction
of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as
defined by Title 21, section 802.



7-11-9-10:  PERSONS IN BUSINESS OF FURNISHING APPRAISALS:



   The consideration by persons in the business of furnishing appraisals
of real property of factors other than those based on discrimination in
furnishing appraisals.



7-11-9-11:  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS:



   Actions which prohibit financial institutions from considering sound
underwriting practices in contemplation of any loan to any person.  Such
practices shall include:



      (1).   The willingness and the financial ability of the
borrower to repay the loan.



      (2).   The market value of any real estate or other item of
property proposed as security for any loan.



      (3).   Diversification of the financial institution's
investment portfolio.



7-11-10:  RESIDENTIAL-CARE HOMES:



   The Village shall encourage the provision of residential-care homes
throughout the Village as follows:



   Small residential-care homes with one to five (1 to 5) residents may be
established as permitted uses, provided that the use is licensed by the
applicable State agency and the home is located no closer than four hundred
fifty feet (450') to any other residential-care home, nursing home or
congregate elderly housing facility.



   Medium-sized residential-care homes with six to eight (6 to 8)
residents may be established as minor special uses, provided that the use is
licensed by the applicable State agency and the home is located no closer
than six hundred sixty feet (660') to any other residential-care home,
nursing home or congregate elderly housing facility.



   Large residential-care homes with more than eight (8) residents may be
established as major special uses, provided that the use is licensed by the
applicable State agency and the home is located no closer than one thousand
feet (1,000') to any other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate
elderly housing facility.



   Residential-care homes shall meet the requirements of any other
applicable Village regulations.



7-11-11:  CONGREGATE ELDERLY HOUSING FACILITIES:



   The Village shall encourage the provision of congregate elderly housing
facilities throughout the Village as follows:



   Congregate elderly housing facilities shall be established as major
special uses, provided that the use is located no closer than one thousand
feet (1,000') from any other congregate elderly housing facility, nursing
home or residential-care home.



   Congregate elderly housing facilities shall meet the requirements of
any other applicable Village regulations.



7-11-12:  ADMINISTRATION:



   The administrative and adjudicative (hearing) responsibilities for this
Chapter shall be implemented by the Village of Orland Park Community
Relations Commission, established by Title 2 Chapter 18 of this code, as
follows:



7-11-12-1:  POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION:



   The Community Relations Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:



      (1).   To act to eliminate discriminatory housing practices;



      (2).   To act to assure to persons living or desiring to live
in the Village, or in any particular dwelling, the opportunity to purchase,
lease or rent a dwelling without discrimination;



      (3).   To outreach to potential minority home seekers to
welcome their consideration of residency in the Village;



      (4).   To gather and provide for the exchange of information
relative to the provisions of this Chapter among real estate brokers and
salespersons, lenders, developers, employers, municipal officials and
community groups within and without the Village;



      (5).   To engage in such recruitment, research and public
communication and create such advisory councils as may be authorized to
effectuate the purposes and terms of this Chapter;



      (6).   To establish educational programs for local civic,
business, religious, education and other community leaders;



      (7).   To participate in regional fair housing leadership
groups to promote a greater understanding and support for fair housing;



      (8).   To coordinate its activities with those of Federal and
State agencies;



      (9).   To receive, investigate, conciliate, settle and dismiss
complaints filed by either an aggrieved person or the Village Manager
charging discrimination in housing;



      (10).   To seek conciliation of, hold hearings, and make
findings of fact with respect to any such complaint;



      (11).   To administer oaths, take sworn testimony and subpoena
witnesses and pertinent documents;



      (12).   To seek temporary relief (judicial enforcement) to
enforce its orders;



      (13).   To recommend the issuance of orders subject to
approval by the Board of Trustees, and publish its findings of fact and
recommended orders after submission to the Board;



      (14).   To render from time to time, but not less than every
twelve (12) months, a written report to municipal officials of its activities
and recommendations with respect to fair housing practices, which written
report shall be made public after submission to the Board of Trustees; and



      (15).   To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind, after
approval of the Board of Trustees, such rules, regulations and other
procedures as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes of this
Chapter.



7-11-12-2:  RECORDING SECRETARY:



   The Village Manager shall appoint a recording secretary to serve the
Community Relations Commission.  The secretary shall keep minutes of all
proceedings of the Commission, which minutes shall be a summary of all
proceedings before the Commission, attested to by the secretary, and which
shall include the vote of each member upon every question.  The minutes
shall be approved by a majority of the members of the Commission voting.  In
addition, the secretary shall maintain all records of Commission meetings,
hearing and proceedings, the correspondence of the Commission, and a mailing
list of persons wishing to receive notice of meetings, agenda or minutes and
who have paid an annual fee set by the Board of Trustees to cover copying and
mailing costs.



7-11-12-3:  STAFF:



   The Village Manager or his/her designee shall be the professional staff
of the Community Relations Commission.



7-11-12-4:  INITIATION OF COMPLAINT:



   A complaint may be initiated by either an aggrieved person or the
staff.  Any complaint shall be in writing, shall be signed by either the
staff or the aggrieved person and shall be initiated within ninety (90) days
of the act complained of.  The complaint shall state such detail as to
substantially apprise any party, properly concerned, as to the time, place
and facts surrounding the charged violation of this Chapter.



7-11-12-5:  NOTICE:



   Within fifteen (15) calendar days after a charge has been received by
the staff, the staff shall serve or cause to be served, in person, or by
certified mail, a copy of said complaint on the person alleged to be in
violation of this Chapter, hereinafter referred to as respondent.



7-11-12-6:  INVESTIGATION:



   The staff shall conduct a prompt investigation of the complaint.



7-11-12-7:  REPORT:



   Within thirty (30) calendar days after a charge has been received, the
staff shall determine whether:



      (1).   The alleged complaint does not constitute a violation
of this Chapter and dismiss the complaint notifying the parties and advising
the complainant of his/her right to contact either State or Federal
authorities relative to the matter if the complainant does not agree with the
staff's decision; or



      (2).   The alleged complaint appears to constitute a violation
of this Chapter, in which case the staff will proceed with the process set
forth in subsection K, below.



7-11-12-8:  CONCILIATION:



   When a conciliation conference is determined necessary, the staff shall:



      (1).   Notify the complainant and respondent in writing by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, of the
time, place, and date of the conciliation session at least ten (10) days
prior thereto, and either or both parties shall appear at the conciliation
session in person or by attorney; and



      (2).   Attempt by all accepted methods of conciliation and
lawful persuasion to resolve the grievance delineated in the complaint; and



      (3).   If, within sixty (60) calendar days after a charge has
been received by the staff, the staff determines that attempts at further
conciliation will not be in furtherance of the objectives of this Chapter, or
that the complaint cannot be resolved by conciliation, the staff shall so
report to the Commission.  The Commission shall, within thirty (30) calendar
days of referral, set a hearing date relative to the complaint.



7-11-12-9:  INJUNCTIVE (TEMPORARY) RELIEF:



   At any time after a complaint is referred to the Commission, the
Commission may petition the appropriate court for temporary relief, pending
final determination of the proceedings under this Chapter, including an order
or decree restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which
would render ineffectual a recommendation with respect to the complaint. 
Such petition shall contain a certification by the Commission that the
particular matter presents exceptional circumstances in which irreparable
injury will result from a violation of this Chapter in the absence of
temporary relief.  The petition shall not exceed a five (5) day period
unless:



      (1).   A longer period is agreed to by the respondent; or



      (2).   The court finds that there is substantial evidence to
demonstrate that the respondent has engaged in violations of this Chapter.



7-11-12-10:  HEARING ON COMPLAINT:



   The Commission shall, upon not less than ten (10) days written notice
to all parties, conduct a hearing on the complaint.  All parties shall be
entitled to be represented by legal counsel, and shall have the right to call
witnesses in their own behalf and to cross examine witnesses.  All parties
to the proceedings may apply to the Commission to have subpoenas issued in
the name of the Commission.  Testimony taken at the hearing shall be under
oath or affirmation, and a transcript shall be made and filed with the
staff.  No fewer than four (4) of the same members of the Commission must be
present at all times.  Only those members who have attended all hearings on
the matter, or have read and reviewed all the transcripts of the hearings,
shall participate in the determination of the complaint.



7-11-12-11:  HEARING DECISION:



   When all testimony has been taken the Commission shall render its
decision in a written report with finds of fact that shall be served upon the
complainant and the respondent by certified mail within thirty (30) calendar
days following the close of the hearing.



7-11-12-12:  RECOMMENDED ACTIONS:



   If the Commission finds that the respondent has engaged in a violation
of this Chapter, it may:



      (1).   Institute proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter against any person found in violation;



      (2).   Apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an
order restraining any person from violating any provision of this Chapter, or
such other or further relief as may seem to the court appropriate for the
enforcement of this Chapter and the elimination of violations hereof,
including, but not limited to, actual damages and/or attorney's fees/costs
for award to the complainant.



      (3).   In the case of any violation of this Chapter by any
person in the course of performing under a contract or sub-contract with the
State or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United
States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, petition or
institute proceedings with such contracting agency for the purpose of causing
it to terminate such contract or any portion thereof, either absolutely or in
condition of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.



7-11-12-13:  APPEAL PROCEDURE:



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Commission, shall have the
right to appeal the decision to the full Village Board.  The appeal shall be
initiated by filing with the staff, within ten (10) calendar days of the
decision, a written statement, under oath, setting forth specifically the
grounds for the appeal.  These grounds shall be supported by written
argument filed along with said statement.  A copy of the statement and
written argument shall be served upon all parties by the person filing same
with the staff.  The opposing party shall be entitled to file a written
response within ten (10) calendar days of the filing of the statement and
written argument by the aggrieved party.  The Village Board, after reviewing
the statement and written argument, the response (if any) and the transcript
of the proceedings before the Commission shall render a decision within
thirty (30) days after the filing of the response, or if no response if
filed, within forty (40) days after the filing of the statement and written
argument, either;



      (1).   Upholding the decision of the Commission;



      (2).   Reversing the decision of the Commission; or



      (3).   Revising the decision of the Commission.



7-11-12-14:  JUDICIAL REVIEW:



   Any person aggrieved by the violation of any provision of this Chapter,
who has exhausted the remedies provided by this Chapter may apply to any
court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation,
including:



      (1).   An order compelling compliance with this Chapter;



      (2).   Compensatory/punitive damages; or



      (3).   Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate
to the court for the enforcement of this Chapter and the elimination of
violations thereof.



7-11-13:  PENALTY:



   Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or resisting the
enforcement thereof shall upon conviction be fined according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.  Each day that such
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 



(Ord. 2153, 9-23-91; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 12
FRAUDULENT SALES



SECTION:



7-12-1:   Definitions



7-12-2:   License Required



7-12-3:   License Application



7-12-4:   License



7-12-5:   Village Clerk Records



7-12-6:   Unlawful Acts



7-12-7:   Time of Sale



7-12-8:   Advertisement



7-12-9:   Change in Inventory



7-12-10:   Penalty



7-12-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   a.   A "going out of business sale" means any sale, whether
described by such name or by any other name (such as, but not limited to,
"closing out sale", "liquidation sale", "lost our lease sale", "forced to
vacate sale"), held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal
of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at
the premises where the sale is conducted.



   b.   "Goods" includes all goods, wares, merchandise and other
personal property, excepting choses in action and money.



   c.   "Person" includes a person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association or two or more persons having a joint or common interest.



   d.   A "removal sale" means any sale held in such a manner as to
induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the
business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is
conducted, and thereafter will be moved to and occupy another location.



7-12-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:



   No person shall directly or indirectly advertise or cause to be
advertised, represent or cause to be represented, or hold out to the public
in any manner that any sale of goods is an insurance, salvage, removal, going
out of business, insolvent's, assigner's, or creditor's sale of goods, or
that it is a sale of goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or
otherwise within the Village of Orland Park, unless such person shall first
have obtained a license to conduct such sale under one of such descriptive
names, from the Clerk of the Village of Orland Park; provided however, that
this shall not apply to any sales directly ordered by any court or referee in
bankruptcy, or to any person acting under the direction and supervision of
state or federal courts in the course of their official duties; provided
further, that this shall not apply to any sales by a person regularly engaged
in insurance or salvage sales of goods, or sale of goods which have been
damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, who acquired the goods for the
account of others as a result of fire or other casualty.



7-12-3:  LICENSE APPLICATION:



   Any applicant for such a license shall file an application in writing
and under oath with the Village Clerk setting out the following facts and
information regarding such a proposed sale:



   (a)   The name and address of the applicant for the license, who
must be the owner of the goods to be sold, and in addition, if the applicant
is a partnership, corporation, firm or association, the name and position of
the individual filing such application.



   (b)   The name and style in which such sale is to be conducted and
the address where such sale is to be conducted.



   (c)   The dates and period of time during which the sale is to be
conducted.



   (d)   The name and address of the person or persons who will be in
charge of and responsible for the conduct of such sale.



   (e)   A full explanation with regard to the condition or necessity
which is the occasion for such sale, including a statement of the descriptive
name of the sale and the reasons why such name is truthfully descriptive of
the sale.  If the application is for a license to conduct a going out of
business sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon
termination of the sale.  If the application is for a license to conduct a
removal sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon
termination of the sale, in addition to the location of the premises to which
the business is to be moved.  If the application is for a license to conduct
a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, it shall also
contain a statement as to the time, location and cause of such damage.



   (f)   A full, detailed and complete inventory of the goods that are
to be sold, which inventory shall:



      (i)   itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient
information concerning each item, including make and brand name, if any, to
clearly identify it;



      (ii)   list separately any goods which were purchased during a
60 day period immediately prior to the date of making application for the
license; and



      (iii)   show the cost price of each item in the inventory
together with the name and address of the seller of the item to the
applicant, the date of the purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to
the applicant and the total value of the inventory at cost.



   (g)   A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after
the application is made or during the sale and that the inventory contains no
goods received on consignment.



   (h)   A statement that the applicant has in the past maintained a
place of business within the Village of Orland Park for not less than 4
months prior to the time of making application for such license.  However,
this subparagraph shall not apply to any applicant who acquired a right,
title or interest in the goods as:



      (i)   An heir, legatee or surviving joint tenant, or



      (ii)   An executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian, or



      (iii)   Pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (i)   The application for license shall be subscribed and sworn to
under oath by the applicant and shall, directly above the space reserved for
the signature of the applicant, contain the following legend in at least 10
point bold type:  "Warning to applicant.  This application must be fully
and accurately completed.  False or misleading statements may subject
applicant to the penalties of perjury in addition to other penalties provided
by law."



7-12-4:  LICENSE:



   The Village Clerk, upon receipt of an application giving fully and
completely the information under oath as required above and upon receipt of
the fee hereinafter provided for, shall issue a license to the applicant
therefor authorizing such applicant to advertise, represent, and to sell the
particular goods so inventoried at the time and place stated in the
application and in accordance with these provisions.  The license shall be
issued in duplicate and shall bear a number and date of its expiration.  A
license issued under this Ordinance shall be granted and valid only for the
sale of the inventories goods which are the property of the licensee.  Such
license shall apply only to the premises specified in the application, and it
may not be transferred or assigned.  If a licensee is engaged in business in
other locations, advertising or offering of goods on behalf of such locations
shall not represent or imply any participation in or cooperation with the
sale on the premises specified in the license, nor shall any advertising or
any other offering of goods on behalf of the premises where the licensed sale
is being conducted represent or imply any participation in or cooperation
with such sale at other locations.



   No license shall be issued to any person:



   (a)   To conduct a sale in the trade name or style of a person in
whose goods the applicant for the license has acquired a right or title
thereto within 6 months prior to the time of making application for such a
license;



   (b)   To continue a sale in the name of a licensee under this
Ordinance in whose goods such person acquired a right or title while such a
sale is in progress; or



   (c)   To conduct a sale, other than an insurance sale, a salvage
sale or a sale of damaged goods, on the same premises within one year from
the conclusion of a prior sale of the nature covered by this section.



   The previous sentence, including subparts (a), (B) and (C) thereof,
shall not apply to any person who acquired a right, title or interest in
goods as an heir, legatee or pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.



7-12-5:  VILLAGE CLERK RECORDS:



   The Village Clerk shall endorse upon each such application the date of
its filing and shall preserve it, and the inventory attached to it, as a
public record of his office, and shall make a notation of it in a book to be
kept for that purpose, properly indexed, showing the name of the applicant,
the date of the application, the descriptive name of the proposed sale, the
place where such sale is to be conducted, its duration, the date of the
license issued thereon, and the total value of the goods thus to be sold.  A
copy of the inventory shall be available for public inspection in the office
of the Village Clerk.



7-12-6:  UNLAWFUL ACTS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or otherwise to
represent, for sale, or to sell, any goods at a bankruptcy, executor's,
administrator's, receiver's or trustee's sale, except pursuant to, and in
compliance with, federal or state statutory authority or judicial process, or
as an assignee's or insolvent's sale except when there is a bona fide
assignment for the benefit of creditors.



7-12-7:  TIME OF SALE:



   A license to conduct a sale issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall not
be issued or valid for a period more than 60 days from the start of such
date, and such sale may be conducted only during the period set forth in such
license; provided, however, that such license may be renewed once only for a
period not to exceed 30 days upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods
listed in the inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods have
been or will be added to the inventory previously filed pursuant to this
section by purchase, acquisition on consignment or otherwise.  The
application for renewal of the license shall be made not more than 14 days
prior to the time of the expiration of the license and shall contain a new
inventory of the goods remaining on hand at the time the application for
renewal is made, which new inventory shall be prepared and furnished in the
same manner and form as the original inventory.  No renewal shall be granted
if any goods have been added to the stock listed in the inventory since the
date of the issuance of the license.  A fee of $75.00 shall accompany an
application for a license and for the renewal of a license.



7-12-8:  ADVERTISEMENT:



   A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale under this
Ordinance, including the inventory filed therewith, shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the sales room or place where the inventoried goods are
to be sold, so that the public may be informed of the facts relating to the
goods before purchasing same; provided, however, that such copy not show the
purchase price of the goods.  The duplicate copy of a license issued
hereunder shall be attached to the front door of the premises where the sale
is conducted in such a manner that it be clearly visible from the street. 
Any advertisement or announcement published in connection with the sale shall
conspicuously show on its face the number of the license and the date of its
expiration.



7-12-9:  CHANGE IN INVENTORY:



   Any substitution for or addition to goods described in an inventory
filed pursuant to this section or any change in the time or place for a sale
conducted pursuant to this section shall be unlawful and shall void any
license issued to conduct a sale pursuant to this Ordinance and such license
shall cease to apply to such sale.  In the case of a sale of goods damaged
by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, or in the case of an insurance sale or a
salvage sale, the goods to be sold at such sale shall be clearly and
distinctly segregated, marked or identified, and advertised, if at all, so
that both on display and in advertising such goods may be readily
distinguished from other stocks, and their identity readily ascertained. 
Any commingling of such goods with other stocks of the licensee in such a
manner as to cause the goods to lose their separate identity, either on
display or in advertising, shall be unlawful and shall void any license
issued to conduct such a sale pursuant to this Ordinance and such license
shall cease to apply to such sale.



   No person in contemplation of conducting any going out of business,
removal, assignee's or creditor's sale, or during the continuance of such a
sale, shall order or purchase any goods for the purpose of selling them at
such sale, and any unusual purchase, or additions to the stock of such goods
within 60 days before the filing of such application for a license to conduct
such a sale, shall be presumptive evidence that such purchases or additions
were made in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling them
at such sale.



7-12-10:  PENALTY:



   Any person, including both the applicant and an individual filing on
behalf of an applicant, who shall procure from the Village Clerk a license to
conduct a sale under the description of one of the names set out in Section 3
hereof which name shall be a misrepresentation of the true description or
character of such sale or of the kind or condition of goods to be sold under
such license, or any such person violating any of the other provisions of
this Ordinance shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor  or  fined
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.  Each
false statement of fact in an application or inventory required to be filed
hereunder shall constitute a separate offense under this Ordinance.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 13
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



SECTION:



7-13-1:   Definitions



7-13-2:   Prohibited Activities



7-13-3:   Exceptions



7-13-4:   Penalty



7-13-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   As used in this Chapter:



      "Transient Merchant" means any person who is engaged temporarily
in the retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise, and in pursuance of such
sales occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure or unoccupied or
unimproved lot for the purpose of conducting such sale.



      "Itinerant Vendor" means any person who transports tangible
personal property for retail sale who does not maintain an established
office, distribution house, warehouse, service center or residence from which
such business is conducted.



      "Peddler" means a person who travels about selling, bartering or
exchanging small wares which he carries with him on his person or on a wagon,
truck, push cart or moveable receptacle of any kind.



      "Hawker"  means a person who cries his wares or exhibits them
for sale.



7-13-2:  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:



   Peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors and transient merchants are
prohibited within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park.



7-13-3:  EXCEPTIONS:



   This Chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any person selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm
products at an established Village market or other location on the private
property of a consenting owner;



      (b)   Any person delivering tangible personal property who is
fulfilling an order for such property which was selected or placed by mail or
other means; or



      (c)   Any person carrying samples of goods and taking orders
for delivery at a later date (see Solicitors Chapter).



7-13-4:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.   



(Ord. 2773, 9-5-95; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 14
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



SECTION:



7-14-1:   Definitions



7-14-2:   Business License Required



7-14-3:   Application for Massage Establishment Business License



7-14-4:   Issuance of License for a Massage Establishment



7-14-5:   Approval or Denial of Application



7-14-6:   Posting of License



7-14-7:   Register of Employees



7-14-8:   Revocation or Suspension of License



7-14-9:   Revocation of Massage Therapist License



7-14-10:   Facilities Necessary



7-14-11:   Operating Requirements



7-14-12:   Persons Under Age 18 Prohibited On Premises



7-14-13:   Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited



7-14-14:   Hours



7-14-15:   Employment of Massage Therapist



7-14-16:   Inspection Required



7-14-17:   Unlawful Acts



7-14-18:   Sale or Transfer or Change of Location



7-14-19:   Name and Place of Business



7-14-20:   Transfer of License



7-14-21:   Violation and Penalty



7-14-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.



      (a)   Employee. Any person over eighteen (18) years of age,
other than a massage therapist, who renders any service in connection with
the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the
operator of the business or patrons.



      (b)   Licensee. The person to whom a license has been issued
to own or operate a massage establishment as defined herein.



      (c)   "Massage" or "massage therapy" means a system of
structured palpation or movement of the soft tissue of the body.  The system
may include, but is not limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking
and gliding, petrissage or kneading, tapotement or percussion, friction,
vibration, compression, and stretching activities as they pertain to massage
therapy.  These techniques may be applied by a licensed massage therapist
with or without the aid of lubricants, salt or herbal preparations,
hydromassage, thermal massage, or a massage device that mimics or enhances
the actions possible by human hands.  The purpose of the practice of massage
is to enhance the general health and well-being of the mind and body of the
recipient.  "Massage" does not include the diagnosis of a specific
pathology.  "Massage" does not include those acts of physical therapy or
therapeutic or corrective measures that are outside the scope of massage
therapy practice as defined in this Section.



      (d)   Massage Establishment. Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages
in or carries, or permits to be engaged in or carries on any of the
activities mentioned in Subsection (c) of this Section.



      (e)    "Massage therapist" means a person who is licensed by
the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation and administers massage
for compensation.



      (f)    Outcall Massage Service. Any business, the function of
which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the
customer or client rather than at a massage establishment.



      (g)   Patron. Any person over eighteen (18) years of age who
received a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected
that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefor.



      (h)   Permittee. The operator of a massage establishment.



      (i)   Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association,
limited liability company, joint stock company, corporation or combination of
individuals of whatever form or character.



      (j)   Sexual or Genital Area. Genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.



7-14-2:  BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:



   (a)   Business license required. No person shall engage in or carry
out the business of massage unless he has a valid business license issued by
the Village pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for each and every
separate office or place of business conducted by such person.  However,
where individuals possessing the license required in Subsection (b), below,
perform massage in their own homes, or for an individual client in the home
of that client, no business license shall be required for the premises. When
a licensee performs massage in his or her own home, the requirements of the
Orland Park Land Development Code pertaining to home occupations shall be met
in addition to the requirements of this Chapter.



   (b)   State License required. No person shall engage in massage for
compensation, unless he has a valid State license issued pursuant to 225 ILCS
57/1 et seq., the Massage Licensing Act or 225 ILCS 410/3A-1 et seq.



7-14-3:  APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS LICENSE:



   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a
massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the Village
of Orland Park upon a form provided by the Development Services Department
and pay a nonrefundable annual business license fee per Title 7 Chapter 2
(7-2-5) of the Village Code.  The application, once accepted, shall also be
referred to the Police Department for investigation of the applicant's
character and qualification. The Police Department will perform the required
criminal record check.  Background investigations shall require the
submission of fingerprints with the cost of the criminal record check
($100.00) and cost of fingerprint submissions ($50.00) to be borne by the
applicant.  Each application shall contain the following information:



   (a)   A definition of service to be provided.



   (b)   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where
the business is to be conducted.



   (c)   The name and residence address of each applicant [hereinafter
all provisions which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a
corporation, limited liability company or partnership].



      (1)   If applicant is a corporation or limited liability
company, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and
directors of said corporation or company and of each stockholder owning more
than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation or company, and the
address of the corporation or company itself, if different from the address
of the massage establishment.



      (2)   If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence
addresses of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address
of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage
establishment.



   (d)   The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the
present address of the applicant.



   (e)   Proof that the applicant is a least eighteen (18) years of age.



   (f)   Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of
eyes, hair and sex.



   (g)   Copy of identification such as driver's license and social
security card.



   (h)   One portrait photograph of the applicant at least two (2)
inches by two (2) inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints shall
be taken by the Chief of Police or his agent.  If the applicant is a
partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, the Chief of Police
shall have the right to require fingerprints of any and all officers,
shareholders, directors, partners, members, managers or agents of the entity
with the $50.00 fee for each to be paid by the applicant.



   (i)   Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the
three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.



   (j)   The massage or similar business license history of the
applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another
Village or State, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action
of suspension or revocation.



   (k)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and
place convicted.



   (l)   The name and address of each massage therapist who is or will
be employed in said establishment, including a copy of their respective
licenses as issued by the State Department of Professional Regulation.



   (m)   The name and address of any massage business or other
establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be
given in Subsection (C) wherein the business or profession of massage is
carried on.



   (n)   A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.



   (o)   Authorization of the Village, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit.



   (p)   Such other identification and information necessary to
discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be
set forth in the application.



   (q)   The names, current addresses and written statements of at
least three (3) bonafide permanent residents of the United States that the
applicant is of good moral character. If the applicant is able, the statement
must first be furnished from residents of the Village, then the County, then
the State of Illinois and lastly from the rest of the United States. These
references must be persons other than relatives and business associates.



   Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of
all foregoing information the Police Department shall accept the application
for the necessary investigations. The holder of a massage establishment
license shall notify the Development Services Department of each change in
any of the data required to be furnished by this Section within ten (10) days
after such change occurs.



7-14-4:  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:



   The Village of Orland Park may issue a business license for a massage
establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described in
this Ordinance are met unless it finds:



   (a)   The correct license fee or other fees or fines owed to the
Village of Orland Park have not been tendered to the Village, and in the case
of a check, or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation.



   (b)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted,
would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the
Village's building, zoning, and health regulations.



   (c)   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders
holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation or
limited liability company, any of the officers and directors, if the
applicant is a corporation or limited liability company; or any of the
partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or
the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment
used therein; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business, have been convicted of any of the following
offenses or convicted of an offense within the State of Illinois that would
have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the State
of Illinois.



      (1)   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon
the person of another that amounts to a felony.



      (2)   An offense involving sexual misconduct.



      (3)   An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or
dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony.



   The Village of Orland Park may issue a license to any person convicted
of any of the crimes described in Subsections (1), (2) or (3) of this Section
if it finds that such conviction occurred at least ten (10) years prior to
the date of the application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony
convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for a
crime or crimes mentioned in this Section.



   (d)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of fact or failed to disclose required information or a
fact in the license application or in any document required by the Village in
conjunction therewith.



   (e)   The applicant has had a massage business, massage therapy, or
other similar permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by the Village
or any other State or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of
the application.



   (f)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company; or
any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a
partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business, is not over the age of eighteen (18) years.



7-14-5:  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION:



   The Village of Orland Park shall act to approve or deny an application
for a license under this Chapter within a reasonable period of time. Every
license issued pursuant to this Chapter will terminate at the end of the
calendar year unless sooner suspended or revoked.



7-14-6:  POSTING OF LICENSE:



   (a)   Every massage therapist shall post his/her State License in
his/her work area.



   (b)   Every person, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, or association licensed under this Ordinance shall display such
license in a prominent place.



7-14-7:  REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:



   The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage
establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time,
as well as a list of all massage therapists and a copy of their licenses.



   Such register shall be available at the massage establishment to
representatives of Village of Orland Park during regular business hours.



7-14-8:  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:



   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Village of Orland Park after notice and a hearing, for good
cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this Chapter are
violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a massage therapist
is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the State or local laws or
ordinances at licensee's place of business and the licensee has actual or
constructive knowledge by due diligence. Such permit may also be revoked or
suspended by the Village of Orland Park after notice and hearing, upon the
recommendations of the Health Inspector that such business is being managed,
conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene. Such
revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed by Village Board of Trustees of
the Village of Orland Park.



7-14-9:  REVOCATION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE:



   A massage therapist license issued by the State shall be revoked or
suspended in accordance with the Massage Licensing Act.  The Chief of Police
shall report any and all suspected violations to the Massage Licensing Board
and the Department of Professional Regulation.



7-14-10:  FACILITIES NECESSARY:



   No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an
inspection by the Village of Orland Park reveals that the establishment
complies with all of the Village of Orland Park's Building, Plumbing and
Electrical Codes.



7-14-11:  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:



   (a)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including
appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.



   (b)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in
the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.



   (c)   Each massage establishment must offer, in addition to massage,
at least one (1) other health or beauty therapy or service administered by
one (1) of the following types of professionals licensed by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation: athletic trainer,
barber, chiropractor, cosmetologist, dietician, nutritionist, electrologist,
esthetician, hair braider, nail technician, naprapath, acupuncturist, or
occupational therapist. This Operating Requirement shall not be applicable to
those massage establishments properly licensed on the effective date of this
Code provision unless such license shall subsequently terminate by expiration
or revocation.



   (d)   All employees, including massage therapists, shall be clean
and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and
genital areas, whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. A
separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with
individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open
inward and shall be self-closing.



   (e)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean,
laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered
after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.



   (f)   No massage establishment granted a license under the
provisions of this Chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be
placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement
which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to
be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase
or utilize any professional massage services.



(Amd. Ord. 5414, 6-17-19)



7-14-12:  PERSONS UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED ON PREMISES:



   No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years,
unless with a guardian, to come or remain on the premises of any massage
business establishment, as massage therapist, employee, or patron, unless
such person is on the premises on lawful business other than as a massage
therapist, employee or patron.



7-14-13:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:



   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be
sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage in the
portion of any business premises used in any way for or by a massage business.



7-14-14:  HOURS:



   No portion of any business premises used in any way for or by a massage
business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 PM and
8:00 AM.



7-14-15:  EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPIST:



   No person shall employ as a massage therapist any person unless said
employee has obtained and has in effect a State License issued pursuant to
the Massage Licensing Act.



7-14-16:  INSPECTION REQUIRED:



   The Chief of Police or his authorized representatives shall from time
to time make inspection of each massage business establishment for the
purposes of determining that the provisions of this Chapter are fully
complied with. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such
inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such officer in any
manner.



7-14-17:  UNLAWFUL ACTS:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part
of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or
genital part of any other person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva
or breasts of a female.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage
establishment, to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion
thereof, to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a
massage establishment, to expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portions
thereof, of any other person.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of
any other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully
opaque covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body.



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or
managing a massage establishment, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or
about such massage establishment, any agent, employee, or any other person
under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in
Subsections (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this Section.



   (e)   It shall be further unlawful for any permittee under this
Chapter to administer massage except within an establishment licensed to
carry on such business under this Chapter, or in the permittee's or the
client's home. Outcall massage service as described in Subsection 7-14-1(f)
of this Chapter is prohibited except in the client's own home.



   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on
within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment
which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Toilets and cubicles
used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall be clearly
marked as to purposes on the exterior door or curtain of said cubicle, room
or booth.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other
requirements of statutes or ordinances concerning the maintenance of
premises, or to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such
inspection is deemed necessary by the police or health departments.



7-14-18:  SALE OR TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION:



   Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the
license therefor shall be null and void unless approved as provided in
Section 7-14-3 provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the
licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir,
beneficiary or legal representative of a deceased licensee, or any guardian
of an heir or beneficiary of a deceased licensee, may continue the business
of the massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed
sixty (60) days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license.



7-14-19:  NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS:



   No person granted a license pursuant to this Chapter shall operate the
massage establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he
conduct business under any designation or location not specified in his
license.



7-14-20:  TRANSFER OF LICENSE:



   No license shall be transferable except with the consent of the Village
of Orland Park. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and
shall be accompanied by fees prescribed in Section 7-14-3. The written
application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested
herein for initial application for the license.



7-14-21:  VIOLATION AND PENALTY:



   Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the
owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere
agent or independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or
acting as a participant or worker, who in any way, directly or indirectly,
gives massages or operates a massage establishment or provides any of the
services defined in this Chapter without first obtaining a license and paying
a fee to do so in accordance with this Chapter, or any person, firm,
corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to
comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this
Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



(Entire Chapter Amended by Ord. 4627, 3-7-11)



CHAPTER 15
TOBACCO PRODUCTS



SECTION:



7-15-1:   Definitions



7-15-2:   License Required



7-15-3:   License Application



7-15-4:   License Fee; Expiration



7-15-5:   Prohibited Sales, Delivery-Signs:



7-15-6:   Minimum Age to Sell Tobacco or Alternative Nicotine Products



7-15-7:   Purchase By Minors Prohibited



7-15-8:   Possession By Minors Prohibited



7-15-9:   Proximity To Certain Institutions



7-15-10:   Certain Free Distributions Prohibited



7-15-11:   Vending Machines - Locking Devices



7-15-12:   Responsibility for Agents and Employees



7-15-13:   Suspension; Revocation of License; Fines, Costs



7-15-14:   Use of Premises After Revocation:



7-15-15:   Violation with Respect to Sale Without License



7-15-16:   Violation with Respect to Possession or Purchase



7-15-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:



   Alternative nicotine product , as defined in the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, 720 ILCS 675/1.5, means "a product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. 'Alternative nicotine product' excludes
cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products and any product
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non tobacco
product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose."



   Tobacco products means any substance containing tobacco leaf,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.



   Vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic, self
service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of
payment, dispenses tobacco or alternative nicotine products.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:



   Commencing January 1, 1996, and thereafter it shall be unlawful to sell
or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the
intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering, tobacco or
alternative nicotine products within the Village without having first
obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefore pursuant to this Chapter.



   Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by the
Village.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-3:  LICENSE APPLICATION:



   Application for the license required by this Chapter shall be made to
the Village Clerk or his designee in writing on a form provided for that
purpose.



   If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the
application shall contain the applicant's name, residence address and
residential telephone number. If the applicant is a partnership or other non
corporate business entity, the application shall contain the name and
residential address and residential telephone number of each partner,
principal or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall contain the name, residential address and residential
telephone number of each principal officer and the registered agent thereof.
If the applicant is an unincorporated association, the application shall
contain the name, residential address and residential telephone number of the
spokesman, such as an officer or leader. Each application also shall contain
1) a designation of the type or kind of license desired, 2) the location or
proposed location of the place of business, occupation or activity, 3) the
fee, 4) the number of the certificate of registration required under the
Retailer's Occupation Tax Act, Service Occupation Tax Act, and/or Use Tax
Act, if applicable, and 5) such additional information as may be needed for
the proper guidance of Village officials in the evaluation of such
application, including a statement of whether the application is for a new
license or a license renewal and whether the applicant has ever been subject
to suspension or revocation of a tobacco license in the Village.  Upon
verification of the information contained in the application, the license
shall be issued as appropriate.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-4:  LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION:



   The license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be $75.00. Each
tobacco dealer's license shall expire on December 31 of each year.



(Ord. 3892, 6-21-04; Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-5:  PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY - SIGNS:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee,
to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco or alternative nicotine
products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.



   (b)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided
for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of
tobacco or alternative nicotine products and on or upon every vending machine
which offers tobacco or alternative nicotine or alternative nicotine
products  for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:



      "THE SALE OF TOBACCO OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS
UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW."



   (c)   Every licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall refuse to sell,
deliver or give tobacco or alternative nicotine products to any person who is
unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that
he or she is over the age of 18 years. "Adequate written evidence" shall be a
document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to a motor vehicle
operator's license or an identification card issued to a member of the Armed
Forces. (Ord. 3592, 1-21-02)



   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale,
give away or deliver any tobacco product in violation of any state, county or
municipal law or ordinance imposing any tobacco product excise tax.



The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5252, 12-18-17)



7-15-6:  MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS:



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ
or permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco or
alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-7:  PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products, or to
misrepresent his or her identity or age, or to use any false or altered
identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco or alternative nicotine
products.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-8:  POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess any tobacco or alternative nicotine products ; provided that
the possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the
direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of
the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-9:  PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away
or deliver tobacco or alternative nicotine products within one hundred feet
(100') of any school, child care facility, library or other building used for
education or recreational programs for persons under the age of eighteen (18)
years.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-10:  CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of
selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco or
alternative nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee
or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to
distribute, give away or deliver tobacco or alternative nicotine products
free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or other
property owned by the Village, any school district, or any public library.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-11:  VENDING MACHINES - LOCKING DEVICES:



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for
sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving
away or delivering tobacco or alternative nicotine products  by use of a
vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual,
electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to
prevent its operation by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, except
that vending machines delivering tobacco or alternative nicotine products
currently in use in Village establishments shall not be required to have
locking devices installed if they are placed in a conspicuous location at
which they can be monitored by adult employees of the establishment.



   Each vending machine delivering tobacco or alternative nicotine
products in use in the Village on April 5, 1997, shall, however, be equipped
with a manual, electric or electronic locking device as described herein at
such time as the machine is remodeled, upgraded or substantially changed or
altered.



   (b)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen
(18) years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally
not permitted or where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees
of the business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the
requirements of Section 11 (A), above.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-12:  RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the
act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same
manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee
personally.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-13:  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES, COSTS:



   The Village Manager shall be charged with the administration of this
Chapter.  The Village Manager may suspend or revoke any license issued under
the provisions of this Chapter, if he or she determines that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of this Chapter.  In lieu of suspension or
revocation of a license, the Village Manager may instead levy a fine on the
licensee.  The fine according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for
each offense of which such person shall be convicted.  Each day on which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.



   However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee
shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Village Manager with a
seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such
notice.  The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following
delivery by certified mail or by personal service.



   The Village Manager shall within seven (7) days after such hearing, if
he or she determines after such hearing that a violation has occurred and
that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should
be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and
either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the license
has been revoked, and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days
upon the licensee.



   Any licensee determined by the Village Manager to have violated any of
the provisions of this Chapter shall pay to the Village the costs of the
hearing before the Village Manager on such violation.  The Village Manager
shall determine the costs incurred by the Village for said hearing,
including, but not limited to: court reporters' fees, the costs of
transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing
notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the
Village, or such lesser sum as the Village Manager may allow.



   The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within thirty (30)
days of notification of the costs by the Village Manager.  Failure to pay
said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this
Chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of
a fine, without the necessity of a further hearing.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-15-14:  USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:



   When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no new license
shall be granted to said licensee for a period of at least six (6) months
thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco or alternative
nicotine products as defined in Section 7-15-2 of this Chapter in the
premises described in such revoked license.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17)



7-15-15:  VIOLATION WITH RESPECT TO SALE WITHOUT LICENSE:



   Each violation with respect to the sale, giving away, delivering or
keeping with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco
products within the Village without first having obtained a tobacco dealer's
license therefore as provided in this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted).  Each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.



(Amd. Ord. 5222, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



7-15-16:  VIOLATION WITH RESPECT TO POSSESSION OR PURCHASE:



   Each violation with respect to possession and/or purchase of tobacco
products by a person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be punishable by
a fine of $50.00 and confiscation of the tobacco product or products.



(Ord. 2722, 4-5-95, amd. Ord. 3024, 7-8-97)



CHAPTER 16
RAFFLES



SECTIONS:



7-16-1:   Definitions



7-16-2:   Licensing Limitations



7-16-3:   License-Application-Restrictions



7-16-4:   Ineligibility



7-16-5:   Conduct of Raffles



7-16-6:   Records and Reports



7-16-7:   Raffles Manager Bond



7-16-8:   Penalty



7-16-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings hereby given them:



      "Business" means a voluntary organization composed of individuals
and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the Village.



      "Charitable" means an organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered
to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.



      "Educational" means an organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare
favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in
tax-supported schools.



      "Fraternal" means an organization of persons having a common
interest, the primary interest of which is both to promote the welfare of its
members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be
cared for by the government.



      "Labor" means an organization composed of workers organized with
the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such
pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their
respective occupations.



      "Net Proceeds" means the gross receipts from the conduct of
raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and
other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a
raffle.



      "Non-profit" means an organization or institution organized and
conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone
as a result of the operation.



      "Raffle" means a form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b)
of the "Illinois Criminal Code of 1961," conducted by an organization
licensed under this Ordinance in which:



         (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of
value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a
combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances
is to be designated the winning chance; and



         (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a
drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or
set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery,
except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a
publicly exhibited sporting contest.



      "Religious" means any church, congregation, society, or
organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.



      "Veterans" means an organization or association comprised of
members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to
promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general
public in such a way as to confer a public benefit.



      "Village" means the Village of Orland Park, Cook and Will
Counties, Illinois.



7-16-2:  LICENSING LIMITATIONS:



   A.   LOCATION. Sales of raffle chances shall be only at locations
designated in the license application and which are within the borders of the
Village of Orland Park.



   B.   ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE. Licenses shall be issued only to bona
fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or
veterans organizations that operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years
immediately before making application for a license and which have had during
that entire 5-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out
their objectives, or to a non-profit fund raising organization that the
Village determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial
assistance to an identified individual or group suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.



   C.   DURATION OF LICENSE. Licenses shall permit the applicant to
issue or sell raffle chances only for those dates stated in the license
application, but in no event shall the period of sales exceed one (1) year.
Each license is valid for not more than one (1) raffle per week during any
one (1) year period.



   D.   MAXIMUM VALUE OF PRIZES.



      (1)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND ($100,000.00) DOLLARS.



      (2)   The retail value of each individual prize awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed FIFTY THOUSAND ($50,000.00)
DOLLARS.



   E.   PRICE OF CHANCES. The price charged for each raffle chance sold
or issued shall not exceed TWO HUNDRED FIFTY ($250.00) DOLLARS.



7-16-3:  LICENSE-APPLICATION-RESTRICTIONS:



   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without
having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this Ordinance.



   B.   Each application for a license shall be in writing upon forms
provided by the Village and shall contain the following:



      (1)   Name and address of individual making application.



      (2)   Name and address of organization applying for a license.



      (3)   Approximate number of members of the organization that
reside in the Village and the length of existence of the organization.



      (4)   Name and address of the raffle manager.



      (5)   The location(s) at which raffle chances are to be sold
or issued.



      (6)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold
or issued.



      (7)   The maximum number of raffle chances to be sold.



      (8)   The time of determination of winning chances.



      (9)   The location(s) at which winning chances will be
determined.



      (10)   A sworn statement, signed by the presiding officer, and
secretary if there is one, of the organization attesting to the
not-for-profit character of the organization, and attesting to the fact the
organization is not otherwise ineligible to receive a license.



      (11)   Such other information as the Village may from time to
time require.



   C.   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment
of a license fee of TEN ($10.00) DOLLARS.



   D.   Application for licenses shall be submitted to the Village
Clerk. The Village shall act to either issue or deny the license within 30
days.



7-16-4:  INELIGIBILITY:



   The following are ineligible for any license under this ordinance:



      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;



      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter;



      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character;



      (4)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in
(1), (2) or (3) has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which
such a person is active or employed;



      (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in (1), (2)
or (3) is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;



      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in (1), (2)
or (3) is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle.



7-16-5:  CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:



   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:



      (1)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct that game.



      (2)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



      (3)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



      (4)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this Ordinance.



      (5)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the
Village of Orland Park and only at the locations specified on the license,
and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on
the license.



      (6)   A person under the age of 18 years may participate in
the conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his/her parent
or guardian.



7-16-6:  RECORDS AND REPORTS:



   (1)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.



   (2)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization
should have separate records for its raffles. The person who accounts for
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles
should not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the
organization.



   (3)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report
monthly to its membership, and to the Village its gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized
as required by this Section.



   (4)   Records required by this Section shall be preserved for three
(3) years, and organizations shall make available for public inspection at
reasonable times and places their records relating to operation of raffles.



7-16-7:  RAFFLES MANAGER BOND:



   All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in an amount determined by the licensing
authority in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the
performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall
be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30 days prior to
its cancellation. The Village Board of Trustees may waive this bond
requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an
organization under this Act, provided that a license containing such waiver
provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the
licensed organization.



7-16-8:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 17
PAWNBROKERS



SECTIONS:



7-17-1:   Definitions



7-17-2:   Prohibition



7-17-3:   Penalty



7-17-1:  DEFINITIONS



   As used in this Chapter, "pawnbroker" shall mean any individual or
business entity which lends money on the deposit or pledge of physically
delivered personal property, other than property the ownership of which is
subject to a legal dispute, securities, printed evidence of indebtedness or
printed evidence of ownership of the personal property, or who deals in the
purchase of such property on the condition of selling the property back again
at a stipulated price.  The business of a pawnbroker does not include the
lending of money on deposit or pledge of title to property.



7-17-2:  PROHIBITION



   Pawnbrokers are prohibited within the corporate limits of the Village
of Orland Park.



7-17-3:  PENALTY



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Ord. 3492, 6-4-01; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 18
VIDEO GAMING



SECTION:



7-18-1:   Authorization



7-18-2:   Definitions



7-18-3:   Village President to Administer This Chapter



7-18-4:   License Required



7-18-5:   Establishments Eligible for License



7-18-6:   Maximum Video Gaming Licenses and Terminals



7-18-7:   Operation of Terminals



7-18-8:   Alarms



7-18-9:   Video Camera Surveillance



7-18-10:   Grounds for Disciplinary Actions



7-18-11:   Compliance Monitoring



7-18-12:   Signage



7-18-13:   Advertising



7-18-14:   Application



7-18-15:   Applicant Eligibility and License Issuance



7-18-16:   Fee



7-18-17:   Initial License Application Fee



7-18-18:   Penalty



7-18-19:   Non-Transferable



7-18-1:     AUTHORIZATION:



   Video gaming terminals, as defined herein, may be located, possessed,
maintained, and otherwise operated on premises within the Village by
establishments licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board and by the Village,
pursuant to the terms, conditions and requirements of this Chapter and of the
Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq., as amended, and by
establishments for which special use permits have been issued pursuant to the
Village Land Development Code.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   THE ACT means the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq., as
amended.



   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL means any electronic video game machine that,
upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video
game, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board from time to time, utilizing a video
display and microprocessors in which the player may receive, in any form,
winnings, prizes, free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. Video
gaming terminal does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins,
cash or tokens.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-3:  VILLAGE PRESIDENT TO ADMINISTER THIS CHAPTER:



   (A)   The President of the Village as the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner of the Village  shall be charged with the administration of
this Chapter.  He/she may designate one or more persons to assist him/her in
the exercise of such duties as he/she may deem necessary. 



   (B)   The Village President/Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
have the following powers, functions and duties:



      1.   To grant, suspend for a period not to exceed (30) days,
or revoke for cause, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a
video gaming terminal license.



      2.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer or
peace officer to enter at any time upon any video gaming terminal premises
licensed hereunder, to determine whether any of the provisions of this
Chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him/her or by any other agency
having the authority to do so have been or are being violated, and at the
time of such entry to examine such premises in connection therewith.



      3.   To receive complaints from any citizen that any of the
provisions of this Chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, or any other applicable rules or regulations, have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided.



      4.   To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a
video gaming terminal license to an applicant he/she has determined to be
ineligible therefor.



      5.   To examine or cause to be examined under oath any
applicant for a video gaming terminal license or for a renewal thereof, or
any license upon who notice of revocation of suspension has been served in
the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the
books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and
take proof for his information in the performance of his/her duties and for
such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this
State. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the
Village President/Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this Section,
he/she may authorize his/her agent to act on his/her behalf. 



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-4:  LICENSE REQUIRED:



   No establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board shall be
permitted to operate any video gaming terminal in the Village pursuant to the
Act, unless the establishment also has obtained a license and paid a yearly
fee to the Village in the amount established by ordinance of the Village
President and Board of Trustees from time to time for each video gaming
terminal on its premises. No license may be issued where the license
applicant owes a debt, fine, fee or penalty to the Village, or where the
license applicant has been convicted of being, or adjudicated to have been,
in violation of any Village Code or Fire Protection District Ordinance.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-5:  ESTABLISHMENTS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:



   Establishments eligible for a video gaming terminal license from the
Village are limited to licensed retail establishments where alcoholic liquor
is drawn, poured, mixed or otherwise served for consumption on the premises
(i.e., only a Class A Liquor License issued by the Village), provided such
licensed retail establishments have been lawfully conducting business on the
premises for at least eighteen (18) consecutive months immediately prior to
applying for a Village video gaming terminal license. In the event the Class
A liquor license of a licensed video gaming establishment is terminated for
any reason, the Village video gaming license for such establishment shall
terminate and be revoked forthwith without the requirement of any further
action by the Village. However, if such licensed video gaming establishment
is sold or transferred and the new owner is issued a Class A Village liquor
license for such establishment, the said new owner will be eligible to apply
for an available six (6) month probationary video gaming terminal license
while the new owner’s application for a non- probationary video gaming
terminal license is processed, and the eighteen (18) consecutive month
operational requirement may be waived, after the six (6) month probationary
period, by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Upon and during the
suspension of the licensee's liquor license, the licensee's video gaming
terminal license shall automatically be suspended. In addition, no
establishment may be licensed under this Chapter where it is located within
three hundred (300) feet of another video gaming establishment premises,
within one hundred (100) feet of a school building or place of worship
building, or such that it would cause undue economic concentration as defined
by the Act and regulations thereunder.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-6:  MAXIMUM VIDEO GAMING LICENSES AND TERMINALS:



   No more than one (1) video gaming license shall be issued and in force
at any one time for each video gaming establishment and no more than five (5)
video gaming terminals may be located, maintained or operated in any one (1)
licensed video gaming establishment. No more than twenty-one (21) video
gaming licensees shall be issued and in force initially. Issuance of video
gaming terminal licenses beyond the initial twenty-one (21) shall be
considered by the Village Board on a case-by-case basis.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-7:  OPERATION OF TERMINALS:



   All video gaming terminals shall at all times be kept, operated, placed
and monitored pursuant to Illinois state law and applicable regulations
including but not limited to the following:



   (A)   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of a
video gaming terminal in a manner which will disturb the peace of persons
otherwise properly within or without the premises where the terminal is
located. No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of such
terminal in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance in fact.



   (B)   Every licensee shall strictly comply with all of the
conditions, rules and regulations imposed by the state and the Village, and
specifically shall comply with the following:



      1.   No video gaming terminal may be played unless all state
and Village licenses and registrations required herein, including but not
limited to, all state and Village licenses required by the Act and any
amendments thereto, and any Village business licenses or occupancy
certificates are current and valid.



      2.   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the
legal hours of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages
at the licensed video gaming establishment, however in no instance shall a
video gaming terminal be operated prior to 11:00 am on any day.



      3.   No licensee shall cause or permit any person under the
age of 21 years to use or play a video gaming terminal.



      4.   The video gaming area shall be personally monitored at
all times of legal gaming operation by an employee of the licensed video
gaming establishment who is 21 years of age or older. Lighting and sounds
produced by the video gaming terminals must be limited so as not to be seen
or heard outside of the video gaming area.



      5.   All video gaming terminals shall be located in a
segregated area of the licensed video gaming establishment which shall not be
accessible to minors. Applicants shall submit a site plan clearly indicating
the proposed location of all video gaming terminals and the type of barrier
to be utilized to segregate the area, provided, however, that such barrier
shall not obstruct the view of the video gaming area which shall be visible
to at least one employee of the licensed video gaming establishment at all
times who must likewise be 21 years of age or over. The site plan must be
approved by the Village Board or its designee. The Village Board may require
a mandatory identification process for all individuals entering the
segregated area designated for video gaming terminals and such other
requirements as are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this Section.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-8:  ALARMS:



   All licensed video gaming establishments shall be equipped with a
burglar alarm system, which shall alert the licensed video gaming
establishment's alarm system monitor who will in turn notify the Village
Police Department in instances of unpermitted entry into the licensed video
gaming establishment. Alarm systems operating within the Village shall have
an alarm permit issued by the Village and such system shall be approved by
the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3- 19)



7-18-9:  VIDEO CAMERA SURVEILLANCE:



   The licensee shall install and maintain in good working order video
recording and monitoring equipment pursuant to specifications as determined
from time to time by the Chief of Police and shall maintain video recordings
for a period of at least thirty (30) days. Video recordings must be
accessible to the Chief of Police or his/her designee, upon request at any
time. Licensees shall record all persons entering or leaving the building,
persons entering or leaving the gaming area, the operation and of all video
gaming terminals, and all payouts/distributions of winnings from video gaming
activities. A written notice that 'ALL GAMING IS VIDEO RECORDED' shall be
conspicuously posted near the gaming area. The Chief of Police will provide
report(s) to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner as to unlawful activities
related to the use of video gaming terminals.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-10:  GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS:



   (A)   The licensee of the licensed video gaming establishment shall
be subject to imposition of fines, suspension, revocation or restriction of
license, or other disciplinary action for any act or failure to act by
him/her or by his/her agents or employees that violates any provision of this
Chapter, is injurious to the public health, safety, morals, good order and
general welfare of the people of the state or the Village, or that would
discredit or tend to discredit the state video gaming industry, the state or
the Village. Without limiting the provisions of this Subsection (A), the
following acts or omissions may be grounds for discipline:



      1.   Failing to comply with or make provision for compliance
with the Act, the regulations promulgated under the Act and this Chapter, any
federal, state or local law or regulation, or a control system or protocol
mandated by the Illinois Gaming Board or the Village;



      2.   Failing to comply with any order or ruling of the
Illinois Gaming Board or its agents pertaining to the regulation of video
gaming in the state;



      3.   Failing to comply with any order or ruling of the Village
Board; the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the Village's officers,
employees or agents pertaining to the regulation of video gaming in the
Village;



      4.   Receiving goods or services from a licensee or other
person in violation of the Act's or this Chapter's licensing requirements, or
in violation of any restriction, condition or prohibition of a license;



      5.   Being suspended or ruled ineligible or having a license
revoked or suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board, the Village or in any
state of gaming or video gaming jurisdiction;



      6.   Employing, associating with, or participating in any
enterprise or business with a documented or identifiable organized crime
group or recognized organized crime figure;



      7.   Employing, associating with, or participating in any
enterprise or business with persons of notorious or unsavory reputation or
who have extensive police records, or who have failed to cooperate with any
officially constituted investigatory or administrative body;



      8.   Failing to establish and maintain standards and
procedures designed to prevent ineligible or unsuitable persons from being
employed by the licensee, including any person known to have been found
guilty of cheating or using any improper device in connection with any game
or gaming device regulated under the Act or under the law of any gaming
jurisdiction;



      9.   Misrepresenting any information to the Illinois Gaming
Board, the Village Board or the Local Liquor Control Commissioner;



      10.   Intentionally making, causing to be made, or aiding,
assisting, or procuring another to make any false statement in any report,
disclosure, application, permit, form, or any other document, including
improperly notarized documents, required by the Act, the regulations
promulgated under the Act or this Chapter;



      11.   Submitting tardy, inaccurate or incomplete material or
information to the Village Board or Local Liquor Control Commissioner;



      12.   Obstructing or impeding the lawful activities of the
Illinois Gaming Board or its agents, the Village Board, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner or the Village's officers, employees or agents;



      13.   Willfully or repeatedly failing to pay amounts due or to
be remitted to the state or the Village;



      14.   Failing to timely pay amounts due or to be remitted to
the state or the Village;



      15.   Failing to timely pay a fine imposed by the Illinois
Gaming Board or the Village;



      16.   Failing to respond in a timely manner to communications
from the Illinois Gaming Board, the Village or the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner;



      17.   Being unavailable to the Illinois Gaming Board, the
Village or their representatives or agents;



      18.   Aiding and abetting a violation by an Illinois Gaming
Board member, Village officer or employee, or other government official, of a
requirement established by statute, resolution, ordinance, personnel code or
code of conduct;



      19.   Violation of the Act, the regulations promulgated under
the Act or this Chapter by any person identified as a person with significant
influence or control over the operation of the licensed video gaming
establishment;



      20.   Employing, associating with, or participating in any
enterprise or business with a person who has facilitated, enabled, or
participated in the use of coin-operated devices for gambling purposes or who
is under the significant influence or control of such a person, such that he
or she is determined unsuitable to be an applicant or licensee by the
Illinois Gaming Board or any other gaming jurisdiction;



      21.   The imposition of fines, suspension, revocation or
restriction of a state license, or other disciplinary action by the Illinois
Gaming Board for any act or failure to act by him/her or by his/her agents or
employees that violates any provision of the Act or the regulations
promulgated under the Act; or



      22.   The occurrence of a disturbance at the licensed premises
provided that the Village Local Liquor Control Commissioner or his/her
designee finds, upon the recommendation of the Police Chief, that as a result
of the disturbances or incidents involving injury or bodily harm a public
nuisance exists therein or threat endangering the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Village.



   (B)   A video gaming licensee whose employment has been terminated
is subject to revocation of the video gaming license for any act or failure
to act that occurred while licensed.



   (C)   A person who has had his/her video gaming license revoked by
the Village Local Liquor Control Commissioner may not reapply for a license
without permission from the Village Board.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-11:  COMPLIANCE MONITORING:



   The Village Manager, Village Code Enforcement Officers, the Chief of
Police, or any of their respective designees, each has the authority to
monitor compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-12:  SIGNAGE:



   (A)   The licensee of the licensed video gaming establishment shall
post a conspicuous official decal or sign, provided by the Village, at each
public entrance to the establishment advising patrons that the establishment
is a licensed video gaming establishment.



   (B)   On-premises signage shall comply with the standards as set
forth in Section 6-307 of the Village Land Development Code.



   (C)   Off-premises signs are prohibited in the Village in accordance
with Section 6-307 of the Village Land Development Code.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-8-13:  ADVERTISING:



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter to advertise any
licensed video gaming establishment in any street, alley, right-of-way or
public place within the Village.



(Ord. 5431, 9- 3-19)



7-18-14:  APPLICATION:



   Application to the Village for a video gaming terminal license shall be
made in conformity with Title 7, Chapter 6, of this Code except as otherwise
may be provided in this Chapter. The application shall attach a copy of the
state license, and shall in addition set forth:



   (1)   The location of the premises where the video gaming terminal
is to be located, maintained, or operated;



   (2)   The charge to be made to the player for operating the device;
and



   (3)   Such other information as the Village may determine is
necessary.



(Ord. 5431, 9- 3-19)



7-18-15:  APPLICANT ELIGIBILITY AND LICENSE ISSUANCE:



   (A)   No licenses may be issued where the license applicant is a
person who has facilitated, enabled, or participated in the use of
coin-operated devices for gambling purposes or who is under the significant
influence or control of such a person who is ineligible for a video gaming
terminal license under this Chapter.



   (B)   Each person seeking a video gaming terminal license for an
establishment shall submit to a background investigation conducted by the
Village with the assistance of the Village Police or other law enforcement.
To the extent that the corporate structure of the applicant allows, the
background investigation shall include any or all of the following as the
Board deems appropriate or as provided by rule for each category of
licensure: (i) each beneficiary of a trust, (ii) each partner of a
partnership, (iii) each member of a limited liability company, (iv) each
director and officer of a publicly or non-publicly held corporation, (v) each
stockholder of a non-publicly held corporation, (vi) each stockholder of 5%
or more of a publicly held corporation, or (vii) each stockholder of 5% or
more in a parent or subsidiary corporation.



   (C)   Each person seeking video gaming terminal license for an
establishment shall disclose the identity of every person, association,
trust, corporation, or limited liability company having a greater than 1%
direct or indirect pecuniary interest in the video gaming terminal operation
for which the license is sought. If the disclosed entity is a trust, the
application shall disclose the names and addresses of the beneficiaries; if a
corporation, the names and addresses of all stockholders and directors; if a
limited liability company, the names and addresses of all members; or if a
partnership, the names and addresses of all partners, both general and
limited.



   (D)   No person may be licensed under this Chapter if the applicant
has been found by the Village to: (1) have a background, including a criminal
record, reputation, habits, social or business associations, or prior
activities that pose a threat to the public interests of the State or to the
security and integrity of video gaming; (2) create or enhance the dangers of
unsuitable, unfair, or illegal practices, methods, and activities in the
conduct of video gaming; or (3) present questionable business practices and
financial arrangements incidental to the conduct of video gaming activities.



   (E)   Any applicant has the burden of proving his or her
qualifications to the satisfaction of the Village.



   (F)   License issuance shall be approved by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, subject to the availability of licenses pursuant to Section
7-18-5 and other restrictions as provided by this Chapter.



  Those completed, filed and pending applications for video gaming terminal
licenses as of the date this Chapter was amended pursuant to Village
Ordinance Number 5431 shall remain pending until approved for issuance of a
license or rejected for reasons as provided in this Chapter, and no further
applications shall be accepted for filing by the Village for a period of
ninety (90) days following adoption of Ordinance Number 5431.  Following
expiration said ninety (90) day period, applications for licenses shall be
accepted and shall be considered and processed in the order they are filed
with the Village.  (Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-16:  FEE:



   The annual fee for each licensee to locate, maintain or operate video
gaming terminal(s) shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) plus one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each video gaming terminal on the licensed
premises. The Village shall issue a decal or sticker for each licensed
terminal to each establishment that obtains a license to locate, maintain or
operate a video gaming terminal on its premises. This decal or sticker must
be affixed by the applicant to the licensed video gaming terminal in a
conspicuous place and must be kept on the device during all times the device
is in use. No refunds or partial refunds of annual fees shall be given by the
Village in the event the licensee ceases operating any or all video gaming
terminals or in the event a video gaming terminal fails to operate. The new
owner of a licensed video gaming establishment who has applied for an
available six (6) month probationary video gaming terminal license shall not
be required to pay the annual fees provided for in this Section 7-18-16 for
the current year or balance of the current year provided such annual fees for
the current year were fully paid by the prior owner. 



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-17:  INITIAL LICENSE APPLICATION FEE:



   A person applying for either an initial or probationary video gaming
terminal license under this Chapter (whether or not the issuance of such
license would require an amendatory ordinance authorizing an increase in the
number of video gaming terminal licenses authorized to be issued), shall pay
at the time of such application a non-refundable initial or probationary
license application fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in
addition to the license fees required in this Chapter. The license
application fee shall be for the purpose of defraying any and all costs which
the Village will incur as a result of the consideration and investigation of
said application and applicant(s). This initial license application fee shall
be retained by the Village regardless of whether or not person/applicant is
granted a license.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-18:  PENALTY:



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B of Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1-4-1 of the Village
Code. Each day such violation continues constitutes a separate fineable
offense. Fines may be assessed in administrative adjudication, through a
Village ordinance violation citation or complaint brought in the Circuit
Court, or local administrative adjudication, or by the Village Board of
Trustees following a hearing as set forth below.



   (B)   Licenses issued under this Chapter may be revoked, or
suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, after notice and hearing as provided in Title 7,
Chapter 1, Section 7-1-16 of the Village Code.



   (C)   Revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties include the seizure of any video gaming
terminal provided for the violation of other applicable Codes or ordinances. 



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



7-18-19:  NON-TRANSFERABLE:



   No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable, except as
provided in Section 7-18-5 of this Chapter.



(Ord. 5431, 9-3-19)



CHAPTER 19
LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS ACT



SECTION:



7-19-1:   Definitions



7-19-2:   Application of Payments



7-19-3:   Interest on Overdue Payments



7-19-4:   Determination of Tax Liability



7-19-5:   Appeals



7-19-6:   Credits and Refunds



7-19-7:   Voluntary Disclosure



7-19-8:   Liens



7-19-9:   Penalties



7-19-1: DEFINITIONS:



   As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:



   CODE means the Orland Park Village Code.



   TAX means any pecuniary burden imposed by the Village on individuals or
entities to support Village government that is not a permit or other fee
(excepting the Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee),
is not collected or administered by a department or agency of the State of
Illinois, and is not a tax on real property under the Illinois Property Tax
Code (35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.), including, but not limited to, any of the
following taxes that may now or in the future be collected or administered by
the Village.



      Note:   Hotel Operator's Accommodation Tax - See Title 7,
Chapter 7, Sections 7-7-7-1 through 7-7-7-12 of this Code.



   TAX ADMINISTRATOR means the Village Manager of the Village or the
Village Manager's designee.



7-19-2:  APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS:



   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, any payment
designated by a taxpayer as payment of a particular tax liability shall be
applied to that taxpayer's liabilities pertaining to the particular tax as
follows: first to the interest accrued on outstanding tax liabilities; second
to the outstanding tax liability; third to any penalties due on outstanding
tax liabilities; and fourth to current tax liabilities.



7-19-3:  INTEREST ON OVERDUE PAYMENTS:



   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, any tax not
paid on the date due shall accrue interest at the rate of 2.0% of the amount
due for each month or part of a month the tax remains unpaid.



7-19-4:  DETERMINATION OF TAX LIABILITY:



   To collect overdue taxes, a determination of tax liability notice shall
be sent to the taxpayer by registered or certified mail no more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year when the tax was due; however, if
less than 75% of the tax due was paid, a determination of tax liability
notice may be sent no more than six (6) years after the end of the calendar
year when the tax was due.  All determination of tax liability notices shall
include the following information:



   (A)   the reason for the tax liability;



   (B)   the amount of tax, interest and penalty due on the date of the
determination and information on how interest and penalties accrue;



   (C)   the procedure for appeal; and



   (D)   information regarding the right of the Village to audit the
taxpayer's books and records for a particular period and the Village's
obligation to refund overpayments.



7-19-5:  APPEALS:



   Any taxpayer may, within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of
a determination of tax liability notice or at any time before a current tax
becomes due, seek a hearing before the Tax Administrator to appeal the tax
liability.  For reasonable cause shown in writing by the taxpayer and full
payment of the amount of tax protested plus accrued interest due, the Tax
Administrator shall extend the forty-five (45) day period for appeal after a
determination has been issued for up to an additional forty-five (45) days.



7-19-6:  CREDITS AND REFUNDS:



   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, taxpayers
may, in writing, claim a credit or refund for payment of taxes, interest or
penalties paid in error for up to four (4) years after the end of the
calendar year in which the payment was made.  Claims must include dates,
amount paid, and an explanation of the error that occurred.  The Tax
Administrator shall determine whether a credit or refund is justified and
shall respond to the taxpayer in writing within thirty (30) days of receipt
of the claim.  Tax amounts paid in error shall be returned plus interest at
the annual rate of 5%.



7-19-7:  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:



   A taxpayer who has not received a written notice of an audit or
determination of tax liability may seek disclosure of tax liability by
applying to the Tax Administrator in writing for voluntary disclosure of the
taxpayer's liability pertaining to a particular tax and agreeing to pay,
within ninety (90) days of the date of the application, the tax due plus 1%
interest per month for all periods prior to filing the application, but not
more than four (4) years prior thereto.  The taxpayer shall be liable for
any underpaid taxes and accrued interest during the four (4) year time period
but, except for the taxes and interest due under this Section, the taxpayer
shall not be liable for any taxes imposed prior to the date of the
application for voluntary disclosure.



7-19-8:  LIENS:



   In the first month of each calendar year, the Tax Administrator shall
cause all liens against taxpayers to be reviewed.  The Village shall, in
regard to liens found to be improper, at its sole expense, release said
liens, correct the taxpayer's credit record and correct any public disclosure
of said liens.



7-19-9:  PENALTIES:



   (A)   A penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due shall be charged
against any taxpayer whose tax payment is not made on or before the date the
tax is due.



   (B)   A penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due shall be charged
against any taxpayer whose tax report or return is not filed on or before the
date said tax report or return is due.



   (C)   A penalty of 25% of the amount of tax due for the period in
relation to which a tax report or return is required to be filed shall be
charged against any taxpayer who fails to file, before the date that a
determination of tax liability notice is issued, a report or return for that
period.



   (D)   The penalties set forth in subsections (A) and (B) above shall
not apply in the event the Village imposes the penalty set forth in
subsection (C) above.



   (E)   Any penalty may be abated by the Tax Administrator if
reasonable cause for nonpayment or failure to file is shown.



(New Chapter Added – Ord. 4921, 8-18-14)



CHAPTER 20
CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES



SECTION:



7-20-1:   Payment of Minimum Hourly Wages



7-20-2:   Payment of Paid Sick Leave



7-20-1:   PAYMENT OF MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES:



   (A)    Employers located within the Village shall comply with all
applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and
regulations may exist from time to time with regard to the payment of minimum
hourly wages.  Employee eligibility for minimum hourly wages shall be in
compliance with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as
such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.



   (B)   No additional obligations with regard to minimum hourly wages
imposed by any ordinance adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners
shall apply to any employer located within the Village, the Village hereby
opts out of any such ordinance(s) adopted by the Cook County Board of
Commissioners, and this Chapter of Title 7 of the Village Code is declared to
conflict with any such ordinance(s) adopted by the Cook County Board of
Commissioners that imposes additional obligations with regard to minimum
hourly wages.



   (C)   For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "employee" means an
individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of
persons the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person
employing one (1) or more employees, or seeking to employ one (1) or more
employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the
Village or does business within the Village.



   (D)   For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "employer" does not
mean:



      1.   The government of the United States or a corporation
wholly owned by the government of the United States;



      2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an
Indian tribe;



      3.   The government of the State or any agency or department
thereof; or



      4.   Any unit of government.  (Ord. 5192, 6-5-17)



7-20-2:   PAYMENT OF PAID SICK LEAVE:



   (A)   Employers located within the Village shall comply with all
applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and
regulations may exist from time to time with regard to paid sick leave. 
Employee eligibility for paid sick leave shall be in compliance with all
applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and
regulations may exist from time to time.



   (B)   No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave
imposed by any ordinance adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners
shall apply to any employer located within the Village, the Village hereby
opts out of any such ordinance(s) adopted by the Cook County Board of
Commissioners, and this Chapter of Title 7 of the Village Code is declared to
conflict with any such ordinance(s) adopted by the Cook County Board of
Commissioners that imposes additional obligations with regard to paid sick
leave.



   (C)   For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "employee" means an
individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of
persons the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person
employing one (1) or more employees, or seeking to employ one (1) or more
employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the
Village or does business within the Village.



   (D)   For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "employer" does not
mean:



      1.   The government of the United States or a corporation
wholly owned by the government of the United States;



      2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an
Indian tribe;



      3.   The government of the State or any agency or department
thereof; or



      4.   Any unit of government.  (Ord. 5193, 6-5-17)



CHAPTER 21
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED



SECTION:



7-21-1:   Definitions



7-21-2:   Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited



7-21-3:   Public Nuisance Declared



7-21-4:   Penalty



7-21-1: DEFINITIONS:



   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter
21, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as
follows:



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT:  A cultivation center,
craft grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing
organization or transporting organization.



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:  A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other
necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing
organization or use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis infused products to licensed cannabis
business establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.
101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:  A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients
and caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as
it may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER:  A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis
concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis infused product,
per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:  A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or
compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis
concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from
time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:  An
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business
establishment or a community college licensed under the Community College
Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.



   PERSON:  Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or
other organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee,
volunteer or agent.



(Ord. 5436, 10-7-19)



7-21-2:  CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:



   The following adult use cannabis business establishments are prohibited
in the Village of Orland Park. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer,
allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the
Village of Orland Park of any of the following:



   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower



   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center



   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization



   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser



   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor



   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter



(Ord. 5436, 10-7-19)



7-21-3:  PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:



Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the
Village of Orland Park in violation of the provisions of this Chapter 21 is
hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all
available remedies.



(Ord. 5436, 10-7-19)



7-21-4:  PENALTY:



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B of Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1-4-1 of the Village Code. Each day
such violation continues constitutes a separate fineable offense.  Fines may
be assessed in administrative adjudication, through a local ordinance
violation brought in the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 5436, 10-7-19)



Orland Park, IL Code of Ordinances


TITLE 8 POLICE



CHAPTER  1   POLICE DEPARTMENT



CHAPTER  2   ADMINISTRATIVE FEES



CHAPTER  3   ALARM SYSTEMS



CHAPTER  4   ANIMALS



CHAPTER  5   MINORS



CHAPTER  6   OFFENSES



CHAPTER  7   CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS



CHAPTER  8   VIOLATION CITATIONS



CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT



SECTION:



8-1-1:   Police Department Created



8-1-2:   Composition of Department



8-1-3:   Qualifications



8-1-4:   Appointments and Removals



8-1-5:   Oath; Bond



8-1-6:   Officers of the Department



8-1-6-1:   Chief of Police; Duties



8-1-6-2:   Police Sergeant; Duties



8-1-6-3:   Patrol Officer; Duties



8-1-6-4:   Additional Assignments



8-1-6:   Compensation



8-1-8:   Records of the Department



8-1-9:   Reports of the Department



8-1-10:   Power of Arrest



8-1-11:   Civil Process Powers



8-1-12:   Custody of Lost or Stolen Property



8-1-13:   Police Pension Fund



8-1-13-1:   Fund Established



8-1-13-2:   Tax Levied for Fund



8-1-13-3:   Board of Trustees of Police Pension Fund



8-1-13-4:   Applicability of Provisions



8-1-14:   Part-Time Police Officers



8-1-15:   Community Service Officer



8-1-16:   Auxiliary Police Officer



8-1-17:   Police Chief’s Powers of Suspension



8-1-17-1   Police Chief’s Disciplinary Authority



8-1-17-2   Application of Illinois Municipal Code



8-1-1:  POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED:



   There is established an executive department of the Village which shall
be known as the Police Department.  Said Department shall embrace the
positions hereinafter enumerated and such others as the President and Board
of Trustees may provide from time to time.



8-1-2:  COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:



   Officers:  There are established the offices of Chief of Police,
Police Sergeant, patrol officers and other officers as provided, whose duties
and powers shall be as hereinafter provided.  There shall be one Chief of
Police, Police Sergeants and patrol officers as may be provided from time to
time by the President and Board of Trustees, all of whom shall be officers of
the Village.  These officers shall be known and are hereby designated as
"police officers" and shall constitute the police force of the Village.



   Civilian Employees:  There are hereby created within the Police
Department such civilian employee positions (hereinafter designated "civilian
employees") as are necessary to staff the Police Department.  There shall be
such number of civilian employee positions as the Police Committee may from
time to time determine.



8-1-3:  QUALIFICATIONS:



   1.   The qualifications for police officers of the Village shall be
determined by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, except that
applicants for the position of police officer must, upon commencing the
process of making application, be at least twenty one (21) years of age and
except that the qualifications for the Chief of Police shall be determined by
the President and Board of Trustees.  Also, the President and Board of
Trustees, by ordinance, shall set the residency requirements for all police
officers.  (Ord. 3842, 1-5-04)



   2.   The qualifications for civilian employees of the Police
Department shall be determined by the Chief of Police with the approval of
the Police Committee.  (Ord. 3049, 9-2-97)



   3.   Any person employed as a part-time police officer must meet the
following standards and possess the following qualifications:



      a.   Be twenty-one (21) years of age upon the date of
application for employment;



      b.   Be a citizen of the United States;



      c.   Be of good moral character, temperate habits, of sound
health and physically and mentally  able to perform the essential functions
and assigned duties of the position as the law provides.



      d.   Must be trained in accordance with the Illinois Police
Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1, et seq.) and the rules and requirements of the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board;



      e.   Must complete a forty (40) hours mandatory firearms
training course;



      f.   Submit to, and pass, an extensive background
investigation as established by the Chief of Police or his/her designee;



      g.   Subsequent to a conditional job offer, submit to, and
pass, a physical examination conducted by an Illinois licensed physician;



      h.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate, 60
hours of college credit is preferred;



      I.   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver's license;



      j.   Have no felony convictions; and



      k.   If having served in the United States military, must have
been honorably discharged; and



      l.   Must work less than twenty-nine (29) hours per week.



   4.   A part time police officer shall have all the responsibilities
of a full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the
General Orders of the Orland Park Police Department and as prescribed by the
Chief of Police or his/her designee, but the number of hours a part time
police officer may work within a calendar year is restricted as prescribed by
the Chief of Police or his/her designee.  Part time police officers shall
not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police officers. 



(Ord. 3073, 11-3-97; Amd. Ord. 4719, 4-2-12; Amd. Ord. 5399, 5-6-19)



8-1-4:  APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS:



   1.   Chief of Police - Appointment and Removal:  The Chief of
Police shall be appointed by the Village Manager.  The Village Manager shall
have the power to remove or discharge the Chief of Police by filing with the
Board of Trustees the reasons for such removal or discharge and such removal
or discharge shall not become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote
of the Board of Trustees.



   2.   Police Officers - Appointment and Removal:  As provided by
this Village Code, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint
all police officers except the Chief of Police.  The Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners shall have the power to remove, discharge and suspend
all police officers except the Chief of Police except as otherwise provided
in an operative contract or collective bargaining agreement.



   3.   Civilian Employees -Appointment and Removal:  The Chief of
Police shall hire and discharge all civilian employees of the Police
Department with the approval of the Village Manager.



(Ord.1293, 11-7-83)



8-1-5:  OATH; BOND:



   All police officers, before entering upon the duties of their office,
shall take and subscribe to an oath of office and post a security bond of a
type and in an amount approved by the President and Board of Trustees.  Such
civilian employees as may from time to time be designated by the Chief of
Police with the approval of the Police Committee shall post a security bond
of a type and in an amount approved by the President and Board of Trustees.



8-1-6:  OFFICERS OF THE DEPARTMENT:



8-1-6-1:  CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES:



   The Chief of Police shall when on duty devote full time and attention
to the discharge of the duties prescribed in the laws of the State of
Illinois, in this Code and all other ordinances of the Village, and shall
obey the provisions of this Chapter relating to the conduct of police
officers. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and he or she shall
have the authority to preserve the peace and secure good order, safety and
cleanliness within the Village; protect the rights of persons and of
property, and to that end he or she shall enforce all laws of the State of
Illinois and all ordinances of the Village and the lawfully issued orders of
the Village Manager.  He or she shall be strictly accountable to the Village
Manager for the efficient performance of the duties required of all police
personnel.



   The Chief of Police shall promulgate and the Village Manager shall
approve such rules and regulations for the conduct of police officers, and
civilian employees as are necessary and proper to preserve the peace and
secure good order, safety and cleanliness within the Village; to protect the
rights of persons and of property and to enforce all laws of the State of
Illinois and all ordinances of the Village and the orders of the Village
Manager.  An updated copy of these rules and regulations shall be on file
with the Village Manager at all times.



(Ord. 1293, 11-7-83)



8-1-6-2:  POLICE SERGEANT; DUTIES:



   A Police Sergeant shall when on duty devote full time and attention to
the discharge of the duties prescribed in the laws of the State of Illinois,
in this Chapter and all other ordinances of the Village and shall obey the
provisions of this Chapter relating to the conduct of police officers.  It
shall be the duty of a Police Sergeant to preserve the peace and secure good
order, safety and cleanliness within the Village, protect the rights of
persons and of property and to that end to enforce all laws of the State of
Illinois and all ordinances of the Village and the orders of the Police
Committee.  He or she shall assist the Chief of Police, in the discharge of
duties and shall discharge the lawful orders given by the Chief of Police, to
carry out the duties imposed on said Chief of Police, by this Chapter and any
other ordinances of the Village or the laws of the State of Illinois.  He or
she shall, in the absence of specific orders of the Chief of Police, assign
the patrol officers and other employees to duty and shall supervise said
persons in the performance of their duties.  He or she shall be strictly
accountable to the Chief of Police, for the efficient performance of the
duties required of those patrol officers and civilian employees under his or
her command as provided for in those said rules and regulations set forth in
Section 8-1-8-1.



8-1-6-3:  PATROL OFFICER; DUTIES:



   A patrol officer shall when on duty devote full time and attention to
the discharge of the duties prescribed in the laws of the State of Illinois,
in this Chapter and all other ordinances of the Village, and shall obey the
provisions of this Chapter relating to the conduct of patrol officers and the
rules and regulations of the Police Department.  It shall be the duty of the
patrol officer to preserve the peace and secure good order, safety and
cleanliness within the Village, protect the rights of persons and of property
and to that end to enforce all laws of the State of Illinois and all
ordinances of the Village and the orders of the Police Committee.  He or she
shall discharge the lawful orders given by the Chief of Police,  and
supervising officers to carry out the duties imposed on said person by this
Chapter and any other ordinances of the Village or laws of the State of
Illinois.



(Ord. 833, 3-13-78)



8-1-6-4:  ADDITIONAL ASSIGNMENTS:



   Assignments Created; Eligibility:



   The following special assignments are hereby created:  Deputy Chief of
Police, Commander - Investigations, Commander - Patrol Division, Commander -
Administrator and Technical Services, Lieutenant (3 positions).



   Police officers having attained the rank of Sergeant or above shall be
eligible to serve in the special assignments listed above.



   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Village Manager, is
hereby authorized and directed to establish the duties and responsibilities
of the above special assignments.



   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Village Manager, is
charged with the responsibility of establishing standards, methods, and
procedures for determining the qualifications of the police personnel
eligible for the above assignments.



   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Village Manager, is
hereby authorized to assign from the ranks of Sergeant and above, police
officers to serve in said assignments at the discretion of the Chief of
Police.



   Any Sergeant or above, so assigned by the Chief of Police, shall be
considered assigned to management and shall not be eligible for overtime pay,
but shall receive a management stipend and receive other management
benefits.  Assignments made under this section shall have no effect upon the
rank of any person so assigned. Such assignments shall in no event be
construed as being a promotion, demotion, or creation of a new rank.



   Nothing herein contained is intended to confer upon the Chief of
Police, or to otherwise alter, the duty and authority of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners, except as provided in Section 8-1-17 of this
Chapter. (Ord. 2600, 7-5-94, Amd. Ord. 3365. 6-5-00)



8-1-7:  COMPENSATION:



   Each police officer, employee and civilian employee of the Police
Department shall receive such compensation as the President and Board of
Trustees shall from time to time determine.



8-1-8:  RECORDS OF THE DEPARTMENT:



   The Police Department shall keep the following books of record:



      Felonies and misdemeanors committed in the Village; persons
arrested; traffic accidents; number of requests for police service and
investigations and the disposition thereof; attendance records of the Chief
of Police, Police Sergeants and patrol officers, account of monies received
and expended and the purposes thereof; all properties placed in their charge;
and such other books and records as shall be required by the business of the
Department.



   These records shall be available at all times to the President and
members of the Board of Trustees subject to any limitations required by
law.  If the President or a member of the Board of Trustees requests such
records, he or she shall present such requests to the Chief of Police or in
his absence, the police officer in charge and shall state to the Chief of
Police or officer in charge, his reason or reasons for such requests.



   A complete history of each person charged with having committed a
felony or misdemeanor shall be kept; which shall include a record of all
orders entered in the proceedings and the final disposition thereof by the
coroner, the coroner's jury, the grand jury or the court.  Such records will
be expunged on the order of court.



8-1-9:  REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT:



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to forward at once to the
President and Board of Trustees a written report of each serious felony and
each suspected serious felony committed within the Village, and from time to
time a report of progress thereon.



   The Chief of Police shall once each month submit a report in writing to
the President and Board of Trustees on the status of the police force, the
number of arrests made, the number of traffic violation tickets issued, the
number of traffic accidents, the number of requests for police service and
investigations made and the dispositions thereof, and any suggestions deemed
advisable for the improvement of the police force, its discipline and
administration.  The attendance records of the Chief of Police, Sergeants
and patrol officers shall be made available to the President and Board of
Trustees upon request.



8-1-10:  POWER OF ARREST:



   All police officers shall have the power:



   1.   To arrest, without process, all persons who break the peace or
who are found violating any ordinance of the Village or any criminal law of
the State;



   2.   When a criminal offense has in fact been committed, to arrest,
with or without process, any person that he or she has a reasonable ground
for believing committed such offense;



   3.   To commit arrested persons for examination;



   4.   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight
or on Sunday in the Village jail or any other safe place until they can be
brought before a Judge or Associate Judge of the Circuit Court.



   All police officers shall have the power and authority and it shall be
their duty to serve and execute warrants and other process in the Village for
the summoning, apprehension and commitment of any person charged with
violation of any provision of this Chapter or with any crime or misdemeanor
or offense against the laws and ordinances of the Village or State of
Illinois.



8-1-11:  CIVIL PROCESS POWERS:



   All police officers shall have the power and authority and it shall be
their duty to serve and execute any civil process issued by any Court in any
case in which the Village is a party or any other case by civil court order.



8-1-12:  CUSTODY OF LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY:



   The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all property seized or
taken by the Police Department and of all lost, abandoned, unclaimed or
stolen property within the Village.  As such custodian, he or she shall keep
or cause to be kept a record of all property which has been seized or
otherwise taken possession of by the Police Department.  (Ord. 833, 3-13-78)



8-1-13:  POLICE PENSION FUND:



8-1-13-1:  FUND ESTABLISHED:



   There is hereby established a Police Pension Fund under and in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40, Act 5, Article 3 of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes entitled, "Police officer’s Pension Fund -
Municipalities 500,000 and Under" (40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq); said fund is
created for the purpose of providing pensions for members of the Police
Department of the Village under the terms and regulations hereinafter set
forth, and not to be in conflict with the provisions set forth in said
chapter.



8-1-13-2:  TAX LEVIED FOR FUND:



   The Board of Trustees shall annually hereafter levy a tax upon all
taxable property of the Village at the rate on the dollar of all such taxable
property which will produce an amount which when added to the deductions from
the salaries or wages of police officers and receipts available from all
other sources as hereinafter referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet
the annual requirements of the Pension Fund.  Such tax shall be levied and
collected in like manner with general taxes of the Village and shall be in
addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all
property within the Village.  In the event that the Pension Fund in any
year, over and above the reserve fund, is sufficient to meet all demands of
those requiring payment therefrom in such year, the Board of Trustees may
dispense with the levy of such tax.



   All moneys derived from the taxes levied hereunder and the following
moneys shall be set apart by the Treasurer of the Village to constitute the
Police Pension Fund.



8-1-13-3:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF POLICE PENSION FUND:



   1.   A Board of five (5) members, a majority of whom shall be
residents of the Village to be chosen as hereinafter provided, shall be and
constitute a Board of Trustees to provide for the disbursement of said Fund
and designate the beneficiaries thereof as herein directed, which Board shall
be known as the "Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the Village
of Orland Park".  Two (2) of said Board shall be appointed by the Village
President, one each year, and shall serve for a period of two (2) years or
until such time as their successors are appointed and qualified.  The third
and fourth members of the Board shall be elected from the regular police
force by the active members.  The fifth member shall be elected from the
beneficiaries by such beneficiaries.  The members to be elected shall be
elected for a period from the date of election until April 30 and for two (2)
year terms thereafter.



   2.   The Board herein provided for shall hold quarterly meetings on
the second Tuesday of July, October, January and April of each year and
special meetings upon the call of the President of said Board.  At the first
meeting of said Board, it shall elect one of its members who shall act as the
President of said Board for the period of one year or until such time as his
successor is elected and qualified.  Said Board on the same day, also shall
elect another of its members as secretary and another as Vice President, both
of whom shall serve for a period of one year or until such time as their
successors are elected and qualified.



   In addition to the other powers herein granted, the following further
powers and authority are hereby conferred upon the Board:



      (a).   The exclusive control and management of the Fund
mentioned herein and of all moneys donated, paid or assessed for the relief
or pensioning of disabled, superannuated and retired members of the Police
Department, their widows, minor children and dependent parents.  All such
moneys shall be placed by the Treasurer of the Village to the credit of the
Fund subject to the order of the Board;



      (b).   To draw such Pension funds from the treasury and invest
such funds, or any part thereof, in the name of the Board of Trustees of the
Police Pension Fund in interest bearing bonds or tax anticipation warrants of
the United States or the State of Illinois, or of any county of this State or
of any township or municipal corporation of the State of Illinois, and in
insured shares of Federal chartered savings and loan associations if the
shares are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. 
All securities shall be deposited with the Treasurer of the Village and shall
be subject to the order of the Board.  The interest received from any such
investment, shall be credited to the account of the Pension Fund;



      (c).   To appoint a clerk and define his duties provided,
however, that no person drawing a pension under this Section shall be
employed by the Board as a clerk;



      (d).   To provide for the payment from the Fund of all
necessary expenses including clerk hire, attorneys' fees, printing and
witness fees; provided that no compensation shall be paid to any member of
the Board for any duty required or performed under this Section;



      (e).   To make all necessary rules and regulations for its
guidance in conformity with the provisions of this Section;



      (f).   To do any and all other acts required under the
provisions of 40 ILCS 5/3-107 et seq.



8-1-13-4:  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:



   "Police officer" as used in this Section means any person appointed and
sworn or designated by law as a full- time police officer of the Village and
who has served or is serving or shall serve in the regularly constituted
Police Department of such Village as a police officer or police supervisor,
or other officer.



   This Section is applicable to all full-time police officers of the
Village who meet the qualifications set forth in 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.



   All police officers and surviving spouses or dependents are eligible
for pension benefits from the Fund who qualify under 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et
seq.  (Ord. 459, 8-30-71)



8-1-14:  PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS:



   There is established the position of part-time police officer. 
Part-time police officers shall have the duties assigned to them as
prescribed by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.  The number of
part-time police officers shall be as determined by the corporate authorities
of the Village.



8-1-15:  COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER:



   Appointment: There is hereby created the position of Community Service
Officer, which is a part-time position requiring twenty (20) hours or less of
work a week.  Such officers shall be appointed and discharged by the Chief
of Police with the approval of the Village Manager, and such officers shall
serve under the direction of the Chief of Police of the Village.  Persons so
appointed shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.  All persons so
appointed shall wear a uniform distinct from that of the Police Department. 
Such officers shall be limited to the number authorized by the President and
Board of Trustees.  Their compensation shall be fixed by the President and
Board of Trustees from time to time.



   Authority:  Community Service Officers are hereby authorized to assist
in the enforcement of the ordinances of the Village, including but not
limited to, ordinances regulating fire lanes, parking restrictions, traffic
control ordinances and non-injury accidents on private property.  They shall
be authorized to issue ordinance citations, complaints and notices to appear
on behalf of the Village.  Said Community Service Officers shall serve at
the pleasure of the Chief of Police of the Village, with the approval of the
Village Manager.



(Ord. 1457, 7-29-85)



8-1-16:  AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICER



   Appointment: There is hereby created the position of Auxiliary Police
Officer. Such officers shall be appointed and discharged by the Village
Manager or his designee, with the advice and consent of the President and
Board of Trustees, in such numbers as the Village Manager or his designee
shall from time to time deem necessary.



   Qualifications:  Applicants shall be fingerprinted prior to
appointment and shall not have been convicted of a felony or other crime
involving moral turpitude. Prior to entering upon any duties, said persons
shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police
procedures as shall be appropriate in the exercise of the powers conferred
upon an auxiliary police officer, which training shall be determined and
provided by the Village, as set forth in the Orland Park Police Department
Policies and Procedures Manual.



   Authority: Such auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the
regular Police Department and shall not supplement members of the regular
Police Department in the performance of their assigned and normal duties,
except as otherwise provided herein. Such auxiliary police officers shall
only be assigned to perform the following duties in the Village:



      a.   To aid or direct traffic within the Village.



      b.   To aid in control of natural or man made disasters.



      c.   To aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the
Police Chief; provided that, in cases which render it impractical for members
of the regular Police Department to perform the normal and regular police
duties, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to assign auxiliary police
officers to perform  normal and regular police duties.



   Identification: Identification symbols, including a badge and uniform,
worn by such auxiliary police officers shall be different and distinct from
those used by members of the regular Police Department. Such auxiliary police
officers shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject
to the direction and control of the Chief of Police, or of the superior
officer in charge during such period of duty.



   Firearms: The auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms,
except with the permission of the Chief of Police and while in uniform and in
the performance of their duties.  Before being permitted to carry a firearm,
an auxiliary police officer must have successfully completed the same course
of training as is required of peace officers under Section 2 of the Peace
Officers Firearm Training Act.  50 ILCS 710/2.



   Conservators of the Peace: The auxiliary police officers, when on duty,
but not at any other time, shall also be conservators of the peace and shall
have the powers as prescribed in the Illinois Municipal Code at 65 ILCS
5/3.1-15-25 provided the auxiliary police officer has complied with the
provisions of the Police Training Act, 50 ILCS 705/10.5, and completed the
400-Hour Mandatory Basic Law Enforcement Officer Training Course required by
the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board, otherwise the
auxiliary police officer shall not be a conservator of the peace and shall
not possess conservation of the peace powers as provided by 65 ILCS
5/3.1-15-25.



(Ord. 4206, 12-4-06)



8-1-17:  POLICE CHIEF'S POWERS OF SUSPENSION:



8-1-17-1:  POLICE CHIEF'S DISCIPLINARY AUTHORITY:



   The provisions of Section 5/10-2.1-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code,
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17, which limit the power and authority of the Chief of
Police to suspension periods of five (5) days, are hereby amended and deemed
superseded by this Code, which hereby grants to the Orland Park Chief of
Police the authority and power to suspend officers and sworn members of the
police department for a period up to and including thirty (30) days in
duration, without pay.



8-1-17-2:  APPLICATION OF ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE:



   In all other respects not inconsistent with the expansion of the Police
Chief's disciplinary powers set forth herein, the provisions of 65 ILCS
5/10-2.1-17 shall continue to apply to all officers and sworn members of the
police department of the Village of Orland Park as therein provided.  (Ord.
3365, 5-6-00)



CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES



SECTION:



8-2-1:   Administrative Fee



8-2-2:   Request for Hearing



8-2-3:   Appeal - Administrative Hearing



8-2-4:   Administrative Fee a Debt



8-2-1:  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:



   The Police Department will charge an administrative fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the processing of individuals on any bookable arrest,
including any arrest on a warrant.  (Ord. 5333, 9-17-18)



8-2-2:  REQUEST FOR HEARING:



   1.   An individual may request, in writing within thirty (30) days
of the imposition of the administrative fee, a hearing.



   2.   The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall conduct the
hearing.



   3.   The hearing shall be informal, not subject to the formal rules
of evidence, and may be conducted over the telephone.



   4.   If, after the hearing, the Chief of Police or his/her designee
determines that the imposition of the administrative fee was proper, then
he/she shall direct the collection of the administrative fee.



   5.   If there is a determination that imposition of the
administrative fee was improper, then the individual shall not be required to
pay the administrative fee. If the administrative fee has already been paid
then the same will be refunded.



   6.   The individual may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police,
or his/her designee, by requesting, in writing, within fourteen (14) days of
the decision, an administrative hearing as set forth herein.  (Ord. 5333,
9-17-18)



8-2-3:  APPEAL - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:



   1.   Upon the timely written request by the individual who has been
charged the administrative fee, a hearing on the lawfulness of the imposition
of the administrative fee shall be conducted in conjunction with the
administrative hearing Sections of this Code, Title 9, Chapter 15, Sections
9-15-1, et seq.



   2.   Any sworn or affirmed report that is prepared in the
performance of a law enforcement officer's duties and sufficiently describes
the circumstances leading to the individual's arrest and processing shall be
admissible prima facie evidence of probable cause and the individual's
liability, unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.



   3.   If after the hearing, the Hearing Officer finds that the
imposition of the administrative fee was proper under the terms of this
Chapter, the Hearing Officer may enter a written order finding the individual
civilly liable to the Village of Orland Park.



   4.   If the individual requests a hearing but fails to appear at the
hearing, the Hearing Officer may enter a default order against the individual
for the amount of the administrative fee.



   5.   If the individual fails to timely request a hearing, an order
for the amount of the administrative fee shall be entered against the
individual, unless said individual has affirmatively waived the right to an
administrative hearing and agreed to pay the administrative fee.



   6.   If, after hearing, the hearing officer finds that the
imposition of the administrative fee was improper, then the individual will
not be charged the administrative fee, or the amount of the administrative
fee shall be refunded if already paid.  (Ord. 5333, 9-17-18)



8-2-4:  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE A DEBT:



   The administrative fee imposed upon an individual shall constitute a
debt due and owing to the Village. If an individual has not previously paid
the administrative fee, the individual shall have thirty (30) days to pay the
debt. If not paid, the Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and
collect the judgment in any manner provided by law.  (Ord. 5333, 9-17-18)



CHAPTER 3
ALARM SYSTEMS



SECTION:



8-3-1:   Definitions



8-3-2:   Permitted Devices



8-3-3:   Monitoring System



8-3-4:   Permit Required



8-3-5:   Application for Permit; Updating of Information



8-3-6:   Inspection



8-3-7:   Local Alarms



8-3-8:   Testing of Equipment



8-3-9:   Revocation of Permit



8-3-10:   False Alarms and Response Time; Fine Amounts



8-3-11:   Disconnection



8-3-12:   Payment of Fines and Fees; Penalty



8-3-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   The following definitions shall be applicable for the purposes of this
Chapter:



   ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER:  Any person, firm or corporation that sells,
leases or installs automatic protection devices or signaling devices which
transmit alarms upon receipt of a stimulus from a detection apparatus or a
manually operated system.



   ALARM CONDITIONS:  Alarms activated by unlawful violation of a user's
property or other violations that the systems were designed to protect
against, acts of God, other violent conditions or by outside agencies or
external forces not under the control of the owner, lessee or his employee or
agent.



   ALARM USER:  Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the Village except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. 
Also included are those systems which employ an audible signal emitting
sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to alert or signal persons
outside the premises.



   ALARM SYSTEM:  An assembly of equipment and devices such as a solid
state unit, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which Police or Fire Department are expected to respond.



   BURGLAR ALARM:  An alarm that indicates that a person or persons are
unlawfully entering on the alarm user’s property, and that does not require
the police to respond in the most urgent fashion.  (Ord. 4415, 9-15-08)



   CENTRAL STATION:  A facility whose prime purpose is to monitor
incoming alarm signals twenty four (24) hours a day and relay the signal
information to the appropriate authorities.



   DIRECT LINE:  A telephone line leading directly into the
communications center of the Police Department that is for use only to report
signals on a person-to-person basis.



   FALSE ALARMS:  The activation of an alarm system caused by improper
operation, negligence of the owner or lessee or his employee or agent or
equipment malfunction.



   LOCAL ALARMS:  A signaling system which, when activated, causes an
audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the 
premises within which the system is installed.    (Ord. 918, 2-12-79)



   PANIC/HOLD UP ALARM:  An alarm that indicates that the alarm user is
in imminent danger and that requires police to respond in the most urgent
fashion.  (Ord. 4415, 9-15-08)



   PERSON:  Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or
society, school district, County, unit of local government as defined in the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, government agency and body politic,
but such term does not include the Village of Orland Park.  (Ord. 1193,
7-26-82)



   POLICE CHIEF:  The Chief of the Police Department of the Village, or
his authorized representative.



   PUBLIC TRUNKLINE:  A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police Department that is for the purpose of handling emergency
and administrative calls on a person-to-person basis.



   SIGNALING DEVICE:  An electrically operated instrument which
automatically sends visual and/or audible signals to be registered by
indicators at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal or central station.



   VILLAGE:  Village of Orland Park.



8-3-2:  PERMITTED DEVICES:



   No person shall use or cause or permit to be used, an alarm system
utilizing automatic protection devices that automatically select a public
trunkline of the Police Department of the Village and then reproduce any pre-
recorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency.



   With the exception of local alarms, only signaling devices shall be
permitted to be installed in the Village for the purpose of reporting any
robbery, burglary, or other emergency to the Police Department of the Village.



(Ord. 4415, 9-15-08)



8-3-3:  MONITORING SYSTEM:



   The Police Department of the Village is authorized to contract for and
maintain the installation of a uniform monitoring system (board) to receive
visual and audible signals over direct lines.  This system shall have a
capacity to meet present needs and the ability to expand for future needs,
and shall be available to any permit user who meets the requirements for a
permit for connection.



   The company supplying and maintaining the monitoring system shall have
the right to charge subscribers or their alarm equipment supplier a
reasonable fee for connection to and maintenance of the system.



8-3-4:  PERMIT REQUIRED:



   No alarm user shall install, operate or maintain an alarm system in the
Village without first obtaining a permit as required below.



   Any alarm user who operates an alarm system without first obtaining
authorization as required by this Section, or who, after having an
authorization revoked, fails to disconnect his alarm system, shall be in
violation of this Chapter.



8-3-5:  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; UPDATING OF INFORMATION



   A.   Applications for permits to install, maintain and operate an
alarm system shall be filed with the Orland Park Police Department on the
form the Department is hereby authorized to prepare as part of its alarm
tracking system.  An application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall
accompany the completed form.  Transfer of ownership or lease of a business
or home will require a new application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if
the alarm system is to be used by the new tenant(s).



   B.    The information contained in an alarm user application
required by this section  and  other information received by the Chief of
Police through correspondence or communications with an alarm user shall be
securely maintained and restricted to inspection only by the Chief of Police
or certain officers or Village employees specifically assigned the
responsibility for handling and processing alarm user authorizations in the
course of official duties.  Neither the Chief of Police nor any employee of
the Village shall knowingly or willfully reveal the information contained in
an alarm user authorization application or in correspondence or communication
with an alarm user to any other person for any purpose not related to this
Chapter or official law enforcement matters without the written consent of
the alarm user supplying such information.



   C.   The Chief of Police shall approve an application if he finds
that:



      1   There is a statement that the equipment complies with the
standard of Underwriters Laboratories, Factory Material, Canadian Standards
Association or an equivalent organization.



      2.   The alarm equipment supplier installing the device
maintains an adequate service organization to repair, maintain and otherwise
service the system sold, leased or installed by him.



      3.   The alarm application is completed in its entirety.



   D.   The Chief of Police may impose reasonable conditions on the
issuance and exercise of a permit.



   E.   Approved alarm system permit holders shall update the
information in the permit application as follows:



      1   Business alarm users shall update all required information
in their alarm permit in conjunction with their annual business license
applications for every odd-numbered year with a form provided with their
business license application form or via the online form available through
the Village website.  There is no fee for this service.



      2   Residential alarm users shall update all required
information in their alarm permit every five years or fraction thereof during
the years 2010, 2015, 2020, etc., with a form provided by the Village or via
the online form available through the Village website.  There is no fee for
this service.



(Ord. 4415, 9-15-08)



8-3-6:  INSPECTION:



   The Chief of Police shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on
the premises where it is intended to be used, both prior to and subsequent to
the issuance of a permit, at reasonable times to determine whether a permit
should be granted and whether it is being used in conformity with the terms
of the permit and the provisions of this Chapter.  Every alarm user
authorized under this Section shall be required to have its alarm system
inspected at least once a year by an alarm equipment supplier, licensed by
the Village and post a certificate of such inspection on the premises with
plain view where the alarm system is maintained.



8-3-7:  LOCAL ALARMS:



   Local alarms are those alarms that activate audibly or visibly on the
premises of the owner, partner or lease.  Local alarms may be in addition to
an alarm system connected to a monitoring system.  Local alarms with any
externally audible alert shall have an automatic cutoff after fifteen (15)
minutes of sounding and shall not make a sound similar to that of civil
defense warning systems.



8-3-8:  TESTING OF EQUIPMENT:



   No alarm system designed to transmit alarm conditions directly to the
Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining
permission from the Police Department.  Permission is not required to test
or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting alarm conditions directly to
the Police Department, unless the alarm conditions are to be relayed to the
Police Department.



   Failure to notify the Police Department prior to testing an alarm
system shall constitute a false alarm.



8-3-9:  REVOCATION OF PERMIT:



   1.   Alarm Permit revocation proceedings may begin after the twelfth
(12th) false alarm in a calendar year beginning on January 1 of any year. 
(Ord. 4415, 9-15-08)



   2.   After the Police Department has recorded twelve (12) false
alarms for an authorized alarm user within a calendar year beginning on
January 1 of that year, it shall prepare a station complaint and on the same
day shall verbally notify the person indicated in the permit to deal with
police authorities, informing the person of the number of false alarms and
requesting that within fifteen (15) days a written report be submitted
describing efforts to discover and eliminate the cause(s) of the false
alarms.  (Ord. 4415, 9-15-08)



   3.   An alarm user whose permit has been revoked for a violation of
this Section will pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) reinstatement fee after
resolving the false alarm issue to the reasonable satisfaction of the Chief
of Police and before the department reinstates the alarm user’s
authorization.  (Ord. 4415, 9-15-08)



   4.   If the authorized user fails to submit the report in paragraph
2, above, within 15 days or such longer time as the Chief of Police may
reasonably grant, or if said report fails to show that the alarm user has
taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false alarms, the
Chief of Police may revoke the alarm user’s authorization.  (Ord. 4415,
9-15-08)



   5.   When alarm conditions are received by the Police Department
that evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, the
Police Chief is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of such device,
or his representative, disconnect such device until it is made to comply with
said requirements.



   6.   The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter after giving written notice to the
alarm user and an opportunity for the alarm user to effect compliance within
ten (10) days or less, if he determines that the alarm system under said
permit has been installed, maintained or operated in violation of this
Chapter or of any term or condition of said permit.



   7.   An alarm system user whose authorization has been revoked is
not precluded under this Section from applying for a new authorization.  The
Police Chief however, is not required to issue a new authorization unless he
is satisfied that the alarm user's system has been properly serviced and its
deficiencies corrected.  The Police Chief may impose reasonable restrictions
and conditions upon issuing a new authorization to an alarm user with respect
to the particular system for which the authorization is revoked.



8-3-10:  FALSE ALARMS AND RESPONSE TIME; FINE AMOUNTS



   1.   After six (6) false alarms in a calendar year beginning on
January 1 of each year, fines will be imposed according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted.



   2.   An alarm user or his or her authorized agent shall have thirty
(30) minutes in which to arrive at an alarm location to assist police
authorities in shutting off any alarm.  If the response time is greater than
thirty (30) minutes, the alarm user will be assessed a fine according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B unless he releases the responding agency
from the scene at the time he is advised of the alarm by the responding
agency.



   3.   A false burglar alarm at an open business will be treated as a
false panic/holdup alarm and will be assessed a fine according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted and also count as a false alarm under this section. 



(Ord. 4415, 9-15-08; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-3-11:  DISCONNECTION:



   In the event the Village finds it necessary to disconnect a defective
alarm system, the Village shall incur no liability by such action.



8-3-12:  PAYMENT OF FINES AND FEES; PENALTY



   1.   All fees and fines shall be paid to the Village Clerk for
deposit into the Village General Fund. Failure to pay assessed fines or fees
for false alarm incidents within thirty (30) days of final determination by
the Administrative Hearing Officer will be considered a violation of this
chapter and will cause the revocation of the alarm permit pursuant to Section
8-3-9-4.  Such revocation does not abrogate the responsibility to pay the
fines.



   2.   Any violation of any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall result in a fine according
to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such
person shall be convicted and every day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.  In addition, any violation of the provisions
of this chapter may cause a revocation of an alarm permit granted, pursuant
to the procedure and provisions of Section 8-3-9-4.



   3.   Alarm users whose permits have been revoked for a violation of
this Chapter will pay reinstatement fee according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B over and above all other fines and fees that are owed
before the Department reinstates the alarm user's permit.



(Ord. 4415, 9-15-08; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS



SECTION:



8-4-1:   Definitions



8-4-2:   Cruelty to Animals Prohibited



8-4-2-1:   Care and Treatment of Animals



8-4-2-2:   Confinement in Motor Vehicle       



8-4-3:   Certain Types of Leghold Traps Prohibited



8-4-4:   Animal Fighting



8-4-5:   Dangerous Animals



8-4-6:   Injury by Animal or Dog



8-4-7:   Running at Large Prohibited



8-4-8:   Dogs and Other Animals Prohibited from Certain Places



8-4-9:   Impoundment and Redemption



8-4-10:   Leash or Other Control Methods Required



8-4-11:   Animals Disturbing the Peace



8-4-12:   Female Dogs and Cats in Heat



8-4-13:   Defecation Control



8-4-14:   Diseased Animals



8-4-15:   Keeping Certain Animals Prohibited



8-4-15-1:   Number of Dogs and Cats



8-4-16:   Vaccination Required



8-4-17:   Animals Suffering From Rabies Declared Nuisance



8-4-18:   Right of Entry



8-4-19:   Contracts with Humane Societies



8-4-20:   Hunting



8-4-21:   Penalty for Violation



8-4-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERED ANIMAL:  An animal which has been spayed or neutered by a
licensed veterinarian and which has thereby been rendered incapable of
reproduction.



   ANIMAL: Any live vertebrate creature except man.



   CATS:  All members of the classification, Felidae.



   COMPETENT PERSON:  A person who is physically and mentally capable of
managing and controlling a dog which is his/her responsibility while off the
premises of the owner or keeper thereof.



   DOGS:  All members of the classification, Canidae.



   EXOTIC ANIMAL:  An animal that is not indigenous to the State of
Illinois.



   FIERCE, VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS DOG:  Any dog is hereby declared fierce,
vicious, or dangerous that, without provocation, attacks or bites humans or
animals.  Dogs may be deemed dangerous based on any single incident that
results in injury to a person or animal.



   HUNTING: The act of a person possessing a weapon or being accompanied
by a dog for the purpose of taking species protected by the Illinois Wildlife
Code in any location such species may inhabit.



   KENNEL:  Any establishment engaged in the commercial business of
breeding, showing, buying, selling, or boarding of dogs and cats.



   OWNER:  Any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation who:



      (1)   Has a right of property in an animal or dog.



      (2)   Keeps or harbors an animal or dog.



      (3)   Has an animal or dog in his/her care, or acts as
custodian of an animal or dog.



   RUNNING AT LARGE: Any dog or other animal shall be deemed to be running
at large when it is off the premises of its owner or keeper and not under
adequate restraint of a competent person.  A dog or animal is under adequate
restraint within the meaning of this ordinance if it is on its owner’s or
keeper’s premises; or under the owner’s or keeper’s or other competent
person’s control on a stout leash not more than eight feet in length; or at
heel near a competent person and obedient to that person’s commands.



   WILD ANIMAL:  All naturally wild non-domesticated animals.



(Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



8-4-2:  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED:



   No person shall cruelly treat any dog or other animal in the Village in
any way.  Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads, or
abandons any dog or other animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of
this ordinance.



8-4-2-1:  CARE AND TREATMENT OF ANIMALS:



   No owner or person shall cruelly treat, beat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse any animal.  No owner of an animal shall fail to
provide such animal with sufficient and wholesome food and water, adequate
shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when necessary to
prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment.  (Ord. 3276, 8-2-99)



   (A)   An animal owner's duties, as provided in the Illinois Humane
Care for Animals Act (510 ILCS 70/3) and for purposes of the requirements of
this Code Section, include providing his/her animals with adequate shelter
and protection from the weather, described as follows:



      (1)   Proper shelter. Defined as protection from weather for
an animal such as a moisture proof building, with dry floor, free from feces,
and adequate clean bedding material;



      (2)   Sufficient room. A pen or kennel shall be of sufficient
room to provide adequate exercise. Cable, lead line, tie line or any line
used to secure the animal in yard or pen shall be of sufficient length and
placement to provide tangle free exercise;



      (3)   Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause
overheating or discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all
animals/pets kept outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the
sun;



      (4)   Shelter from rain or snow. Animals/pets kept outdoors
shall be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during
rain or snow;



      (5)   Shelter from cold weather. Shelter shall be provided for
all animals/pets kept outdoors to afford comfort and protection to such
animals appropriate for the local climatic conditions and the animal/pet
species concerned;



      (6)   Shelter from extreme heat or cold. Shelter that is
provided in an enclosed area such as enclosed porch shall not cause danger,
distress or discomfort to the animal;



      (7)   Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly
eliminate excess water to prevent a damp, wet or muddy environment;



      (8)   No animal may be left outdoors in the case of extreme
weather conditions, including when a heat advisory, a wind chill warning,
thunderstorm warning, or tornado warning has been issued by the National
Weather Service (NWS) or other local, state, or national authority.



   (B)   In addition to any fine or penalty provided for in Chapter 8
of this Title 8 for a violation of this Section 8-4-2-1, a law enforcement
officer or animal control officer may take an animal into protective custody
if such officer reasonably believes that the animal is not being provided
humane care and treatment as required by this Section and to prevent
suffering by the animal.  (Ord. 5391, 3-18-19)



8-4-2-2:  CONFINEMENT IN MOTOR VEHICLE:



   No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in a
manner that places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure
to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold.  In order to protect the life
and safety of an animal, an animal control officer or a law enforcement
officer who has probable cause to believe that this section is violated shall
have authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the
circumstances, after making a reasonable effort under the circumstances to
locate the owner or person.  (Ord. 3276, 8-2-99)



8-4-3:  CERTAIN TYPES OF LEGHOLD TRAPS PROHIBITED:



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to set, use, or maintain
any leg hold trap, or similar device, which is spring activated and which
trap is composed of saw-toothed, spiked, or toothed jaws, or any other leg
hold trap capable of inflicting excruciating pain to trapped animals.  (Ord.
4595, 11-1- 10)



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale, transfer,
possession, setting, or use in or under buildings, or otherwise, of standard
household mouse or rat traps for the purpose of controlling mice, rats, and
rodents, nor shall this section apply to the possession or use of traps for
display or exhibition purposes by not-for-profit organizations, or to a
person in the act of turning over possession of traps prohibited in division
(A) above to a local law enforcement agency, or any animal welfare agency.



   (C)   Conviction under this section shall result in the confiscation
of all equipment, animals, and pelts used in, or obtained by reason of
violation of this section.



8-4-4:  ANIMAL FIGHTING:



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or dog to
intentionally allow such animal or dog to become involved in a fight with any
other animal or dog.



8-4-5:  DANGEROUS ANIMALS:



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or any
vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the Village; exhibitions or
parades of animals which are fierce in nature in the eyes of the law may be
conducted only upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police.



   (B)   If a confined dog is declared to be dangerous, fierce, or
vicious by either a licensed veterinarian, or the Chief of Police or his/her
designee, the owner or keeper of such dog shall immediately provide
extraordinary precautions to insure the safety of the public.  Precautions
that can be mandated may include spaying, neutering, muzzles, chains, cages,
warning signs or any reasonable constraint or requirement as may be necessary
to safeguard the public.  Any dog at large which by its actions is deemed by
the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, to be dangerous, fierce, or
vicious, and cannot safely be taken up and impounded, may be tranquilized by
the Police Department.  It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or
his/her designee to forthwith deliver such tranquilized dog to a licensed
veterinarian provided, however, that a police officer shall have the right to
slay any dog or animal when in his/her determination it poses an imminent
threat of loss of life or serious bodily injury to humans, dogs, cats or
other domesticated animals. (Ord. 4458, 2-16-09; Amd. Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



   (C)   Dogs that are maintained at a residential, commercial, or
other establishment for protection only, shall be contained by a secure fence
at all times when outdoors, including when on the owner's property.  The
Police Department must be notified, by the property owner, of the use of such
guard dogs on any property located in the Village of Orland Park.



8-4-6:  INJURY BY ANIMAL OR DOG:



   (A)   Any animal or dog which bites (as defined in the Illinois
Animal Control Act, as from time to time amended) a person or so injures any
person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.



   (B)   Whenever the Police Department receives information that any
person has been bitten by a dog or other animal, the Chief of Police or
his/her designee shall order the dog or other animal confined and observed by
a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days beginning within
twenty-four (24) hours of the biting incident. (Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



   (C)   The veterinarian shall report, in writing, to the appropriate
Rabies Control office of Cook or Will Counties within 24 hours after the dog
or other animal is confined by him or her, the owner's name, address, and
date of confinement, the breed, description, age, and sex of the dog or other
animal.  The veterinarian shall confine the dog or other animal for ten days
and notify the appropriate Rabies Control office in writing of the final
disposition of the dog or other animal at the termination of the period of
confinement.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person
has been bitten by a dog or other animal to fail to notify the Police
Department within twenty-four (24) hours of said bite.  (Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



   (E)   It is unlawful for the owner of such dog or other animal to
sell or give away or otherwise dispose of the dog or other animal that is
known to have bitten a person until it is released by the Police Department
or its authorized agent.  It is unlawful for the owner of the dog or other
animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written or printed
recommendations of the licensed veterinarian in any particular case.



   (F)   The written or printed recommendations shall, if possible, be
delivered in person by the Police Department or its properly authorized
agent.  If such recommendations cannot be delivered in person, they shall be
mailed by regular mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the owner of the
dog or other animal.  The affidavit or testimony of the police officer or
other properly authorized agent of the Police Department who delivered or
mailed such recommendations shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt of
such recommendations by the owner of the dog or other animal.



   (G)   Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog or other
animal shall be borne by the owner.



8-4-7:  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:



   The owner of any dog or animal shall not permit, cause, or suffer the
animal or dog to be at large in any of the streets, public ways, or upon the
private premises of any person other than the owner of the animal or dog. 
Having a right of property in, or the keeping, housing, harboring,
maintaining, feeding, or caring for, or having custody of any such animal or
dog shall be deemed prima facie evidence of ownership of the animal or dog.



8-4-8:  DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS PROHIBITED FROM CERTAIN PLACES:



   (A)   Parks and Village Property:  It shall be unlawful for any
person owning, harboring, keeping, or in charge of any dog or other animal to
walk or allow such dog or other animal in a park or on other property owned
by the Village of Orland Park unless it is under control by leash or other
approved control methods.  This provision shall not apply to ‘seeing
eye’ dogs aiding visually impaired persons or similarly trained dogs aiding
handicapped persons, or police canine units in the performance of their
duty.  (Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



   (B)   Public Halls, Food Establishments:  It shall be unlawful for
any dog or other animal, even though on leash, to be in or enter upon any
public hall, restaurant, confectionery shop, coffee shop, ice cream parlor,
soft drink parlor, office, store, grocery, meat market, bakery or any store
or shop for the sale of food, except any shop for the sale of animal pets,
anywhere within the Village, during the time that any of said places or
establishments are open for use by the public or persons entitled to use the
same.  This provision shall not apply to "seeing eye" dogs aiding visually
impaired persons or similarly trained dogs aiding handicapped persons, or
police canine units in the performance of their duty.



8-4-9:  IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION:



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, his/her designee
and every police officer and conservator of the peace to apprehend any dog or
animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this ordinance
and to impound the dog or animal in such place as shall be designated for
that purpose.



   (B)   Any animal not bearing a serially numbered tag evidencing
inoculation as required by the Cook County Animal and Rabies Control
Ordinance which has been impounded shall be separated from other impounded
animals that do bear a serially numbered tag evidencing inoculation as
required by the Cook County Animal and Rabies Control ordinance and shall be
disposed of by delivery to a chartered animal humane society as soon as is
practicable.  (Ord. 4458, 2-16-09)



   (C)   The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall within eight
hours of such impounding, attempt by telephone, or if unsuccessful by regular
mail, to notify the last-known owner of the animal that the animal has been
impounded.  The animal may be redeemed by the owner only upon the payment of
a fine for violation of the Village Code and any other applicable fees or
costs and the execution of a certificate that the animal so impounded will
voluntarily be impounded by the owner should the animal later be suspected of
having bitten or injured any person during the period the animal was at
large.  In the event any such animal remains unredeemed and unwanted for a
period of eight hours (or such lesser period if the Chief of Police or
his/her designee determines that facilities are not available for continued
impoundment), then the animal shall be disposed of by delivery to a chartered
animal humane society.  (Ord. 3276, 8-4-99; Amd. Ord. 4458, 2-16-09)



   (D)   Anything in this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, no
dog or cat suspected of having rabies shall be released within less than ten
days following its impounding, and any such dog or cat shall be held and
dealt with in the manner hereinafter provided.



8-4-10:  LEASH OR OTHER CONTROL METHODS REQUIRED:



   It is unlawful for any owner of any animal or dog to maintain a public
nuisance by permitting any animal or dog to leave the premises of its owner
when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods. 
Animals or dogs confined on the owner’s property shall be restrained so
that they do not disturb any public right-of-way.  (Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



8-4-11:  ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE:



   No person shall harbor or keep any animal or dog which barks, whines,
howls, or makes excessive noise so as to disturb the peace of other residents
or to constitute a nuisance at any time of the day or night.  Every hour any
animal or dog continues to disturb the peace or constitutes a nuisance shall
constitute a separate offense.



   In the event an animal or dog is disturbing the peace or constituting a
nuisance as described in this SECTION, and



      (A)   Such animal or dog is outside of a building, and



      (B)   The owner of the animal or dog is not on the premises
and cannot be contacted by telephone or any other reasonable means by the
Chief of Police or his/her designee in order to cease the disturbance or
abate the nuisance, the Chief of Police or his/her designee may enter upon
the premises (but not in any building) to apprehend and impound the animal or
dog, in the manner provided in SECTION 9 hereof, so long as the apprehension
can be accomplished without harm to the animal or dog.



8-4-12:  FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT:



   The owner or keeper of any female dog or cat shall not permit or suffer
such dog or cat, while in heat, to be upon any sidewalk, street, parkway,
alley, or other public place, or upon any private premises, other than the
premises of the owner or keeper, or, if outdoors, upon any unfenced part of
the premises of the owner or keeper which is closer to a sidewalk, street,
parkway, alley, or other public place, than ten feet.



8-4-13:  DEFECATION CONTROL:



   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal or dog to maintain
a public nuisance by permitting any animal or dog to defecate on any
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such owner unless the
owner removes such excrements as provided for in this section.  Having a
right of property in, or the keeping, housing, harboring, maintaining,
feeding, or caring for, or having custody of any animal or dog shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of ownership of any such animal or dog for the
purpose of enforcing this section.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal or dog to
walk or permit such animal or dog to be on any property, public or private,
not owned or possessed by such owner unless the animal or dog is accompanied
by a person who has in his/her possession a device for the removal of
excrement and a depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle
located upon the property owned or possessed by the person.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or dog to
immediately fail to remove excrement left by the animal or dog on property,
whether public or private, not owned or possessed by the person.  The
excrement shall be removed to a proper receptacle located on property owned
or possessed by the owner.



   (D)   No owner of any animal or dog shall allow excrement to
accumulate in any yard, pen, or premises in or upon which the animal or dog
shall be confined or kept to the extent that the stench becomes offensive to
those residing in the vicinity, or results in a health hazard or nuisance. 
Any accumulation of excrement upon the premises of the owner which becomes
offensive to those residing in the vicinity is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.



8-4-14:  DISEASED ANIMALS:



   (A)   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an
infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any
public place whereby the health of man, animal, or beast may be affected; nor
shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner thereof, except upon the supervision of the Health Officer.



   (B)   It is made the duty of the Health Officer to secure such
disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as
to prevent the communication and spread of contagion or infection, except in
cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act.



8-4-15:  KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:



   (A)   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any
animal is or may be kept to become unclean, or unwholesome, and it shall be
unlawful to keep any live snakes, large cats, swine or pigs, cattle, goats,
or the like in the Village.  No other animals may be maintained or kept in
the Village for any purpose other than as pets (except as permitted in pet
shops and animal hospitals).



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor any exotic animals,
wild animals, live snakes, alligators, crocodiles, large cats, swine or pigs,
cattle, goats, or the like in the Village.  No other animals may be
maintained or kept in the Village for any purpose other than as pets (except
as permitted in pet shops and animal hospitals).  (Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to house or keep any live poultry or fowl
within 100 feet of any school or church or within 100 feet of any residence
other than the residence of the owner of such animals or poultry, or within
100 feet of any public street.  It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any
fowl for the use in the staging of any cockfights.  (Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



8-4-15-1:  NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than three (3) dogs
and three (3) cats on property within the Village, except that a litter may
be kept for a period not exceeding four (4) months from birth.  (Ord. 3276,
8-2-99)



8-4-16:  VACCINATION REQUIRED:



   Except as otherwise in this section provided, it shall be unlawful to
own or keep within the Village any animal required to be vaccinated under the
Cook County Animal and Rabies Control Ordinance which has not been vaccinated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian within the then calendar year;
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful to keep an unvaccinated dog
or cat which is under four months of age; and further provided, however, it
shall not be unlawful if the animal has been vaccinated in accordance with
the Cook County Animal and Rabies Control Ordinance and lawful regulations
promulgated thereunder.  Evidence of vaccination shall be the serially
numbered tag issued by Cook County, or a lawful authorized and licensed
veterinarian, and attached to the collar or harness worn by the animal. 
(Ord. 3276, 8-2-99; Amd. Ord. 4458,  2-16-09)



8-4-17:  ANIMALS SUFFERING FROM RABIES DECLARED NUISANCE:



   Any animal, dog or cat suffering from rabies as determined by a
licensed veterinarian is hereby declared to be a nuisance.  It shall be the
duty of the owner or keeper of the animal, dog or cat  to immediately
confine the animal, dog or cat  for observation as provided for by the
Illinois Animal Control Act. (Ord. 3276, 8-2-99)



8-4-18:  RIGHT OF ENTRY:



   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, the
Chief of Police, or any other officer so designated may enter upon private
premises to apprehend an at-large animal or dog, a dangerous dog or other
animal, or an animal or dog thought to be infected with rabies.  If, after
request therefor, the owner of such animal or dog shall refuse to deliver
such animal or dog to such person, the owner shall be in violation of this
ordinance.  (Ord. 4595, 11-1-10)



8-4-19:  CONTRACTS WITH HUMANE SOCIETIES:



   For the purposes of carrying out the intention of this Chapter, the
Village may enter into contracts with chartered humane societies.  In any
contract or agreement with a chartered humane society, the Village shall be
responsible for payment for no more than three (3) days of impounding of an
unclaimed animal.  Notwithstanding, the owner of any animal claiming an
impounded animal shall be responsible for all costs of impounding as well as
any other applicable fines or fees under these regulations or state law. 



(Ord. 3276, 8/3/99)



8-4-20:  HUNTING PROHIBITED



   Hunting for any animals within the limits of the Village of Orland Park
is prohibited with the exception of licensed trappers or private property and
designated officers or contractors of the police department.  (Ord. 4595,
11-1-10)



8-4-21:  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:



   Whoever violates any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted and every day the violation continues,
except as provided in Section 11 hereof, shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 4595, 11-1-10; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 5
MINORS



SECTION:



8-5-1:   (Reserved)



8-5-2:   (Reserved)



8-5-3:   Curfew for Minors



8-5-3-1:   Child Defined



8-5-3-2:   Hours of Curfew



8-5-3-3:   Halloween Curfew



8-5-3-4:   Enforcement



8-5-3-5:   Penalty



8-5-4:   Harmful Materials, Distribution and Display



8-5-4-1:   Definitions



8-5-4-2:   Harmful Material Prohibited



8-5-4-3:   Public Display of Harmful Material Prohibited



8-5-4-4:   Exclusion



8-5-5:   Parental Responsibility; Vandalism



8-5-5-1:   Definitions



8-5-5-2:   Parental Responsibility for Damages



8-5-5-3:   Limitation on Damages



8-5-5-4:   Enforcement



8-5-3:  CURFEW FOR MINORS:



8-5-3-1:  CHILD DEFINED:



   Any person, male or female, who has not reached his or her seventeenth
birthday is considered, for purposes of this Section only, to be a child.



8-5-3-2:  HOURS OF CURFEW:



   Nothwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in this Code, the
following shall apply with respect to curfew:



   (a)   It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of
age (the "child") to be present at any public assembly or in any public
building, park, sidewalk, street or highway or other public way or public
place in the Village between:



      1.   10:30 P.M. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday, and 6:00 A.M. on the following day;



      2.   11:30 P.M. on Friday through 6:00 A.M. on Saturday; and



      3.   11:30 P.M. on Saturday through 6:00 A.M. on Sunday.



   (b)   The curfew set forth in subsection (a) does not apply to a
child who is:



      1.   Accompanied by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;



      2.   Accompanied by a person at least eighteen (18) years of
age approved by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;



      3.   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of
this State authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to
perform;



      4.   Participating in, going to, or returning from:



         (i)   an emergency involving the protection of a person
or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage;



         (ii)   an activity involving the exercise of the child's
rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution
or Article 1, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, or both, such as freedoms of religion and speech and the right of
assembly, to include, but not be limited to:



            (1)   a religious event, including, but not
limited to, prayer and vigil services; or



            (2)   a political event, including, but not
limited to, observing or influencing a legislative session and attending a
political rally or event.



         (iii)   an activity conducted by a nonprofit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other
care under the supervision of one (1) or more adults; or



      5.   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a
location outside Illinois to another location outside Illinois with the
permission of a parent or legal guardian.



   (c)   Any police officer may stop and question any child suspected
of violating the provisions of Section 8-5-3-2.  Prior to arresting or
citing a child for curfew under this Section, the police officer much make
reasonable inquiry to determine whether any of the exceptions contained in
subsection (b) apply, in addition to the age and time requirements set forth
in subsection (a) of this Section.  A police officer shall issue a citation
or make an arrest for curfew only if the officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that the child has violated this Section and that no exceptions apply.



   (d)   It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
to knowingly permit a person in his/her custody or control to violate this
Section.



(Ord. 3864, 4-5-04)



8-5-3-3:  HALLOWEEN CURFEW:



   Halloween trick or treating is permitted only on October 31 of each
calendar year between the following hours:



      If October 31 is a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday, from 2:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.



      If October 31 is a Friday or Saturday, from 2:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.



   Trick or treating at other hours or on other days shall be treated as a
violation of this Section and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty
provisions of this Section.  (Ord. 3427, 10-02-00)



8-5-3-4:  ENFORCEMENT:



   Upon taking a person under seventeen (17) years of age into custody,
the police officer shall immediately communicate with the parent, legal
guardian, or custodian of that person.  The Juvenile Officer shall cause a
written notice to be served on the parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
person less than seventeen (17) years of age who has been taken into custody
by the police department, advising the parent, guardian or custodian of the
circumstances of the detention.  (Ord. 3427, 10-02-00; Amd. Ord. 3864,
4-5-04)



8-5-3-5:  PENALTY:



   A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted.  Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B. 



(Ord. 396, 3-10-69; Amd. Ord. 3864,  4-5-04; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-5-4:  HARMFUL MATERIALS, DISTRIBUTION AND DISPLAY:



8-5-4-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   CHILDREN:  All persons seventeen (17) years of age or younger.



   HARMFUL:  A thing shall be deemed to be harmful to children when
"obscene" or "violent" as defined herein:



      (1).   A thing is "obscene" for children, when taken as a
whole, if:



         (a).   To the average child, applying contemporary
community standards, it appeals to the prurient interest;



         (b).   Depicts or describes patently offensive
representations or descriptions of nude persons, ultimate sexual acts
including intercourse (whether actual or simulated), normal or perverted
sexual conduct (whether actual or simulated), and masturbation, excretory
functions and lewd exhibitions of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts; and



         (c).   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.  Each of these three (3) elements shall be applied in
terms of what the adult community judges is appropriate for children.



      (2).   A thing is "violent" for children:



         (a).   When its theme or plot is devoted primarily or
substantially to patently offensive deeds or acts of brutality or violence
(whether actual or simulated), such as, but not limited to, assaults,
cuttings, stabbings, shootings, beatings, sluggings, floggings, eye gougings,
brutal kicking, burnings, dismemberments and other reprehensible conduct to
the persons of human beings or to animals; and



         (b).   Which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.



   Both of these elements shall be applied in terms of what the adult
community, applying contemporary standards, judges is appropriate for
children.



8-5-4-2:  HARMFUL MATERIAL PROHIBITED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person with knowledge that a person is
seventeen (17)  years of age or younger, or who fails to exercise reasonable
care in determining the age of such children, to sell, deliver, offer for
sale, distribute, publish, print or exhibit to children any harmful material
with knowledge of the content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content
thereof, whether writing, picture, moving picture, record or other
representation or embodiment of harmful material, or to present or to direct
a harmful play or other performance, or to perform a harmful act, or
otherwise promote the sale of harmful material to children.



8-5-4-3:  PUBLIC DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATERIAL PROHIBITED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly display any harmful
materials or to allow access for review of such harmful materials, at
newsstands or any business establishment frequented by children, or where
children are or may be invited as a part of the general public.



8-5-4-4:  EXCLUSION:



   Nothing in this Section shall prohibit any public library or accredited
educational institution from circulating harmful material to children,
providing such circulation is for a legitimate, scientific or educational
purpose.  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a parent from distributing
to his child any harmful material.



(Ord. 978, 8-13-79)



8-5-5:  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY; VANDALISM:



8-5-5-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them for the
purpose of this Section:



   LEGAL GUARDIAN:  A person appointed guardian or given custody of a
minor by a Circuit Court of the State, but does not include a person
appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act,
as now or hereafter amended.



   MINOR:  A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but not yet
nineteen (19) years of age.



8-5-5-2:  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES:



   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with
such a parent or legal guardian is liable to the Village and to any person,
partnership, corporation, association or any incorporated or unincorporated
religious, educational or charitable organization for actual damages for the
wilful or malicious acts of such minor which cause injury to a person or
property.



8-5-5-3:  LIMITATION ON DAMAGES:



   No recovery under this Section may exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) actual damages for each person or legal entity designated in
Section 8-5-5-2 above for each occurrence of such wilful or malicious acts by
the minor causing injury in addition to taxable court costs.  In determining
the damages to be allowed in an action under this Section for personal
injury, only medical, dental and hospital expenses and expenses for treatment
by Christian Science practitioners and nursing home care appropriate thereto,
may be considered.  This Section shall not affect the recovery of damages in
any other cause of action where the liability of parent or legal guardian is
predicated on a common law basis.



8-5-5-4:  ENFORCEMENT:



   Upon the authorization by the Board of Trustees and with the consent of
a person or any legal entity designated in Section 8-5-5-2, the Village
Attorney may institute such proceedings as are necessary to enforce the
liability imposed by this Section for the benefit of the Village, a person or
any of the legal entities designated in Section 8-5-5-2 above.  (Ord. 1056,
8-18-80)



CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES



SECTION:



8-6-1:   Offenses Relating to the Person



8-6-1-1:   Disorderly Conduct



8-6-1-2:   Assault and Battery



8-6-1-3:   Fighting; Immoral Exhibitions



8-6-1-4:   Disturbing Religious Worship



8-6-1-5:   Disturbing Schools



8-6-1-6:   Misrepresentation of Age (Ord. 4330, 1-21-08)



8-6-1-7:   Reckless Conduct (Ord. 5280, 3-19-18)



8-6-1-8:   Electronic Harassment (Ord. 5300, 5-21-18)



8-6-1-9:   Unattended Child in Motor Vehicle (Ord. 5302, 5-21-18)



8-6-1-10:   Misuse and Abuse of the E-9-1-1 Telephone System (Ord. 5303,
5-21-18)



8-6-1-11:   Unauthorized Presence in Schools (Ord. 5331, 9-17-18)



8-6-2:   Offenses Relating to Morals and Decency



8-6-2-1:   Obscene Material



8-6-2-2:   Houses of Ill Fame



8-6-2-3:   Electronic Dissemination of Visual Depictions (Sexting) (Ord.
5301, 5-21-18)



8-6-3:   Offenses Relating to Animals



8-6-3-1:   Cruelty to Animals



8-6-3-2:   Killing Birds or Animals



8-6-4:   Offenses Relating to Weapons



8-6-4-1:   Discharge of Firearms



8-6-4-2:   Discharge of Air Rifles



8-6-4-3:   Unlawful Use of Weapons



8-6-5:   Offenses Relating to Property



8-6-5-1:   Trespasses



8-6-5-2:   Defacing Lampposts, Signs



8-6-5-3:   Defacing Trees or Buildings



8-6-5-4:   Damaging Shrubbery



8-6-5-5:   Defacing Public Property



8-6-5-6:   Damaging Sewers, Etc.



8-6-5-7:   Throwing Stones



8-6-5-8:   Removing Sod From Streets



8-6-5-9:   Damaging Street Lights or Wires



8-6-5-10:   Defacing Markers



8-6-5-11:   Tampering With Telephone Coin Boxes



8-6-5-12:   Traction Engines on Streets



8-6-5-13:   Climbing on Railroad Trains



8-6-5-14:   Posting Bills on Fences



8-6-5-15:   Throwing Articles in Streets



8-6-5-16:   Blasting



8-6-5-17:   Retail Theft



8-6-5-18:   Theft of Property, not from a person, of value not exceeding
$500.00 (Ord. 4331, 1-21-08)



8-6-6:   Offenses Relating to Public Health and Protection



8-6-6-1:   Poisonous  Medicine; Labels



8-6-6-2:   Barbed Wire



8-6-6-3:   Insecure Gratings or Doors



8-6-6-4:   Spitting on Sidewalks



8-6-6-5:   Stagnant Water



8-6-7:   Offenses Relating to Drug-Relating Equipment and Paraphernalia



8-6-7-1:   Definitions



8-6-7-2:   Prohibition of Possession and Related Activities



8-6-7-3:   Procedures on Violation of Provisions



8-6-8:   Miscellaneous Offenses



8-6-8-1:   Handbills and Samples



8-6-8-2:   Campgrounds Prohibited



8-6-9:   Cannabis; Possession of Prohibited



8-6-9-1:   Definition



8-6-9-2:   Possession Prohibited



8-6-9-3:   Exceptions



8-6-9-4:   Notice to Parents



8-6-10:   Fireworks, Possession, Sale and Use Prohibited- Repealed (Ord.
4265, 7-2-07)



8-6-10a:   Fireworks, Possession, Sale and Use Prohibited Without Permit
(Ord. 4265, 7-2-07)



8-6-10a-1:   Definitions



8-6-10a-2:   Possession, Sale, and Use of Fireworks or Pyrotechnics
Prohibited Except as Provided:



8-6-10a-3:   Pyrotechnic Displays



8-6-10a-4:   Consumer Displays



8-6-10a-5:   600 Foot Rule



8-6-10a-6:   Theaters or Public Halls



8-6-10a-7:   Railroad, Truck and Aircraft Industry



8-6-10a-8:   Sparklers



8-6-10a-9:   Forms



8-6-10a-10:   Class A Misdemeanor



8-6-10a-11:   Penalty



8-6-11:   Replica Firearms, Possession or Use Prohibited



8-6-11-1:   Prohibition



8-6-11-2:   Definition



8-6-11-3:   Exception



8-6-11-4:   Penalty



8-6-12:   Marijuana Flavored Candy



8-6-12-1:   Definition



8-6-12-2:   Prohibition



8-6-12-3:   Penalty



8-6-13:   Fishing, Boating and Swimming



8-6-13-1:   Fishing



8-6-13-2:   Fishing Regulations



8-6-13-3:   Boating Regulations on Lake Sedgewick  (Ord. 4280, 8-20-07)



8-6-13-4:   Boat Launch Hours and Fees on Lake Sedgewick  (Ord. 4280,
8-20-07)



8-6-13-5:   Swimming in Lake Sedgewick  (Ord. 4280, 8-20-07)



8-6-13-6:   Penalty (Ord. 4280, 8-20-07)



8-6-14:   Chronic Nuisances (Ord. 5383, 2-18-19)



8-6-15:   Prohibited Social Hosting (Ord. 5423, 8-19-19)



8-6-99:   Penalty



8-6-1:  OFFENSES RELATING TO THE PERSON:



8-6-1-1:  DISORDERLY CONDUCT:



   Generally.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to engage in any
type of disorderly conduct within the Village as further defined.



   Definitions.



   Any of the following acts shall, when knowingly committed within the
Village be considered as disorderly conduct:



      1.   In an unreasonable manner to make, aid, countenance or
assist in making any improper voice, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace
or diversion tending to a breach of the peace in the streets or elsewhere in
the Village.



      2.   To collect with others in groups or crowds for unlawful
purposes to the annoyance or disturbance of citizens or travelers so as to
provoke a breach of the peace.



      3.   To use any violent, threatening, profane or indecent
language to the disturbance of any person, or to use any threatening or
abusive language toward any other person so as to provoke a breach of the
peace.



      4.   To be openly lewd or do any act of public indecency
tending to debauch the public morals.



      5.   In an unreasonable manner to interrupt or disturb any
lawful assembly or procession of people met for a lawful purpose so as to
provoke a breach of the peace.



      6.   To injure, beat, torture or kill any animal or knowingly
allow same to be done to any animal under one's personal control, unless such
is necessary to protect the health or safety of oneself or another.



      7.   To injure, destroy or deface or assist in injuring,
destroying or defacing any building, structure, bridge, fence, street,
sidewalk, hydrant, street light, sign or property of any type.



      8.   To make or cause to be made any obscene phone calls.



      9.   To transmit in any manner to the Fire Department of any
city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such fire exists.



      10.   To transmit in any manner to another a false alarm to
the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such
place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of
such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
bomb or explosive is concealed in such place.



      11.   To transmit in any manner to any peace officer, public
officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been
committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no
reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed.



      12.   To do any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm
or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace.



8-6-1-2:  ASSAULT AND BATTERY:



   Assault:  Any person who shall assault another person within the
limits of the Village shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



   Assault and Battery:  Any person who shall commit an assault and
battery upon the person of another within the limits of the Village, shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-1-3:  FIGHTING; IMMORAL EXHIBITIONS:



   Any person who shall instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, cock
fight or any public or private fighting, or in any manner instigate, cause,
procure or assist in any indecent or immoral show or exhibition of any
animal, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-1-4:  DISTURBING RELIGIOUS WORSHIP:



   Any person who shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly
met for religious worship by making a noise or by rude and indecent behavior
or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near the same as to
disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting, shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this Section.



8-6-1-5:  DISTURBING SCHOOLS:



   Whoever shall in this Village disturb any school or other assembly of
people met for a lawful purpose, by rude and indecent behavior or otherwise,
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.  (Ord. 208, 4-23-60)



8-6-1-6:  MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:



   A person who falsely states either orally or in writing that he or she
is of an age that he or she is not, or who presents or offers to any person
any evidence of age or identity that is false or not actually his or her own,
for the purpose of obtaining, viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to
procure or view any age-restricted material or participating in any
age-restricted activity, is guilty of violating this Section.



   A person who is convicted of violating this Section shall be fined
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted.  In addition to a fine, any person
convicted of violating this Section may be required by the court or
administrative hearing officer to perform public/community service work.



(Ord. 4330, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-1-7:  RECKLESS CONDUCT:



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to engage in
reckless conduct within the Village as such conduct is hereafter defined:



   (a)   A person commits reckless conduct when he or she, by any means
lawful or unlawful, recklessly performs an act or acts that cause(s) bodily
harm to or endanger(s) the safety of another person.



   (b)   Any person who violates the provisions of this Section, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B for this and subsequent or continuing violations.



(Ord. 5280, 3-19-18)



8-6-1-8:  ELECTRONIC HARASSMENT:



   (a)   Definitions:  For purposes of this section, the terms
"electronic communication", "family or household member", "harass", and
"harassing" has the meaning ascribed to it in Article 26.5, Section 26.5-0.1
of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/26.5-0.1).



   (b)   Harassment by Telephone.  A person commits harassment by
telephone when he or she uses telephone communication for any of the
following purposes:



      (1)   Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal
which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with intent to offend;



      (2)   Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation
ensues, with intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called
number;



      (3)   Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to
ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number;



      (4)   Making repeated telephone calls, during which
conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; or



      (5)   Knowingly permitting any telephone under one's control
to be used for any of the purposes mentioned herein.



   (c)   Harassment Through Electric Communications.  A person commits
harassment through electronic communications when he or she uses electronic
communication for any of the following purposes:



      (1)   Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal
which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with an intent to
offend;



      (2)   Threatening injury to the person or to the property of
the person to whom an electronic communication is directed or to any of his
or her family or household members; or



      (3)   Knowingly permitting any electronic communications
device to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in this Subsection.



   (d)   Evidence that a defendant made additional telephone calls or
engaged in additional electronic communications after having been requested
by a named complainant, or by a family or household member of the
complainant, to stop may be considered as evidence of intent to harass unless
disproved by evidence to the contrary. 



(Ord. 5300, 5-21-18)



8-6-1-9:  UNATTENDED CHILD IN MOTOR VEHICLE:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, or allow any
child under the age of eight (8) years to be left unattended in a motor
vehicle.  For purposes of this Section, "unattended" shall mean either (i)
not accompanied by a person twelve (12) years of age or older, or (ii) if
accompanied by a person twelve (12) years of age or older, out of the sight
of that person. 



(Ord. 5302, 5-21-18)



8-6-1-10:  MISUSE AND ABUSE OF THE E-9-1-1 TELEPHONE SYSTEM:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:



   A.   Call the number "911" for the purpose of making a false alarm
or complaint or to report false information which could result in the
emergency response of any public safety agency.



   B.   Call the number "911" for any non-emergency purpose or reason,
after having been notified, either verbally or in writing that such calls are
not to be made on the 9-1-1 line. 



(Ord. 5303, 5-21-18)



8-6-1-11:  UNAUTHORIZED PRESENCE IN SCHOOLS:



   A.   It shall be unlawful for any student who is under suspension,
expulsion, exemption or other discipline excluding the student from attending
school, or for any person, not a student, not a school employee or not a
parent or guardian of a student or not an otherwise "authorized person" to be
present within any school building without first having secured authorization
to be present within a school building from the principal or person in charge
of the school, except while in direct route to secure such authorization.
Authorized persons shall include any person who is present within any school
building for any purpose previously authorized by the principal or person in
charge of a school. 



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including without
limitation student(s) and/or school employee(s) to knowingly allow,
facilitate, aid or abet unauthorized persons to enter a school building
without first receiving authorization from the principal or person in charge
of said school.



   C.   The term "student," as used herein, is hereby defined as any
person of school age and enrolled in the school at which he or she then is
present.



   D.   Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this
section, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for this and subsequent or continuing
violations.  (Ord. 5331, 9-17-18)



8-6-2:  OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS AND DECENCY:



8-6-2-1:  OBSCENE MATERIAL:



   Any material or performance is obscene if:



      1.   The average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest; and



      2.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or level
exhibition of genitals; and



      3.   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed
to such an audience.



   A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or
content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection
which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he:



      1.   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell,
deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other
representation or embodiment of the obscene; or



      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other
performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it
obscene; or



      3.   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything
obscene; or



      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene
exhibition of his body for gain; or



      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or
material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this Section, or of
the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or



      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material
represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.



   In any prosecution for an offense under this Section evidence shall be
admissible to show:



      1.   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;



      2.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;



      3.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other
merits of the material, or absence thereof;



      4.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material
in this State;



      5.   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in
advertising or other promotion of the material;



      6.   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.



8-6-2-2:  HOUSES OF ILL FAME:



   Any person who shall in any way keep or maintain or be an inmate of, or
in any manner contribute to the support of any house of prostitution located
in the Village shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



(Ord. 208, 4-23-60; amd. 1981 Code)



8-6-2-3:  ELECTRONIC DISSEMINATION OF VISUAL DEPICTIONS (SEXTING):



   (a)   Definitions:  For the purposes of this Section, the following
definitions shall apply:



      COMPUTER has the meaning ascribed to it in Article 17, Section
17-0.5 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/17-0.5).



      ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE means an electronic device,
including but not limited to, a wireless telephone, personal digital
assistant, or a portable or mobile computer, that is capable of transmitting
images or pictures.



      INDECENT VISUAL DEPICTION means a photograph image, depiction or
portrayal in any pose, posture, or setting involving a lewd exhibition of the
unclothed or transparently clothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if
such person is female, a fully or partially developed breast of the person.



      MINOR means a person under eighteen (18) years of age.



   (b)   A minor shall not solicit, possess, distribute, or disseminate
an indecent visual depiction of another minor through the use of a computer
or electronic communication device.



   (c)   A minor does not violate this paragraph if all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The minor did not solicit the photograph or video.



      (2)   The minor took reasonable steps to report the photograph
or video to a school or law  enforcement official.



      (3)   The minor did not transmit or distribute the photograph
or a video to a third party other than a law enforcement official.



   (d)   Penalty.  Any person who violates this Subsection shall upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted.  Each subsequent violation shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (e)   Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to prohibit a
prosecution for disorderly conduct, public indecency, child pornography, a
violation of Article 26.5 (Harassing and Obscene Communications) of the
Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/26.5-0.1, et seq.), or any other applicable
provision of law. 



(Ord. 5301, 5-21-18)



8-6-3:  OFFENSES RELATING TO ANIMALS:



8-6-3-1:  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:



   Any person who shall inhumanely or cruelly beat, injure or otherwise
abuse any dumb animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-3-2:  KILLING BIRDS OR ANIMALS:



   Any person who shall wound or attempt to kill or wound any bird (except
starlings, grackles and English sparrows) or any game animal within the
Village limits, or shoot any arrow or bullet or throw a stone or club or
other missile at any such bird or animal within any private grounds, or take
the eggs or young of any such bird or the young of any such animal, or enter
upon any private enclosure of any public grounds within the Village for the
purpose of doing the same shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
Section.  (Ord. 208, 4-23- 60)



8-6-4:  OFFENSES RELATING TO WEAPONS:



8-6-4-1:  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:



   Firearm shall mean any device by whatever name known, which is designed
to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion
of gas or escape of gas; excluding however:



   1.   Any pneumatic gun, spring or B-B gun which expels a single
globular projectile not exceeding eighteen one-hundredths of an inch (.18")
in diameter.



   2.   Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and
required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate
Commerce Commission.



   3.   Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges,
explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition in the building and/or
construction process.



   4.   Model rockets designed to propel a model vehicle in a vertical
direction.



   No person shall discharge or fire a firearm within the Village of
Orland Park, Illinois, except:



   1.   Peace officers while in performance of his/her official duties.



   2.   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United
States or the National Guard, while in performance of their official duties.



   3.   The discharge of a firearm in a firearm range properly licensed
and operated in accordance with Village ordinance.



   4.   Color guards in uniform and performing in parades or
celebrations provided that the firearms are discharging blank cartridges.



   5.   A person discharging a firearm in self defense.



   6.   Properly trained and licensed security guards in the
performance of their employment duties.



   Any person who violates this Section shall upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each
offense of which such person shall be convicted.  Each discharge shall be
deemed a separate offense. 



(Ord. 1971, 3-5-90; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-4-2:  DISCHARGE OF AIR RIFLES:



   Definitions:



      AIR RIFLE:  Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol,
B-B gun, pellet gun or any other implement that is not a firearm which impels
a pellet  constructed of hard  plastic, steel, lead or other hard material
of less than eighteen one-hundredths of an inch (.18") in diameter with a
force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.



      DEALER:  Any person, co-partnership, association or corporation
engaged in the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles
included in the definition of "air rifle".



   Transfer to Children:



      1.   It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give
or otherwise transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of thirteen
(13) years where the dealer knows or has cause to believe the person to be
under thirteen (13) years of age or where such dealer has failed to make
reasonable inquiry relative to the age of such person and such person is
under thirteen (13) years of age.



      2.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend, or
otherwise transfer any air rifle to any person under thirteen (13) years of
age except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward or
adult instructor and pupil, exists between such person and the person under
thirteen (13) years of age, or where such person stands in Loco Parentis to
the person under thirteen (13) years of age.



   Carrying or Discharging:



      1.   It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years
of age to carry any air rifle on the public streets, roads, highways, or
public lands within the corporate limits of the Village unless such person
under eighteen (18) years of age carries such rifle unloaded.



      2.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle
within the Village except as provided In this Section.



   Permissive Possession:  Notwithstanding any provision of this Section,
it is lawful for any person under thirteen (13) years of age to have in his
possession any air rifle if it Is:



      1.   Kept within his house of residence or other private
enclosure.



      2.   Used by the person under thirteen (13) years of age and
he Is a duly enrolled member of any club, team or society organization for
educational purposes and maintaining as a part of its facilities or having
written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the
supervision, guidance and Instruction of a responsible adult and then only if
said air rifle is actually being used in connection with the activities of
said club, team or society under the supervision of a responsible adult.



      3.   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under
circumstances when such air rifle is fired, discharged, or operated in such a
manner as not to endanger persons or property, domesticated or wild animals
or other wildlife or any type of birds, and then only if it Is used In such
manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space
outside the limits of such grounds or residence.



   Sales:  The provisions of this Section do not prohibit sales of air
rifles:



      1.   By wholesale dealers or jobbers in conformity with the
provisions of this Section; or



      2.   To be shipped out of state; or



      3.   To be used at a target range operated In accordance with
subsection D of this Section, by members of the armed services of the United
States in their capacity as members of the specific branch of the armed
services, or by law enforcement officers for official purposes.



   Seizure and Removal:  The Police Department shall seize, take, remove
or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or
used in any manner in violation of this Section.  Following seizure, the
seized air rifle shall be inventoried and held by the Police Department as
evidence for any hearing or court proceeding relating thereto, and will be
released to the owner only upon full completion of such proceedings including
orders of disposition and in conformity with the provisions of this Section.



   Penalty:  Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall
upon conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted.  Each discharge of an air rifle shall be deemed a separate
offense. 



(Ord. 2053, 10-1-90; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-4-3:  UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS:



   Definitions:



      STUN GUN OR TASER:  Any device which is powered by electrical
charging units, such as batteries, and which may or may not fire one of
several barbs attached to a length of wire, and which, upon hitting a human
or upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human, can send out a
current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a manner as
to render him or her incapable of normal functioning.



      SWITCHBLADE KNIFE:  Any knife that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring, coil or other device in the handle.



   Unlawful Use, Sale, Etc.: It shall be unlawful for any person within
the Village of Orland Park to:



      1.   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry on their
person, or in their vehicle, any bludgeon, black-jack, slung shot, sand club
or sand club metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon, throwing star or any
knife commonly referred to or known as a switchblade knife;



      2.   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully
against another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto,
broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun, taser or any other dangerous
or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;



      3.   Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about
his person, a stun gun or taser, except when on his land, in his abode, legal
dwelling or fixed place of business.



   Seizure and Removal: The Police Department shall seize, take, remove or
cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any weapons sold,
manufactured, purchased, possessed, carried or used in any manner in
violation of this Section.  Following seizure, the seized weapon shall be
inventoried and held by the Police Department as evidence for any hearing or
court proceeding relating thereto, and will be released to the owner only
upon full completion of such proceedings including orders of disposition and
in conformity with the provisions of this Section.



   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall
upon conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(Ord. 4889, 3-3-14)



8-6-5:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY:



8-6-5-1:  TRESPASSES:



   Trespasses Prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within this
Municipality upon either public or private property.



   Specifically Enumerated Trespasses; Suppression.



   Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection A
hereof, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included
among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said
subsection A, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or
from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this
Section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows:



      1.   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of
another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach
or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing, by any owner or occupant thereof; or



      2.   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental
to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice
posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of
approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, seaming or protest given
orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or



      3.   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of
another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by
any owner or occupant thereof; or



      4.   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft
made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or
control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft
or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.



(Ord. 540, 4-9-73)



8-6-5-2:  DEFACING LAMPPOSTS, SIGNS:



   Any person who shall carelessly or maliciously break, deface or carry
away, or in any way injure or destroy any public lamp or lamppost or any
sign, gate, sidewalk or fence in the Village, or climb upon any public
lamppost, or hang or place any goods or merchandise thereon, or place any
goods, boxes, wood or any other material upon or against the same, shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-3:  DEFACING TREES OR BUILDINGS:



   Any person who shall cut, injure, mark or deface any building or
property not his own, or any tree, grass, shrub or walk in any square, street
or public park, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-4:  DAMAGING SHRUBBERY:



   Any person who shall cut down, dig up, damage or destroy any fruit or
ornamental tree or cultivated plant, standing or growing on the land or
premises of another, or pick, destroy or carry away therefrom, any part, bud,
flower or fruit of any cultivated tree, plant, vine or bush, without
permission from the owner or occupant of said land or premises, or shall
without lawful authority cut down, uproot, damage or destroy any fruit or
ornamental tree or shrubbery, planted or growing on any street, highway,
public thoroughfare, park or public grounds shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this Section.



8-6-5-5:  DEFACING PUBLIC PROPERTY:



   Any person who shall injure, destroy, deface or assist in injuring,
destroying or defacing any bridge, fence, building, school house, church
building, depot, house, public building, street sign, sidewalk, tree,
lamppost or any other public property in the Village, shall be deemed guilty
of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-6:  DAMAGING SEWERS, ETC.:



   Any person who shall wilfully or carelessly break, damage, deface or
destroy and sewer, cesspool, culvert, catch basin, manhole, water pipe or
hydrant, laid or placed in, upon or under any street, sidewalk, highway,
thoroughfare, or public place within the Village, shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this Section.



8-6-5-7:  THROWING STONES:



   Any person who shall throw any stone or other missile upon or at any
building, railroad car, tree or other public or private property, or upon or
at any person in any street, avenue, alley, lane, public place or enclosed or
unenclosed ground in the Village, or aid or abet in the same shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-8:  REMOVING SOD FROM STREETS:



   Any person who shall dig, cut or remove any sod, gravel, sand or earth
from any street or other public place within the Village without a permit
from the Building Department or from any premises not his own without the
consent of the owner shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-9:  DAMAGING STREET LIGHTS OR WIRES:



   Any person who shall carelessly or maliciously break, deface, carry
away or in any way damage, destroy or interfere with any electric light bulb
or globe or any lamp or light of any kind, or any part or appurtenance
thereof, used in or upon any street, alley or public place in the Village, or
who shall carelessly or maliciously break, damage, destroy or in any manner
interfere with any electric light, telephone or telegraph wire, or any
appurtenance thereto, at any place within the limits of the Village, shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-10:  DEFACING MARKERS:



   Any person who shall purposely break, change, remove, deface or
otherwise injure any sign, stake, post or stone, placed or set to designate
the corner or line of any lot, block, land or street or to show the grade of
any street or sidewalk in the Village shall be deemed guilty of a violation
of this Section.



8-6-5-11:  TAMPERING WITH TELEPHONE COIN BOXES:



   Any person who shall insert or attempt to insert into the coin box or
money receptacle of any telephone any slug, button, wire, hook or other
implement of substance with the intent to obtain a legal tender coin of the
United States shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-12:  TRACTION ENGINES ON STREETS:



   Any person who shall haul, drive or operate any tractor on or through
any street or alley of the Village unless the wheels or tracks thereof are
equipped with treads which will not damage the pavement shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-13:  CLIMBING ON RAILROAD TRAINS:



   Any person who shall, without having lawful authority so to do, mount
or climb upon or hang to or enter any locomotive, engine, car or train of
cars within the Village while the same is in motion or is standing upon any
track within the limits of the Village, shall be deemed guilty of a violation
of this Section.



8-6-5-14:  POSTING BILLS ON FENCES:



   Any person who shall affix any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or
notice of any kind on any curbstone, flagstone or other part of any sidewalk,
or upon any tree, lamppost, hitching post, telephone pole, telegraph pole, or
hydrant within the streets or alleys or upon any Village property, or upon
any private wall, window, fence, door or gate shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this Section.



8-6-5-15:  THROWING ARTICLES IN STREETS:



   Any person who shall throw, drop, place or leave in or on any street,
alley, sidewalk or public place in the Village, any handbills, dodgers,
posters or other advertising matter, or any stone, missiles, nails, ice,
glass, iron or other metal, or any other article or thing, except cinders on
unimproved streets or alleys, shall be guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-16:  BLASTING:



   Any person who shall blast or cause to be blasted any rock or rocks
within the Village without permission of the Building Commissioner shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-5-17:  RETAIL THEFT:



   (A)   Definitions.  For purposes of this Section, the following
words and phrases shall be defined as indicated:



      (1)   CONCEAL - To "conceal" merchandise means that, although
there may be some notice of its presence, the merchandise is not visible
through ordinary observation.



      (2)   FULL RETAIL VALUE means the merchant's stated or
advertised price of the merchandise.



      (3)   MERCHANDISE means any item of tangible personal property.



      (4)   MERCHANT means an owner or operator of any retail
mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer,
director, franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator.



      (5)   PERSON means any natural person or individual.



(6)   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT includes, but is not
limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in
shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a       merchant or
on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of
the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.



      (7)   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT means any place where
merchandise is displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.



   (B)   Offense of Retail Theft.  A person commits the offense of
retail theft when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes
to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of
retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or



      (2)   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag,
marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining
value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale,
in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full
retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail
value of such merchandise; or



      (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in
or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or



      (4)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of
the owner and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property when a lessee of the personal property of another
fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full
retail value of such property to the lessor in satisfaction of any
contractual provision requiring such, within thirty (30) days after written
demand from the owner for its return.  A notice in writing, given after the
expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered mail, to the lessee at the
address given by the lessee and shown on the leasing agreement shall
constitute proper demand; and



      (5)   The full retail value of the property in question under
either subsection (1), (2), (3) or (4) above is less than THREE HUNDRED AND
NO/100 DOLLARS ($300.00).  (Ord. 4538, 2-1-10; amd. Ord. 4967, 3-2-15)



   (C)   Presumptions.  If any person:



      (1)   conceals upon his or her person or among his or her
belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and



      (2)   removes that merchandise beyond the last known station
for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment; such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away
or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with
the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise.



   (D)   Repeat Offenders.  Any person arrested for or convicted of
retail theft under this Section or State Statute, who is arrested for retail
theft a second or further time, shall not be charged under this Section, but
shall be charged under the State Statute provisions relating to retail theft,
720 ILCS 5/16A-1 et seq.



   (E)   Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall
be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each
offense. In addition to, or in lieu of a fine, any person convicted of a
violation of this subsection may be required by the Court to perform
public/community service work.



(3362, 6-5-00; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-5-18:  THEFT OF PROPERTY, NOT FROM A PERSON, OF VALUE NOT EXCEEDING
$500.00:



   A.   A person who knowingly takes possession of carries away,
transfers or causes to be transferred property, not from a person, and of a
value not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500), shall be guilty of violating
this section.



   B.   A person who is convicted of violating this subsection shall be
fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.
In addition to a fine, any person convicted of a violation may be required by
the Court or administrative hearing officer to perform public/community
service work.



   C.   A person who is convicted under subsection A above, of this
section and is arrested a second time under subsection A shall be charged
under the state statutory provision, 720 ILCS 5/16-1.



(Ord. 4331, 1-21-08; Amd. Ord. 4967, 3-2-15; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd.
Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-6:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PUBLIC HEALTH AND PROTECTION:



8-6-6-1:  POISONOUS MEDICINE; LABELS:



   Any person who shall sell or hold for sale any poisonous medicine,
substance or compound for unlawful purposes or who shall sell or deliver the
same to any person unless the container thereof is marked "Poison" shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.



8-6-6-2:  BARBED WIRE:



   Any person who, being the owner, lessee or agent of any building in the
Village, shall erect or maintain or permit to be erected or maintained on or
about the stairway in or the entrance to such building or on or about its
exterior building line or upon any portion of the sidewalk adjacent to such
building any railing, fence, guard or protection of any kind, constructed of
barbed wire, or upon any part of which there shall be affixed or placed any
spike, nail or other pointed instrument of any kind shall be deemed guilty of
a violation of this Section.  Each and every day any such person shall fail
or neglect to remove such barbed wire or to remove from such railing, fence
or other protection, any such spike, nail or other pointed instrument, after
notice in writing from any officer of the Village so to do, shall constitute
a separate offense.



8-6-6-3:  INSECURE GRATINGS OR DOORS:



   Any person who shall keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of
any vault in any street, highway, thoroughfare or sidewalk, or shall suffer
any such door or grating belonging to premises owned or occupied by him or
under his control to be in an insecure condition whereby persons may be in
danger of falling into such cellar or vault, shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this Section.



8-6-6-4:  SPITTING ON SIDEWALKS:



   Any person who shall spit upon any public sidewalk or upon the floor of
any hall, assembly room or public building in the Village shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Section.  (Ord. 208, 4-23-60)



8-6-6-5:  STAGNANT WATER:



   Any person who allows stagnant water to accumulate or stand on any
premises under his ownership or control without treating the water so as to
effectively prevent the breeding of mosquitoes shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this section, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$500.00.  For purposes of this section, stagnant water shall mean any
accumulation of water which does not circulate at all times with sufficient
velocity to prevent the existence of any “dead” or non-moving spots. 
(Ord. 3774, 7-7-03)



8-6-7:  OFFENSES RELATING TO DRUG-RELATED EQUIPMENT AND PARAPHERNALIA



8-6-7-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Section, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them herein:



   CLOSE PROXIMITY:  Within two thousand feet (2,000') on a straight line
commencing at the property lines nearest to each other.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE:  Any drug or other substance as defined in the
Illinois Controlled Substance Act, and cannabis as defined in the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:  All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or which are primarily designed or adopted
for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging or repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance.  It includes, but is not limited to:



      1.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



      2.   Kits used, intended for use, or designated for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances;



      3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed
for use in increasing. the, potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



      4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for
use in identifying, or in analyzing, the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;



      5.   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed
for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



      6.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;



      7.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning
or refining controlled substances, particularly cannabis;



      8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



      9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



      10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



      11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body;



      12.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing controlled substances,
particularly cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil, into the human body,
such as:



         (a).   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls;



         (b).   Water pipes;



         (c).   Carburetion tubes and devices;



         (d).   Smoking and carburetion masks;



         (e).   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning
material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



         (f).   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;



         (g).   Chamber pipes;



         (h).   Carburetor pipes;



         (i).   Electric pipes;



         (j).   Air-driven pipes;



         (k).   Chillums;



         (l).   Bongs;



         (m).   Ice pipes or chillers.



   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:



      1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;



      2.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any
controlled substance;



      3.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;



      4.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;



      5.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object for ingesting
controlled substances; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use,
or designed for use, as drug paraphernalia;



      6.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;



      7.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or  depict its use;



      8.   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      9.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      10.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object,
is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



      11.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



      12.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community;



      13.   Expert testimony concerning its use.



   MINOR:  Any person who has not attained eighteen (18) years of age.



   PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITY:  Any land, space, equipment or
building which is owned, operated and maintained by the Village or its
departments and boards for use by the general public for recreational,
athletic, programs, classes or other such activities whether supervised or
not.



   PLACE OF DISPLAY:  Any museum, library, school or other similar public
place upon which business is not transacted for a profit.



   PREMISES OPEN TO MINORS:  Any business establishment which sells its
wares or merchandise to minors or which permits minors to enter into its
place of business.



   SCHOOL:  Any public, private or parochial elementary junior high or
high school.



8-6-7-2:  PROHIBITION OF POSSESSION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES:



   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use
or to possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance. A person who is convicted of violating this subsection shall be
fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



   2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
deliver, sell, or manufacture, or possess with intent to deliver, sell or
manufacture drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare,
test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale,
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. A person,
firm or corporation who is convicted of violating this subsection shall be
fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



   3.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
sell or display any drug paraphernalia in or upon any premises which:



      a.   Is a premises open to minors; or



      b.   Is in close proximity to a school, park or recreational
facility, unless such place is a place of display.



   A person, firm or corporation who is convicted of violating this
subsection shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix
B for each offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-7-3:  PROCEDURES ON VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS:



   Penalty:  Any person violating this Section 8-6-7 shall be fined as
provided in this Village Code; and in cases of unlawful display, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each and,every day during which an
unlawful display of drug paraphernalia continues or exists.



   Revocation of License:  In addition to the penalty set forth above,
any person convicted of violating Section 8-6-7 of this Code shall be subject
to revocation of the business license issued to the owner or operator of any
such business by the Village in accordance with applicable Village ordinances.



   Declaration of Public Nuisance:  A violation of Section 8-6-7 is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as
provided by law. (Ord. 1026, 3-17-80)



8-6-8:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:



8-6-8-1:  HANDBILLS AND SAMPLES:



   Any person who shall, personally or by agent, distribute (other than
hand to hand), throw or place in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or
public place in the Village, or upon the porches or in the vestibules,
entries or yards of private residences, dwelling houses, apartment buildings
or office buildings therein where the premises are posted "No Solicitors",
any handbills, pamphlets, circulars, books, advertisements or samples of
merchandise for the purpose or with the intent of advertising, any business,
occupation, profession, medicinal treatment, medicine, entertainment or
merchandise of any kind shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
Section.  (Ord. 208, 4-23-60)



8-6-8-2:  CAMPGROUNDS PROHIBITED:



   Definition.



   For the purpose of this Section the words "camp car or trailer" and the
words "campgrounds" are hereby defined as follows:



      A camp car or trailer is any unit used for living or sleeping
purposes and which is equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the
purpose of transporting said unit from place to place, whether by motive
power or other means.  A campground is any place, area or tract of land upon
which is located any camp car or trailer, which is in actual use as the
habitation of any human being or beings.



   Prohibition.



   No campground as hereinabove defined shall be established or located
within the limits of the Village.



(Ord. 12, 3-25-46)



8-6-9:  CANNABIS; POSSESSION OF PROHIBITED:



8-6-9-1:  DEFINITION:



   For the purpose of this Section, cannabis is defined as:



   CANNABIS:  Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such
plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring
or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or
by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include
the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom) fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant
which is incapable of germination.



8-6-9-2:  POSSESSION PROHIBITED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess any quantity
of any substance containing cannabis, except that the application of this
section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty
(30) grams of any substance containing cannabis.



8-6-9-3:  EXCEPTIONS:



   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:



   Any person who has been authorized by the Department of Mental Health
and Developmental Disabilities, with the approval of the Department of Law
Enforcement, to possess and deliver substances containing cannabis;



   or



   Persons registered under Federal law to conduct research with cannabis.



8-6-9-4:  NOTICE TO PARENTS:



   Whenever a minor is charged with a violation of this Section, the
parent or legal guardian thereof shall be required to appear at all court
appearances with said minor, unless excused therefrom by the court.  The
Chief of Police of the Village shall notify the parents or legal guardian of
a minor charged with a violation of this Section of this requirement by
mailing or delivering a notice thereto in substantially the following form at
least five (5) days prior to the first scheduled court hearing:



   LEGAL NOTICE



   TO: (Parents' Names)



   (Address)



   FROM: Village of Orland Park, Illinois



   Please take notice that (minor's name) has been charged with violating
an ordinance prohibiting the possession of cannabis.  This requires the
minor's appearance in Court on      20-, at 14750 Ravinia Avenue, Orland
Park, Illinois.



   Please take further notice that this ordinance requires the appearance
of one parent or legal guardian in Court at that time and at any later Court
dates. If you fail to appear, a subpoena for your appearance will be issued
and served upon you.  Failure to obey the command of a subpoena can result
in a finding of contempt of Court, with a fine or imprisonment as the penalty.



   The attorney representing the Village in the prosecution of any such
ordinance violation is authorized and directed to secure the issuance of a
subpoena to any parent or legal guardian of any minor charged with violating
this Section, whenever said parent or legal guardian fails to appear in court
pursuant to this Legal Notice.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-10:     FIREWORKS, POSSESSION, SALE AND USE PROHIBITED – Repealed



                  (Ord. 4265, 7-2-07)



8-6-10a:   FIREWORKS, POSSESSION, SALE AND USE PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT:



8-6-10a-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following definitions and meanings:



      1.3G fireworks means those fireworks used for professional
outdoor displays and classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335 by the
United States Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.



      Consumer distributor means any person who distributes, offers for
sale, sells, or exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois to
another distributor or directly to any retailer or person for resale.



      Consumer fireworks means those fireworks that must comply with
the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S.
Consumer Products Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. Parts 1500 and
1507, and classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States
Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101. "Consumer fireworks"
shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick
noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick
matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps
containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are
used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic
caps that contain less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture;
the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.



      Consumer fireworks display or consumer display means the
detonation, ignition, or deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a
visual or audible effect.



      Consumer operator means an adult individual who is responsible
for the safety, setup, and discharge of the consumer fireworks display and
who has completed the training required in Section 2.2 of the Fireworks Use
Act.



      Consumer retailer means any person who offers for sale, sells, or
exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois directly to any
person with a consumer display permit.



      Display fireworks means 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as
further defined in the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.



      Flame effect means the detonation, ignition, or deflagration of
flammable gases, liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal,
physical, visual, or audible effect before the public, invitees, or
licensees, regardless of whether admission is charged, in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association 160 guidelines, and as may be further
defined in the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.



      Lead pyrotechnic operator means an individual who is responsible
for the safety, setup, and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is
licensed pursuant to the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.



      Person means an individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, company, consortium, joint venture, or commercial entity.



      Pyrotechnic display means the detonation, ignition, or
deflagration of display fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or
audible effects of an exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or
licensees, regardless of whether admission is charged, and as may be further
defined in the Fireworks Use Act and Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.



      Special effects fireworks means pyrotechnic devices used for
special effects by professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with
theatrical, musical, or other productions that are similar to consumer
fireworks in chemical compositions and construction, but are not intended for
consumer use and are not labeled as such or identified as "intended for
indoor use". "Special effects fireworks" are classified as fireworks UN0431
or UN0432 by the United States Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R.
172.101.



      State Acts means the Illinois Fireworks Use Act (425 ILCS 35) and
the Illinois Pyrotechnic Distribution and Operator Licensing Act (225 ILCS
227).



8-6-10a-2:  POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF FIREWORKS OR PYROTECHNICS
PROHIBITED EXCEPT AS PROVIDED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, offer for sale, expose
for sale, sell at retail, store, use, discharge, set-off or explode any
display fireworks, flame effects, or consumer fireworks in the Village at any
time, or to allow any such acts on property owned by that person within the
Village, without a permit having been issued by the Village in compliance
with this Chapter, the State Acts and applicable State and local regulations.



8-6-10a-3:  PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS:



   A.   Pyrotechnic Display Permits Required.  A pyrotechnic display
permit is required and shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon compliance
with the following conditions:



      1   Applications for pyrotechnic display permits shall be made
to the Village Clerk in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of
the proposed pyrotechnic display, unless such 15 day requirement is waived by
the Village Clerk and the Chief of the Respective Fire Protection District.



      2   Applicants for pyrotechnic display permits must be adult
individuals eighteen years of age or older.



      3   Applications for pyrotechnic display permits must identify
the licensed lead pyrotechnic operator who will be conducting the display,
and a current and valid copy of his or her license shall be attached to the
application.



      4   Applications for pyrotechnic display permits must identify
the licensed pyrotechnic distributor from whom the pyrotechnics will be
obtained, and a current and valid copy of the pyrotechnic distributor’s
license shall be attached to the application.



      5   Applications for pyrotechnic display permits must verify
that all pyrotechnic assistants will be 18 years of age or older at the time
of the display.



      6   Applicants for pyrotechnic display permits must provide
proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than $1,000,000 to the Village
before issuance of the permit.  The insurance coverage shall be an
occurrence- based policy and shall cover all periods of time when pyrotechnic
materials are in the insureds actual and constructive possession.



      7   Pyrotechnic display permits shall be issued only after the
Chief of the Respective Fire Protection District, or his or her designee, has
inspected the proposed display site and determined, in writing, that the
display can be performed in full compliance with the rules adopted by the
State Fire Marshal and that the display shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person or persons.



      8   Pyrotechnic display permits shall be signed by the Village
Clerk, or his or her designee, and the Chief of the Respective Fire
Protection District, or his or her designee, and must identify the lead
pyrotechnic operator and pyrotechnic distributor.



      9   After a pyrotechnic display permit has been granted,
sales, possession, use, and distribution of display fireworks for the display
shall be lawful for that purpose only.



      10   No pyrotechnic display permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.



      11   The application fee for a pyrotechnic display permit
shall be $100.00 payable to the Village Clerk; no application fee is required
for pyrotechnic displays held in conjunction with events sponsored by the
Village of Orland Park.



   B.   Indoor Pyrotechnic Displays: An indoor pyrotechnic display
shall be permitted upon compliance with the foregoing conditions.  In
addition, all indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be conducted in buildings
protected by automatic sprinkler systems and meeting the requirements of
rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to the Fireworks Use Act.



   C.    State/County Fair Association Exception:  No pyrotechnic
display permit shall be required under this Chapter for supervised public
displays by State or County fair associations.



8-6-10a-4:  CONSUMER DISPLAYS: 



   A.   Consumer Display Permits:  A consumer display permit is
required and shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon compliance with the
following conditions:



      1   Applications for consumer display permits shall be made to
the Village Clerk in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of the
proposed display, unless such 15 day requirement is waived by the Village
Clerk and the Chief of the Respective Fire Protection District.



      2   The applicant applying for the consumer display permit
must be an adult individual eighteen years of age or older. 



      3   Application for consumer display permits must identify the
competent individual who has received training from a consumer fireworks
training class approved by the Office of the State Fire Marshal and who will
be handling the display.  In addition, proof that the competent individual
handling the consumer display has received the requisite training shall be
attached to the application.



      4   A criminal background check of applicants shall be
conducted before issuance of a consumer display permit.  No consumer display
permit shall be issued to applicants who have been convicted of a felony or
any violation of a criminal statute or local ordinance related to the illegal
sale of fireworks.



      5   Applicants for consumer display permits must provide proof
of liability insurance in a sum not less than $250,000 to the Village before
issuance of the permit.  The insurance coverage shall be an occurrence-based
policy and shall cover all periods of time when consumer fireworks are in the
insured actual and constructive possession.



      6   A consumer display permit shall be issued only after
inspection of the display site by the Chief of the Respective Fire Protection
District, or his or her designee, to determine, in writing, that the display
is in full compliance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal.



      7   Consumer display permits shall be signed by the Village
Clerk, or his or her designee, and the Chief of the Respective Fire
Protection District or his or her designee, and must identify the trained
individual handling the consumer display.



      8   After a consumer display permit has been granted, sales,
possession, use, and distribution of consumer fireworks for display shall be
lawful for that purpose only.



      9   No consumer display permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.



      10   The application fee for a consumer display permit shall
be $100.00.



8-6-10a-5:  600 FOOT RULE:



   No pyrotechnics or fireworks shall be discharged, ignited or exploded
at any point in the Village within 600 feet of any hospital, asylum,
infirmary, school, church, retirement community, assisted living center or
complex where more than three senior citizens are residing.



8-6-10a-5:  THEATERS OR PUBLIC HALLS:



   The use of what are technically known as fireworks showers or any
mixture containing potassium chlorate, and sulphur in theatres or public
halls is prohibited.



8-6-10a-7:  RAILROAD, TRUCK AND AIRCRAFTINDUSTRY:



   Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the manufacture,
storage or use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe operation of
railroads, trucks, aircraft, or other instrumentalities of transportation.



8-6-10a-8:  SPARKLERS:



   The sale and/or use of sparklers in the Village is prohibited.



8-6-10a-9:  FORMS: 



   All applications, permits and site inspection records shall be on forms
approved by the State Fire Marshal.



8-6-10a-10:  CLASS A MISDEMEANOR:



   Any person violating these provisions shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.



8-6-10a-11:  PENALTY:



   Any person who violates the prohibitions of this Chapter shall be
subject to a fine according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for
each offense of which such person shall be convicted and confiscation of the
prohibited materials. Each and every violation of this Chapter and every day
of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 



(Ord. 3018, 6-17-97;  Amd. Ord. 4265, 7-2-07; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd.
Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-11:  REPLICA FIREARMS, POSSESSION OR USE PROHIBITED:



8-6-11-1:  PROHIBITION:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess on their person, or use
as if it were a real firearm, a replica firearm on the public ways, streets,
parks or other locations within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland
Park other than as prescribed by law.  (Ord. 4016, 5-2-05; Amd. Ord. 4035,
6-6-05)



8-6-11-2:  DEFINITION:



   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following term shall have the
following meaning: 



      "Replica firearm" means any device, object or facsimile made of
plastic, wood, metal or any other material,  that a person could reasonably
perceive as a real firearm.  The term shall not include any replica of an
antique firearm as defined in the Orland Park Village Code Section
7-3-7-7(a)(5) A and B. (Ord. 4016, 5-2-05; Amd. Ord. 4035, 6-6-05)



8-6-11-3:  EXCEPTION:



   The possession of a replica firearm is permitted on private property
with the permission of the owner or if the device is solely for use in
theatrical productions, including motion picture, television and stage
productions.  (Ord. 4016, 5-2-05; Amd, Ord. 4035, 6-6-05)



8-6-11-4:  PENALTY:



   Any person who violates the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B
for each offense.  Each possession or use of any such replica firearm shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 



(Ord. 4016, 5-2-05; Amd. Ord. 4035, 6-6-05; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord.
5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-12:  MARIJUANA FLAVORED CANDY



8-6-12-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   (a)   "Person" shall mean any natural person, individual,
corporation, unincorporated association, proprietorship, firm, partnership,
joint venture, joint stock association or other entity or business
organization of any kind.



   (b)   "Marijuana Flavored Candy" shall mean a lollipop, gumdrop or
other candy which is flavored to taste a including, but not limited to,
"Chronic Candy®."



8-6-12-2:  PROHIBITION:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for
sale, give away, barter, exchange or otherwise furnish or provide any
Marijuana Flavored Candy or other confection, dessert or food item which is
flavored to taste like marijuana within the Village of Orland Park.



8-6-12-3:  PENALTY:



   Any person who violates this section upon conviction shall be punished
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted:



   (a)   a fine according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B
for each offense of which such person shall be convicted;



   (b)   any repeat violations of any provision of Section 8-6-12 by a
licensee shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of such license.  For
purposes of this section, "license" includes any and all licenses issued by
any officer, department or agency of the Village of Orland Park required for
retail or other business operations at the location at which the offense
occurred, and includes but is not limited to business licenses; and



   (c)   for purposes of this section, each sale equals one violation
of this subsection.



(Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-13:  FISHING, BOATING AND SWIMMING:



8-6-13-1:  FISHING:



Any person taking or attempting to take any fish, including minnows and
crayfish, by any means whatever, in any waters or adjacent lands wholly or in
part within the jurisdiction of the Village of Orland Park, shall first
obtain and have in his/her possession a valid State of Illinois fishing
license as described in Chapter 515, Act 5, Section 20-5, Illinois Compiled
Statutes. 



(Amd. Ord. 5101, 6-6-16)



8-6-13-2:  FISHING REGULATIONS:



   All State of Illinois regulations apply when fishing within the Village
of Orland Park.  The taking of frogs, turtles and mussels is prohibited. 
Each angler is restricted to two (2) poles with fishing line.  No seines or
nets are allowed.  Fishing from Village boat docks is prohibited.



   Catch and release is encouraged.  It shall be prohibited for any
person to carry away or keep fish not in accordance with the following
species and minimum size limits:



 

Fish Species
 
Daily Limit
 
Minimum Size Requirement




Bluegill/Sunfish
 
No limit
 
None


Bullhead
 
6
 
None


Carp
 
No Limit
 
None


Catfish
 
No Limit
 
None


Crappie
 
10
 
9" or smaller


Crappie
 
Catch and Release
 
10" or larger


Largemouth Bass
 
1
 
18" or larger


Northern Pike
 
Catch and Release
 
All sizes - Immediate Release


Perch
 
No Limit
 
None


Tiger Muskie
 
Catch and Release
 
All sizes - Immediate Release


Walleye
 
Catch and Release
 
All sizes - Immediate Release




 



(Amd. Ord. 5101, 6-6-16)



8-6-13-3:  BOATING REGULATIONS ON LAKE SEDGEWICK:



   Only watercraft that comply with this section and with State of
Illinois and United States Coast Guard registration requirements and safety
regulations will be allowed.  All boaters sixteen (16) years of age and
younger must wear a United States Coast Guard approved personal floatation
device at all times.  Boats must leave the bay area while fishing and no
more than twelve (12) boats are allowed on the lake at one time.  Boats may
only be launched and retrieved at the Village designated boat launch.  Boats
must not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length.  Except for boats with
electric trolling motors, no inflatable boats, powerboats or jet skis are
allowed on the lake. 



(Amd. Ord. 5101, 6-6-16)



8-6-13-4:  BOAT LAUNCH HOURS AND FEES ON LAKE SEDGEWICK:



   Boats may be launched at the Village designated boat launch sunrise to
dusk, weather permitting. 



(Amd. Ord. 5101, 6-6-16)



8-6-13-5:  SWIMMING IN LAKE SEDGEWICK:



   No person shall knowingly wade, swim, float or otherwise immerse all or
any part of his or her body on or in the waters of Lake Sedgewick. 



(Amd. Ord. 5101, 6-6-16)



8-6-13-6:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Ord. 4280, 8-20-07; Amd. Ord. 5101, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd.
Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



8-6-14:  CHRONIC NUISANCES:



   A.   Any real property within the Village which becomes a chronic
nuisance property is in violation of this Section and is subject to its
remedies. Any person in charge who permits real property under his or her
ownership or control to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation
of this Section and subject to its remedies and penalties, as well as the
penalties provided for in Section 8-6-99 of this Chapter.



   B.   Definitions.



      1.   Chronic nuisance property upon which either two (2) or
more of the following criminal activities have occurred during any sixty (60)
day period or three (3) or more of the following criminal activities have
occurred during any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period, as a result of
separate factual events that have been independently investigated by a law
enforcement agency:



         a.   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1,
as amended;



         b.   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS
5/24-1 et seq., as amended;



         c.   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1, as
amended;



         d.   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 5/24-1.2
et seq., as amended;



         e.   Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1, as amended;



         f.   Possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled
substance, a counterfeit substance or a controlled substance analog, as
defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq., as amended;



         g.   Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of
cannabis as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., as amended;



         h.   Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled
substances as defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS
570/401 et seq., as amended;



         i.   Sale, delivery or possession of drug paraphernalia,
as defined in 720 ILCS 600/3 and 3.5, as amended;



         j.   Possession, manufacture, or delivery of
methamphetamine as defined in the Methamphetamine Control and Community
Protection Act, 720 ILCS 646/1 et seq., as amended;



         k.   Any offense involving the use, sale or delivery of
intoxicating compounds as defined in the Use of Intoxicating Compounds Act,
720 ILCS 690/.01 et seq., as amended;



         l.   Assault or battery or any related offense as
defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-1 et seq., 5/12-2 et seq., 5/12-3, or 5/12-4 et
seq., as amended;



         m.   Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720
ILCS 5/12-15 et seq., or 5/12-16 et seq., as amended;



         n.   Public indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-9 et
seq., as amended;



         o.   Sexual exploitation of a child as defined in 720
ILCS 5/11-9.1, as amended;



         p.   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et
seq., as amended;



         q.   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS
5/21-1 et seq., as amended;



         r.   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol, as
defined in 235 ILCS 5/1 et seq., as amended;



         s.   A violation of a provision of the Village Code
relating to disorderly conduct, assault, battery, unlawful use of a weapon,
possession or cannabis, possession of drug paraphernalia, underage
consumption of alcohol, disposal of garbage/refuse/solid waste and/or noise
regulations; and



         t.   A violation of Title 5 Chapter 7 (Property
Maintenance) or Title 5 Chapter 1 (Building Code) of the Village Code.



      2.   Control. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate,
counteract or govern conduct that occurs on property.



      3.   Owner. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any
legal or equitable interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not
limited to, a mortgagee in possession in whom is vested all or part of the
legal title to the property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and
the right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises; or an occupant
who can control what occurs on the property.



      4.   Permit. To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by
failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.



      5.   Person. Any natural person, association, limited
liability company, partnership or corporation capable of owning or using
property in the Village. 



      6.   Person in charge. Any person in actual or constructive
possession of a property, including but not limited to an owner, occupant of
property under his or her domain, ownership or control.



      7.   Property. Any real property, including land which is
affixed, incidental or pertinent to the land, including but not limited to
any premises, room, house, building, or structure or any separate part or
portion thereof.



   C.   Commencement of action. When the chief of police receives a
report documenting the occurrence of the second nuisance activity in a sixty
(60) day period or the third nuisance activity in a three hundred sixty-five
(365) day period at or within a property and determines that the property has
become a chronic nuisance property pursuant to this Section, the Chief of
Police shall:



      1.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property
has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall
contain the following information: the street address or legal description
sufficient for identification of the property; a statement that the Chief of
Police has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a
concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his/her findings;
and a demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to the
Chief of Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of Police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.



      2.   Service shall be made either personally or by certified
mail, postage pre- paid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in
charge at the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance
property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge
notice of the determination by the Chief of Police.



      3.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such
address as shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is
located, and/or the occupant, at the address of the property, if these
persons are different from the person in charge, and shall be made either
personally or by certified mail, postage pre-paid, return receipt requested.



      4.   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property
after ten (10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to
the person in charge if the person in charge has not subsequently contacted
the Chief of Police.



      5.   The failure of any person to receive notice that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise
affect the proceedings under this Section.



      6.   After the notification, but prior to the commencement of
legal proceedings by the Village pursuant to this Section, a person in charge
stipulates with the Chief of Police that the person in charge will pursue a
course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving
rise to the violation, the chief of police may agree to postpone legal
proceedings for a period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30)
days. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the
nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within
thirty (30) days, the Chief of Police shall request authorization from the
Village Manager or his/her designee for the Village Attorney to commence a
legal proceeding to abate the nuisance.



      7.   Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth
herein, the Chief of Police shall send copies of the notice, as well as any
other documentation which supports legal proceedings to the Village Attorney.



      8.   When a person in charge makes a response to the Chief of
Police as required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with
the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any
nuisance activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require
the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for
any other purpose.



   D.   Abatement of nuisance. The Village Attorney may commence an
action to abate a public nuisance as described in this Section. Upon being
satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic
nuisance property exists, the court may without notice or bond enter a
temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction to enjoin any
defendant from maintaining such nuisance and may enter an order restraining
any defendant from removing or interfering with all property used in
connection with the public nuisance.



   E.   Burden of Proof.



      1.   In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance
property pursuant to this Section, the Village shall have the initial burden
of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic
nuisance property.



      2.   It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of
chronic nuisance property pursuant to this Section that the owner of the
property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of reasonable
care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance
property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and
diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that the property is a
chronic nuisance property.



      3.   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty
requested, the court may consider any of the following factors and shall
state those found applicable: 



         a.   The actions or lack of action taken by the person
in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance at the property.



         b.   Whether the nuisance at the property was repeated
or continuous.



         c.   The magnitude or gravity of the nuisance.



         d.   The cooperation of the person in charge with the
Village.



         e.   The cost of the Village investigating and
correcting or attempting to correct the nuisance condition.



   F.   Remedies.



      1.   In the event a court determines property to be a chronic
nuisance property under this Section, the court may order that the property
be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for a period of not less
than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or the
court may employ any other remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the
nuisance.



      2.   In addition to the remedy provided in subsection (1)
above, the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in
the amount of up to $500 per day, but no less than $100 per day, payable to
the Village, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property
was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a
chronic nuisance property. 



      3.   In determining what remedy or remedies shall be employed,
the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the
property, including, but not limited to:



         a.   The disturbance of neighbors.



         b.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises. 



   G.   Emergency closing procedures.



      1.   In the event that it is determined that the property is
an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the Village may
apply to the court for such interim relief, as is deemed appropriate by the
Chief of Police. In such an event, the notification provision set forth in
Subsection (C) above need not be complied with, however, the Village shall
make a diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a court
hearing.



      2.   In the event that the court finds the property
constitutes a chronic nuisance property as defined in this Section, the court
may order the remedy set out above. In addition, in the event that it also
finds the person in charge had knowledge of activities or conditions of the
property constituting or violating this Section and permitted the activities
to occur, the court may assess a civil fine as provided above.



      3.   The court may authorize the Village to physically secure
the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so
within the time specified by the court. In the event that the Village is
authorized to secure the property, all reasonable costs incurred by the
Village to affect a closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the
property. If used herein, "costs" means these costs actually incurred by the
Village for the physical securing of the property.



      4.   The Village shall prepare a statement of cost and the
Village shall thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review.
If no objection of the statement is made within the period described by the
court, a lien in said amount may be recorded against said property.



      5.   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or
civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof
to the Village.



   H.   If any provision, clause or paragraph of this Section shall be
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect the remaining provisions of this Section. 



   I.   Other remedies. The adoption of this Section does not preclude
the Village from using any other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of
this Code.



(Ord. 5383, 2-18-19)



8-6-15:  PROHIBITED SOCIAL HOSTING:



   A.   Generally.



      It is hereby declared to be unlawful to host or allow an event or
gathering within the Village in violation of this Section as further defined
and provided.



   B.   Definitions.  For the purposes of this Section the following
terms shall have the meanings stated:



      1.   Adult.  Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older.



      2.   Alcohol.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or
spirits of wine, liqueur, cordials, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other
distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever
source or by whatever process produced.



      3.   Alcoholic beverage.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine,
beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
which contains one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume
and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or
combined with other substances.



      4.   Event or gathering.  Any group of three (3) or more
persons assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other
activity.



      5.   Host or allow.  To aid, conduct, entertain, organize,
supervise, control or permit an event or gathering.



      6.   Parent.  Any person having legal custody of a juvenile
as a natural parent, adoptive parent, step parent, legal guardian, or a
person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.



      7.   Person.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership,
corporation, or any association of one (1) or more individuals. A person does
not include any municipal, county, or state agency.



      8.   Residence, premises, or private property.  Any location,
including a house, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other
dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, yard, field, park, or any other
place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis,
whether occupied as a dwelling or residence or specifically for a social or
business function, and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without
permission or compensation.



      9.   Underage person.  Any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years.



   C.   Prohibited Acts.



      1.   It is a violation of this Section for any person(s) to
host or allow an event or gathering at any residence, premises or on any
other public or private property where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are
present, when the person(s) knows or reasonably should know that:



         a.   Alcohol or an alcoholic beverage is being possessed
or consumed by an underage person; and



         b.   The person failed to prevent such possession or
consumption by an underage person.



      2.   It is a violation of this Section if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels or conspires with another or
otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.



      3.   A person who hosts or allows an event or gathering does
not have to be present at the event or gathering to be responsible for a
violation of this Section.



   D.   Exceptions.



      1.   This Section does not apply to conduct of an underage
person specifically authorized by his or her parent while present in the
parent's household.



      2.   This Section does not apply to legally protected
religious observances.



      3.   This Section does not apply to law enforcement activities
supervised by a law enforcement agency.



      4.   This Section does not apply to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during
the course and scope of employment.



      5.   This Section does not apply to a landlord, mortgagee,
college, university, hotel or motel owner, or operator who has not actually
participated in hosting or allowing an event or gathering where alcohol is
present.



   E.   Penalty.



      Any person who violates this Section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in
accordance with Appendix B; Fine Schedule appearing at the end of this Code.



(Ord. 5423, 8-19-19)



8-6-99:  PENALTY:



   Any violation of any provision this chapter (Chapter 6 Offenses) for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined according
to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such
person shall be convicted and every day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. 



(Amd. Ord. 5101, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-166; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 7
CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS



SECTION:



8-7-1:   Emergency Services and Disaster Agency



8-7-2:   Local Civil Emergencies



8-7-2-1:   Definitions



8-7-2-2:   Declaration; Procedures



8-7-3:   Failure to Comply



8-7-1:  EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY:



   The Village Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA) shall have
the powers granted by and shall act pursuant to Title 2, Chapter 1 of this
Code and 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq, the Illinois Emergency Management Act, as
directed by the state of Illinois and the Governor.  The Village ESDA shall
also respond pursuant to its local emergency plan when so directed by the
Village President.



8-7-2:  LOCAL CIVIL EMERGENCIES:



8-7-2-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   LOCAL CIVIL EMERGENCY:  A civil emergency is hereby defined to be:



      A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate
power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without
authority of law; or



      The occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury
or loss of life or property within the corporate limits of the Village
resulting from any natural disaster, manmade calamity or technological cause,
including but not limited to fire, flood, cyclone, tornado, earthquake,
explosion, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination
requiring emergency action and extraordinary measures to protect the public
health, safety and welfare in order to avert danger or damage, extended
periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical
shortages of essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, public health
emergencies, or acts of domestic terrorism.



   CURFEW:  A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially
designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency. 



(Ord. 4726, 5-7-12)



8-7-2-2:  DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY; PROCEDURES:



   Whenever an emergency as defined in Section 8-7-1 or 8-7-2-1 of this
Chapter exists, the Village President shall declare the existence thereof by
means of an executive order, which shall be in the form of a signed, written
declaration under oath that includes the following:



      1.   A statement finding that the standards set forth in
Section 8-7-1 or 8-7-2 have been met;



      2.   Facts that substantiate the findings above;



      3.   A description of the nature of the emergency;



      4.   A declaration that a state of emergency exists.



   Such executive order shall be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as
practicable. A state of emergency, declared as provided in this Section,
shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of
the Village after the state of emergency is declared.



   After declaration of a civil emergency by the Village President, he/she
may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the
Village or to the Village as a whole, as he/she deems advisable, and
applicable during such hours of the day or night as he/she deems necessary in
the interest of the public safety and welfare.



   After the declaration of a civil emergency, the Village President may
also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the
following orders:



      1.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including
taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted.



      2.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor
by any wholesaler or retailer.



      3.   Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing or
giving away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in
any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.



      4.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing,
dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever.



      5.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for
the protection of life and property.



   The declaration of a civil emergency herein authorized shall be
effective for a period of forty-eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by
a declaration by the Village President indicating that the state of emergency
no longer exists.  The Village President shall have the power to re-issue an
executive order at the end of each forty-eight (48) hour period during the
time the said civil emergency exists; provided, however, that any such
declaration of the existence of a civil emergency shall expire not later than
the adjournment of the first meeting of the corporate authorities after the
civil emergency is declared, unless extended by the corporate authorities. 



   Upon issuing the executive order herein authorized, the Chief of Police
shall notify the news media situated within the Village and shall cause three
(3) copies of the executive order declaring the existence of the emergency to
be posted at the following places in the Village: The Village Hall, the
Police Station and the Post Office.  (Ord. 4726, 5-7-12)



8-7-3:  FAILURE TO COMPLY:



   No person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or
any order issued pursuant to those provisions.



CHAPTER 8
VIOLATION CITATIONS



SECTION:



8-8-1:   Citations for Specific Violations



8-8-2:   Procedure on Issuance of Citation



8-8-3:   Fines



8-8-1:  CITATIONS FOR SPECIFIC VIOLATIONS:



   Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without a
warrant because of a violation in respect to any of the following subjects:



      1.   Prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in a designated area;



      2.   Restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there
parked;



      3.   Requiring the purchase and display of a vehicle sticker;



      4.   Regulating parking in metered zones;



      5.   Regulating and licensing dogs;



      6.   Regulating and licensing businesses;



   said police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court,
in the first instance issue to such alleged violator, a citation:



      1.   Advising said person that he has violated a specific
Village regulation;



      2.   Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to
said alleged violation as set forth in Section 8-8-3 of this Chapter as
settlement of said violation claim; and



      3.   Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint
will be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County, charging him with such
violation.



8-8-2:  PROCEDURE ON ISSUANCE OF CITATION:



   Pursuant to said citation, the person so accused of said violation may
settle and compromise the violation claim in respect of such ordinance
violation by paying to the Village the applicable amount as shown in the
schedule set forth in Section 8-8-3 of this Chapter, within a period to be
specified in said citation - not more than seven (7) days after the time said
alleged offense was committed.



   Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions
contained in the aforesaid citation, at the office of the Village Clerk who
shall issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit said
amount to the Village Treasurer to be credited to the proper Municipal fund.



   In the event that the person to whom said citation is issued fails to
settle and pay said violation claim within the prescribed time, or within a
period of time specified in a final notice (if one is served upon him),then
the police officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served
upon said alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to
prosecute the same in the Circuit Court of Cook County.



   The fact that an automobile or motor vehicles is illegally operated or
parked is registered with the Secretary of State in the name of said alleged
violator; or, in the alternative, in the been issued in the name of and to
said alleged violator, shall be considered prima facie proof that said
alleged violator was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or
motor vehicle at the time of such alleged violation.



8-8-3:  FINES:



   The violation claim described in said citation so to be issued pursuant
to the terms of this Chapter, may be settled, compromised and paid in the
respective amounts set according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B.



   In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in the
final notice, and a notice to appear has been served and a complaint filed in
the Circuit Court of Cook County, payment of any fine and costs shall be in
such amounts as may be determined and established by the Circuit Court of
Cook County.



(Ord. 321, 2-14-66; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



TITLE 9 TRAFFIC



CHAPTER  1   VEHICLE LICENSES



CHAPTER  2   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



CHAPTER  3   DRIVERS



CHAPTER  4   PEDESTRIANS



CHAPTER  5   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS



CHAPTER  6   GENERAL RULES OF THE ROAD



CHAPTER  7   STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING



CHAPTER  8   PARKING LOT REGULATIONS



CHAPTER  9   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 10   VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, CONDITION



CHAPTER 11   ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES



CHAPTER 12   SNOWMOBILES, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES



CHAPTER 13   BICYCLES



CHAPTER 14   ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE VIOLATIONS, CITATIONS AND SETTLEMENT



CHAPTER 15   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR STANDING, PARKING
AND COMPLIANCE VIOLATIONS



CHAPTER 16   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE
ADJUDICATION



CHAPTER 1
VEHICLE LICENSES



SECTION:



9-1-1:   Definitions



9-1-2:   License Required



9-1-3:   Application for Vehicle License



9-1-4:   Annual License Fees



9-1-5:   Term of License



9-1-6:   Exceptions



9-1-7:   Tag or Insignia



9-1-8:   Prima Facie Proof



9-1-9:   Transfer Fee



9-1-10:   Application for License at Certain Other Agencies



9-1-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   The following words and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall for
the purpose herein have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
Chapter except when the context otherwise requires:



   MOTOR VEHICLES:  Every vehicle which is, or is intended to be, or is
capable of being propelled otherwise than by muscular power, including but
not limited to automobiles, antique vehicles, motorcycles, motor bicycles,
motor trucks, truck tractors and all vehicles propelled by gasoline, battery,
mechanical, electrical or other non-muscle power except cars or equipment
designed to be used on rail or tracks, and snowmobiles as defined in the
Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.  (Ord. 3543, 9-27-01)



   MOTOR BICYCLE or MOTORCYCLE: A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle
for the use of a rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3)
wheels in contact with the ground.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE:  A motor vehicle originally or permanently
converted and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation and
not used as a commercial vehicle.



   AUTOMOBILE DEALER:  Any person engaging in the sale of motor vehicles
where motor vehicles are used principally for testing or demonstration
purposes.



   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
association of any kind.



   STREET:  Any public highway, street or alley within the Village.



   SCHOOL BUS:  School Bus shall mean a motor vehicle as defined in 625
ILCS 5/1-182 (1994).



9-1-2:  LICENSE REQUIRED:



   No person being the owner of a motor vehicle who resides in the Village
and no person being the owner of a motor vehicle, the situs or base of which
is in the Village shall use or cause or permit the use of such motor vehicle
upon the streets of the Village without first obtaining a license for such
vehicle as hereinafter set forth.  A separate license shall be so obtained
for each vehicle so owned and so used by said person.



9-1-3:  APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE LICENSE:



   Any person desiring to license a motor vehicle shall file an
application with the Village Treasurer on a form or forms provided by the
Village Treasurer for such purpose.  The applicant shall submit name, bona
fide residence and mailing address of the owner, or business address of the
owner if a firm, partnership, association or corporation,  a telephone
number and a description of the vehicle, including the Illinois license plate
number, truck class (if applicable), make, model, color and year.  An
automobile dealer shall not apply for more vehicle licenses than dealer
plates issued by the Secretary of State of Illinois.  Upon payment of the
fee herein provided, the Village President shall issue or cause to be issued
a vehicle license authorizing the use of such vehicle within the Village
until its expiration date.  (Ord. 3335, 2-22-00)



9-1-4:  BIENNIAL  LICENSE FEES:



   The following biennial motor vehicle license fees shall be paid to the
Village Treasurer:



   1   For motor bicycles or motorcycles - $30.00



   2   For recreational vehicles - $40.00



   3   For motor vehicles, except motor bicycles, motorcycles,
recreational vehicles, motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles, and
motor vehicles which are used for public hire - $30.00



   4   For motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles and motor
vehicles used for public hire having a gross weight in pounds including
vehicle and maximum load not over 8,000 pounds.



      (Class B as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code for vehicles
of the second division.) - $30.00



   5   For motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles and motor
vehicles used for public hire having a gross weight in pounds including
vehicle and maximum load from 8,001 pounds to 12,000 pounds. (Class D as set
forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code for vehicles of the second division.) -
$40.00



   6   For motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles and motor
vehicles used for public hire having a gross weight in pounds including
vehicle and maximum load from 12,001 to 28,000 pounds. (Classes F, H and J as
set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code for vehicles of the second division.)
- $55.00



   7.   For motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles and motor
vehicles used for public hire having a gross weight in pounds including
vehicle and maximum load from 28,001 pounds to 45,000 pounds. (Classes K, L,
N and P as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code for vehicles of the second
division.) - $85.00



   8   For motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles and motor
vehicles used for public hire having a gross weight in pounds including
vehicle  and maximum load from 45,001 pounds to 73,280 pounds. (Classes Q,
R, S, T and V as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code for vehicles of the
second division.) - $105.00



   9   For motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles and motor
vehicles used for public hire having a gross weight in pounds including
vehicle and maximum load from 73,281 to 80,000 pounds. (Classes X and Z as
set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code for vehicles of the second division.)
- $130.00



   10   For automobile dealers' licenses--first motor vehicle license -
$30.00



   11   For automobile dealers' licenses for each additional motor
vehicle license for such dealer - $10.00



   12   For School Buses - $60.00



   13.   For antique vehicles, as defined in Section 1-102.1 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-102.1) - $15.00



   No provision of this Section shall be construed to relate to taxicabs
as defined in and licensed by other ordinances of the Village.



(Ord. 619, 11-11-74; Amd. Ord. 2952, 11-4-96; Amd. Ord. 3543, 9-27-01; Amd.
Ord. 3975, 1-17-05; Amd. Ord. 4623, 2-21-11)



9-1-5:  TERM OF LICENSE:



   All vehicle licenses with a June 30, 2002 expiration date are hereby
extended to June 30, 2003.  From and after July 1, 2003, vehicle licenses
shall have a two-year term.  A two-year license fee for all vehicles shall
be due and payable in advance of July 1 of each odd-numbered year and said
license shall expire on June 30 two years later.



   One-half of the license fee as above set forth shall be the license fee
when the vehicle to be licensed was not used upon the streets of the Village
nor was a previous unlicensed vehicle of the applicant so used during the
first year of the two-year license period or any portion thereof.  In no
event shall the license fee be less than one-half of the two-year fee.



   On and after July 1 of any license payment year, the license fees set
forth above, or in 9-1-6 below, shall be doubled.  Each said doubled license
fee shall be paid before an applicant shall be entitled to a license,
provided however that no doubling of the fee shall occur when the vehicle to
be licensed was acquired by the applicant, or the applicant first became a
resident of the Village, or the situs or base of said vehicle was
established, within thirty (30) days preceding the date of the application,
and provided that no other unlicensed vehicle was previously operated in this
Village in that two-year license period by the applicant.  The doubling of
license fees shall not be construed as in lieu of any other penalties
provided for herein.



(Ord. 3975, 1-17-05)



9-1-6:  EXCEPTIONS:



   The official vehicles of the Orland Fire Protection District shall be
issued vehicle licenses without payment of a license fee each year and the
Village Treasurer is hereby authorized to so issue such licenses.



   Any natural person required under this Chapter to pay a two-year
license fee for a motor vehicle  described in Section 9-1-4 subsections (1),
(2) and (3), who has attained or will attain the age of sixty-five (65) years
at any time before or during the two year license period shall be issued one
vehicle license for a vehicle described in Section 9-1-4 subsections (1), (2)
or (3) upon the payment of a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) only, and
the Village Treasurer is hereby authorized to issue one such vehicle license
upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of the age of such person.  Two
(2) vehicles of the type aforesaid may be licensed per household where there
are two (2) drivers of the age aforesaid. 



   A license is not required for a Class 1, Class 2 or Class 3 low-speed
electric bicycle as defined and described in Section 1-140.10 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 IL CS 5/1-140.10)



(Ord. 3543,  9-27-01; Amd. Ord. 3975, 1-17-05; Ord. 4623, 2-21-11; Amd. Ord.
5430, 9-3-19)



9-1-7:  TAG OR INSIGNIA:



   Upon the issuance of a vehicle license, the Village Treasurer shall
deliver to the licensee an appropriate insignia or tag bearing a number, the
type of vehicle and the period for which the license is issued.  A
nonmetallic insignia shall be promptly affixed by the licensee on the motor
bicycle, motorcycle, or automobile dealer vehicle licensed in the lower
right-hand corner of the windshield as viewed from the inside of the
vehicle.  A metallic tag shall be promptly affixed on the license plate of
the vehicle licensed so as to be visible from the rear of said vehicle. 
Failure to so affix the insignia or tag shall be deemed a violation hereof.



(Ord. 3335, 2-22-00)



9-1-8:  PRIMA FACIE PROOF:



   Where an offense is charged for violation of the provisions of this
Chapter, the registration of a motor vehicle by the Secretary of State in the
name of the alleged violator and at an address in the Village shall be
considered prima facie proof of ownership in such person and of the residence
of said person.  (Ord. 619, 11-11-74)



9-1-9:  TRANSFER FEE:



   In the event the licensee shall acquire a new vehicle of the same class
and the use of a licensed vehicle of the said class shall be discontinued,
the licensee may transfer the issued and outstanding license to the new
vehicle upon payment of a transfer fee of one dollar ($1.00), provided that
portion of the previous vehicle tag or sticker indicating the number thereof
and the receipt therefor are presented to the Village Treasurer at the time
of application for transfer.  (Ord. 3335, 2-22-00; Amd. Ord. 3543, 9-27-01;
Amd. Ord. 3975, 1-17-05)



   In the event the licensee shall acquire a new vehicle of a class
licensed pursuant to Section 9-1-4 of this Chapter, where the license fee
shall be a higher amount as herein specified for the new vehicle, the amount
of license fee heretofore paid shall be credited to the higher fee for said
new vehicle.



9-1-10:  APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE LICENSE AT CERTAIN OTHER AGENCIES:



   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein contained, the Village
Treasurer is hereby authorized to arrange with any bank, savings and loan
association or currency exchange located within the corporate limits of the
Village, to process applications for, collect the license fee and issue the
tag or insignia for those classes of vehicles licensed pursuant to Section
9-1-4 of this Chapter.  Any said bank, savings and loan association or
currency exchange so authorized shall transmit the application and monies
collected together with the records of issuance of a vehicle license to the
Village Treasurer within ten (10) days after so doing.  The said
organization shall be authorized to charge a fee to the licensee not to
exceed one dollar ($1.00) for the service herein provided.  (Ord. 3335,
2-22-00)



CHAPTER 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



SECTION:



9-2-1:   Definitions



9-2-2:   Classification of Vehicles



9-2-3:   Registration of Vehicles



9-2-3-1:   Plates, Proper Display



9-2-3-2:   Improper Use of Evidences of Registration



9-2-3-3:   Display or Registration Plates



9-2-4:   Obedience to Police



9-2-5:   Animals or Bicycles



9-2-6:   Exemptions to Provisions



9-2-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   Whenever in this Title the following terms are used they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section:



   BUSINESS DISTRICT:  The closely built up business portion of the
Village.



   CROSSWALK:  That portion of the roadway included within the
prolongation of the sidewalk lines at street intersections.



   DRIVER:  Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle or
street car.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE:  Vehicles of the Police or Fire Department,
ambulances or any vehicle conveying a Village official or employee in
response to an official emergency call.



   EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains
any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion or by detonation of any part of the compound or mixture may
cause such a sudden generation of highly combustible gases that the resultant
gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous
objects or of destroying life or limb.



   FARM TRACTOR:  Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing plows, moving machines and other implements of husbandry.



   FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flash point of seventy degrees
(700) Fahrenheit or less, as determined by a tabliabue, or equivalent closed
cup test device.



   IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or
gravel.



   INTERSECTION:  The area embraced within the prolongation of the
property lines of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or
not such streets cross.



   LANED HIGHWAY:  A street, the roadway of which is divided into three
(3) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular travel.



   LOADING ZONE:  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.



   METAL TIRE:  Every tire the surface of which in contact with the
roadway is wholly or partly composed of metal or other hard nonresilient
material.



   MOTORCYCLE:  Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels, in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.



   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electricity obtained from an overhead wire, but not
operated upon rails.



   PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time
greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
persons.



   PEDESTRIAN:  Any person on foot.



   PNEUMATIC TIRE:  Every tire in which compressed air is designed to
support the load.



   PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the
lots or property abutting thereon.



   PUBLIC BUILDING:  A building used by the Village or by any park
district, school district, the State of Illinois or the United States
government.



   ROAD TRACTOR:  Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or as any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT:  The closely built up residence portion of the
Village.



   ROADWAY: That portion of a street designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.



   SAFETY ZONE:  That portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use
of pedestrians, suitably marked or elevated.



   SEMI-TRAILER:  Every vehicle without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or
is carried by another vehicle.



   SIDEWALK:  That portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line.



   SOLID TIRE:  Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which
does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.



   STREET:  Every way set aside for travel except foot paths.



   SUBURBAN DISTRICT:  That portion of the Village other then the closely
built up business and residence districts.



   TRAFFIC:  Vehicles using any street for travel.



   TRAILER:  Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that no part of its weight rests upon the towing truck.



   TRUCK TRACTOR:  Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.



   VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including bicycles but not
including perambulators or toy vehicles.



9-2-2:  CLASSIFICATION OF VEHICLES:



   For the purpose of this Chapter, motor vehicles shall be divided into
two (2) divisions:  (Ord. 80A, 10-27-41)



   1.   Motor Vehicles of the First Division:  Those vehicles which
are designed and used for the carrying of not more than seven (7) persons.



   2.   Motor Vehicles of the Second Division:  Those vehicles which
are designed and used for pulling and carrying freight and also those
vehicles which are designed and used for the carrying of more than seven (7)
persons.



   3.   Emergency Vehicles:  Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire
Department and ambulances, and emergency vehicles of Municipal corporations
or public service corporations.  (Ord. 311, 8-9-65)



9-2-3:  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES:



9-2-3-1:  PLATES, PROPER DISPLAY:



   No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be
operated, upon any street or highway of this Village, a vehicle required to
be registered under the laws of the State of Illinois unless there shall be
attached thereto and displayed thereon when and as required a valid
registration plate or plates issued therefor by the Secretary of State for
the current registration year.



9-2-3-2:  IMPROPER USE OF EVIDENCES OF REGISTRATION:



   No person shall lend to another any registration card, registration
plate, special plate or permit issued to him if the person desiring to borrow
the same would not be entitled to the use thereof, nor shall any person
knowingly permit the use of any of the same by one not entitled thereto, nor
shall any person display upon a vehicle any registration card, registration
plate or permit not issued for such vehicle or not otherwise lawfully used
thereon under the laws of the State of Illinois.



9-2-3-3:  DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION PLATES:



   No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be
operated upon any street or highway of this Village, any vehicle which does
not properly display its registration plates in compliance with subsections
(1) and (2) of this Section.



   1.   Registration plates, issued by the Secretary of State, for a
motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, trailer, semi-trailer or truck-tractor
shall be attached thereto, one in the front and one in the rear.  The
registration plate issued for a motorcycle, trailer or semi-trailer shall be
attached to the rear thereof.  The registration plate issued for a
truck-tractor shall be attached to the front thereof.



   2.   Every registration plate shall at all times be securely
fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it was issued so
as to prevent the plate from swinging at a height of not less than twelve
inches (12") from the ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a
place and position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained free from
foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible.  (Ord. 322,
2-14-66)



9-2-4:  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:



   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic in accordance with the provisions of this Title, or in emergencies as
public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of a policeman.  Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any
person not authorized by the Chief of Police to direct or attempt to direct
traffic.



9-2-5:  ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:



   Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal
drawing a vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this
Title applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which
can have no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an
animal.



9-2-6:  EXEMPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:



   The provisions of this Title regulating the movement or parking of
vehicles shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is
engaged in the performance of emergency duties.  Nor shall such provisions
apply to persons engaged in repairing or otherwise improving the street under
authority of the Board of Trustees or of the State of Illinois.  (Ord. 80A,
10-27-41)



CHAPTER 3
DRIVERS



SECTION:



9-3-1:   Valid Operators' or Chauffeurs' Licenses Required



9-3-2:   Driving With Suspended or Revoked License



9-3-3:   Restricted License or Permit



9-3-4:   Age Limit



9-3-5:   Seat Safety Belts and Child Restraint Systems



9-3-1:  VALID OPERATORS' OR CHAUFFEURS' LICENSE:



   No person, except those expressly exempted by 625 ILCS 5/6-102, shall
drive any motor vehicle upon any street or highway of the Village unless such
person has a valid license or permit as an operator or chauffeur, or a
restricted driving permit issued under the provisions of ch. 625 aforesaid,
which such license or permit is to be kept in the possession of the operator
or chauffeur at all times of operation of a motor vehicle upon any street or
highway of the Village.



9-3-2:  DRIVING WITH SUSPENDED OR REVOKED LICENSE:



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street or highway of the
Village at a time when his operator's or chauffeur's license or permit or
privilege so to do or his privilege to obtain a license or permit under the
laws of the State of Illinois is revoked or suspended.



9-3-3:  RESTRICTED LICENSE OR PERMIT:



   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or  highway 
of  this Village in any manner that is in violation of the restrictions
imposed on a restricted driver's license or permit issued by the Secretary of
State of the State of Illinois.  (Ord. 322, 2-14-66)



9-3-4:  AGE LIMIT:



   It shall be unlawful for any person under sixteen (16) years of age to
operate any motor vehicle upon the streets of the Village.



9-3-5:  SEAT SAFETY BELTS AND CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS



   A.   For purposes of this Section, "seat safety belts" shall mean a
set of belts or a harness meeting the specifications established by the
Illinois Department of Transportation and installed in such a manner as to
prevent or materially reduce the movement of the person using the same in the
event of a collision or upset of the motor vehicle.  The Illinois Department
of Transportation shall establish and maintain the performance specifications
for seat safety belts and for the attachment and installation thereof.



   B.   For purposes of this Section, "child restraint system" shall
mean any device which meets the standards of the United States Department of
Transportation designed to restrain, seat or position children.



   C.   No person shall sell any 1965 or later model motor vehicle of
the first division unless the front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped
with at least two (2) sets of seat safety belts.  Motorcycles are exempt
from the provisions of this subsection.



   D.   No person shall operate a 1965 or later model motor vehicle of
the first division that is titled or licensed by the Secretary of State for
the State of Illinois unless the front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped
with at least two (2) sets of seat safety belts.  Motorcycles are exempt
from the provisions of this subsection.



   E.   Each driver and passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a
roadway, street or highway within the Village shall wear a properly fastened
and adjusted seat safety belt (625 ILCS 5/12-603.1 (a); except that a child
less than eight (8) years of age shall be protected as required pursuant to
the Child Passenger Protection Act (625 ILCS 5/25-1 et seq.). Each driver of
a motor vehicle transporting a child eight (8) years of age or older, but
less than sixteen (16) years of age, in the front seat of the motor vehicle
shall secure the child in a properly fastened and secured seat safety belt.



   F.   When any person is transporting a child in the Village under
eight (8) years of age in a non- commercial motor vehicle of the first
division, a motor vehicle of the second division with a gross vehicle weight
rating of nine thousand (9,000) pounds or less, or a recreational vehicle, on
the roadways, streets or highways in the Village, such person shall be
responsible for providing protection of such child by properly securing him
or her in a child restraint system. The parent or legal guardian of a child
under eight (8) years of age shall provide a child restraint system to any
person who transports his or her child. Any person who transports the child
of another shall not be found to be in violation of this subsection unless a
child restraint system was provided to said person by the parent or legal
guardian of the child, but was not used to transport the child.



   G.   Every person, when transporting a child eight (8) years of age
or older but under sixteen (16) years of age, in a motor vehicle within the
Village, shall be responsible for securing that child in either a child
restraint system or a properly fastened and secured seat safety belt.



   H.   Every person under the age of eighteen (18) years, when
transporting a child eight (8) years of age or older but under the age of
eighteen (18) years, in a motor vehicle within the Village, shall be
responsible for securing that child in a properly adjusted and fastened seat
safety belt.



   I.   The provisions of subsection E above shall not apply to any of
the following:



      1.   A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the
motor vehicle or delivering property from the motor vehicle, if the speed of
the motor vehicle between stops does not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour.



      2.   A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from
a physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons, to
wear a seat safety belt.



      3.   A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate
or license endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or
country indicating that the driver is unable for medical, physical, or other
valid reasons to wear a seat safety belt.



      4.   A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse.



      5.   A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965.



      6.   A motorcycle, motor driven cycle.



      7.   A moped.



      8.   A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with
seat safety belts under federal law.



      9.   A motor vehicle operated by a rural letter carrier duly
employed by the United States Postal Service while engaged in the performance
of his or her duties as a rural letter carrier.



      10.   A back seat passenger of a taxicab.



   J.   The provisions of subsection F above shall not apply to a child
passenger with a physical disability of such a nature as to prevent
appropriate restraint in a seat, provided that the disability is duly
certified by a physician who shall state the nature of the disability, as
well as the reason the restraint is inappropriate.



   K.   Failure to wear a seat safety belt in violation of this Section
shall not be considered evidence of negligence, shall not limit the liability
of any insurer, and shall not diminish any recovery for damages arising out
of the ownership, maintenance and/or operation of a motor vehicle.



   L.   In no event shall a person's failure to secure a child under
six (6) years of age in an approved child restraint system, or a properly
fastened and secured seat safety belt if such child is four (4) or five (5)
years of age, constitute contributory negligence or be admissible as evidence
of such in the trial of any civil action.



   M.   Any Orland Park Police Officer may stop any motor vehicle, or
driver and/or passenger of any such motor vehicle, solely on the basis of a
violation or suspected violation of this Section at any time while such motor
vehicle is being operated on any roadway, street and/or highway within the
Village.



   N.   Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be
fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense
of which such person shall be convicted. 



(Ord. 3636, 5-21-02; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5382, 2-18-19)



CHAPTER 4
PEDESTRIANS



SECTION:



9-4-1:   Right of Way



9-4-2:   Use of Roadways



9-4-3:   Pedestrian-Control Signals



9-4-1:  RIGHT OF WAY:



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive into any
crosswalk without the exercise of due and proper care in view of the special
use made thereof by pedestrians.



   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into any crosswalk while
there is in such crosswalk upon the half of the roadway upon which such
vehicle is traveling, any pedestrian engaged in crossing the roadway.



   The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when
any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such
crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.



9-4-2:  USE OF ROADWAYS:



   At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most
direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other
than a crosswalk he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.



   No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety
zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.



   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except
as near as is reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such
standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians.



9-4-3:  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS:



   At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a stop
and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway,
other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful
movement of traffic.  (Ord. 80A, 10-27-41)



CHAPTER 5
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS



SECTION:



9-5-1:   Signs and Signals; Legend



9-5-2:   Unauthorized Signs



9-5-3:   Interference with Signs



9-5-4:   Authority for Placement of Signs



9-5-5:   Location and Design of Signs



9-5-6:   Enforcement



9-5-1:  SIGNS AND SIGNALS; LEGEND:



   Whenever traffic at an intersection is regulated by the type of signal
commonly known as a stop and go signal, the following colors shall indicate
the following commands:



   Red requires that traffic faced by this color shall stop and remain
standing.



   Green requires that traffic faced by this color shall move and continue
to move, except when stopped for the purpose of avoiding an accident or when
stopped at the command of a policeman.



   Amber or yellow indicates preparation for a change in the direction of
traffic movement.



   When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers
of vehicles shall stop before entering the intersection.



   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers of vehicles may proceed into the intersection only with extra caution.



9-5-2:  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display any
device, other than an official warning or direction sign or signal authorized
by Statute or ordinance, upon or in view of any street, if such device
purports to be, or is in imitation of any official warning or direction sign
or signal, or directs or purports to direct traffic.  Any such unauthorized
device is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be removed by a policeman.



9-5-3:  INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, more or
interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.  (Ord. 80A, 10-27-41)



9-5-4:  AUTHORITY FOR PLACEMENT OF SIGNS:



   This Chapter hereby vests the power and authority for the placement of
traffic-control signs and devices in the Board of Trustees of the Village.



(Amd. Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



9-5-5:  LOCATION AND DESIGN OF SIGNS:



   The Board of Trustees of the Village shall locate traffic-control signs
and devices throughout the Village at the sole discretion of the Board of
Trustees, wherever it is considered to be in the best interests of public
safety.  All such traffic-control signs and devices shall at all times be
placed in accordance with the Illinois Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, as established in section 5/11-301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and
adopted by the Illinois Department of Transportation.



(Amd. Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



9-5-6:  ENFORCEMENT:



   T The Police Department of the Village shall enforce the obeyance of
such traffic-control signs and devices as placed by the Board of Trustees by
authority granted under 625 ILCS 5/11-1204(b).  (Ord. 807, 10-24-77; Amd.
Ord. 5455, 11-18-19)



CHAPTER 6
GENERAL RULES OF THE ROAD



SECTION:



9-6-1:   Speed Limits



9-6-2:   Turning Movements



9-6-3:   Signals Required by Operators of Vehicles



9-6-4:   Driving From Alleys, Driveways or Garages



9-6-5:   Driving on Sidewalks, in Safety Zones



9-6-5A:   Negligent Driving



9-6-6:   Right of Way of Vehicles



9-6-7:   Driving on Right Side of Roadway



9-6-8:   Overtaking Vehicles



9-6-9:   Following Fire Apparatus



9-6-10:   Traffic Not to be Obstructed



9-6-11:   Riding on Bicycles, Motorcycles



9-6-12:   Through Streets



9-6-13:   Railroad Crossings



9-6-14:   Operation of Vehicles in Village Parks



9-6-15:   Use of Streets and Alleys by Vehicles of the Second Division



9-6-16:   Frightened Animals



9-6-17:   Unattended Vehicles, Animals



9-6-18:   Commercial Vehicles



9-6-18-1:   Definitions



9-6-18-2:   Use of Streets and Alleys by Commercial Vehicles



9-6-18-3:   Signs to be Erected



9-6-18-4:   Penalties



9-6-1:  SPEED RESTRICTIONS:



   No person shall drive a vehicle of the first and second division as
defined in this Title upon any public street or highway within the Village at
a speed which is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the street or highway, or which endangers the
safety of any person or property.  The fact that the speed of a vehicle does
not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit shall not relieve the driver
from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an
intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a
hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special
hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of
weather or highway conditions.  Speeds shall be decreased as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the
highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to
use due care.



   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any street at a speed which is
greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit established by
Village regulation or ordinance.



9-6-2:  TURNING MOVEMENTS:



   Method for Approaching for Left Turn: The driver of any vehicle
intending to turn left at any intersection or into any alley or driveway
shall approach the point of timing in the traffic lane nearest the center of
the roadway.



   Method of Approaching for Right Turn: The driver of a vehicle intending
to turn to the right at any intersection shall approach the point of turning
in the traffic lane nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway.



9-6-3:  SIGNALS REQUIRED BY OPERATORS OF VEHICLES:



   No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, start or
attempt to turn without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to
apprise others who might be affected by his action.



   The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand
and arm or by a signal lamp or other device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that hand and arm signal would not be visible both to
the front and rear of such vehicle when said signals must be given by such a
lamp or device.



   All signals herein required, given by hand and arm signal, shall be
given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such
signals shall indicate as follows:



   Left turn - hand and arm extended horizontally.



   Right turn - hand and arm extended upward or moved with a sweeping
motion from rear to the front.



   Stop or decrease of speed - hand and arm extended downward.



9-6-4:  DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR GARAGES:



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage,
shall stop such vehicle immediately, prior to driving onto a sidewalk or
across a sidewalk line projected across such alley, sound the horn of said
vehicle and shall exercise unusual care in driving said vehicle upon said
sidewalk or across such line.



9-6-5:  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, IN SAFETY ZONES:



   No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at
a permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion
of a roadway marked as a safety zone.



9-6-5A:  NEGLIGENT DRIVING:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any
public street or highway within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland
Park negligently or without due caution in a manner that will or is likely to
endanger persons or property. (Ord. 4057, 8-1-05)



9-6-6:  RIGHT OF WAY:



   Subject to section on exemptions of this Title, the driver of a vehicle
shall give the right of way to the driver of a vehicle approaching along an
intersecting street from the right, and shall have the right of way over
those approaching from the left.



9-6-7:  DRIVING ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:



   Any driver of a vehicle upon meeting another vehicle shall turn to the
right side of the roadway so far as may be necessary in order to avoid
collision with such vehicle.  Further provided that it shall be unlawful to
operate any vehicle upon the left-hand side of any roadway except where
necessary because of obstructions.



9-6-8:  OVERTAKING VEHICLES:



   Any driver of a vehicle, upon overtaking another vehicle, shall pass on
the left side of the overtaken vehicle.  When requested to do so, any driver
of a vehicle travelling upon any street shall as soon as practicable turn to
the right, so as to allow any overtaking vehicle free passage to the left of
the overtaken vehicle.



9-6-9:  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:



   Upon the sounding of gongs or warning devices used upon fire apparatus
or fire patrol vehicles, drivers shall draw their vehicles as near to the
right-hand curb as is reasonably possible and shall remain standing until
such fire apparatus has passed. lt shall be unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any fire apparatus in
response to a fire alarm, closer than one block, or to park any vehicle
within the block where fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.



9-6-10:  TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:



   No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in
such a manner  as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.



9-6-11:  RIDING ON BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES:



   It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride upon any bicycle
propelled by human power upon any street, or for any person to ride upon any
motorcycle other than upon a seat attached to said vehicle.



9-6-12:  THROUGH STREETS:



   Every driver of a vehicle traversing any street intersecting with any
through street shall stop such vehicle before entering upon the through
street unless a go signal is given at such intersection by a traffic officer
or a traffic signal.



9-6-13:  RAILROAD CROSSINGS:



   The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a
signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train, shall stop
within fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest
track of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can safely do so.



   The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain standing and not traverse
such grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman gives a
signal of the approach of a train.



   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any
school bus or of any vehicle carrying explosives or inflammable liquid as
cargo, shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less than ten
feet (10') from the tracks and shall listen and look in both directions from
which a train might come, before proceeding across such tracks at a grade
crossing.  Provided, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply
when traffic at the crossing is directed by an officer or stop or go light
which gives a go signal.



(Ord. 80A, 10-27-41)



9-6-14:  OPERATION OF VEHICLES IN VILLAGE PARKS:



   Passenger automobiles may be operated in any park sites in the Village,
but only upon designated roadways and parking areas and motorized vehicles
required for maintenance purposes or required in an emergency may be also so
operated in said park sites.  However, no person shall operate a motorized
vehicle, including but not limited to minibikes, motorcycles and snowmobiles,
on any park site in the Village.  (Ord. 605, 8-26-74)



9-6-15:  USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS BY VEHICLES OF THE SECOND DIVISION:



   No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle of the second division
as described in Section 9-2-2 of this Title on the streets and alleys within
the jurisdiction, control and custody of the Village, except for the purposes
of access to points of destination within the Village by the shortest, most
expeditious route and for the purposes only of picking up and delivering
property or loading or unloading of passengers, and then only for those
periods of time as shall be reasonably necessary to accomplish said purposes;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles
as herein defined or to those stops necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or to comply with the directions of policemen or traffic-control
devices; and provided further, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to relieve the operators of said motor vehicles from compliance
with all other ordinances of the Village or State of Illinois regulating
traffic on roads and highways.



(Ord. 311, 8-9-65)



9-6-16:  FRIGHTENED ANIMALS:



   Any driver of a vehicle shall, at a signal from a person in charge of a
frightened horse, bring his vehicle to a stop and remain stationary until
said horse has passed.



9-6-17:  UNATTENDED VEHICLES, ANIMALS:



   No vehicles shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is
running; and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or incline
unless the vehicle is secured against moving.



   It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal
unattended in any street without having such animal securely fastened. 
(Ord. 80A, 10-27-41)



9-6-18:  COMMERCIAL, VEHICLES:



9-6-18-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   That unless otherwise stated, wherever used in this Section, the
following terms shall respectively be deemed to mean:



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE (TRUCK):  A motor vehicle which has a gross weight
in pounds, including vehicle and maximum load, in excess of eight thousand
(8,000) pounds and which is not primarily designed for carrying passengers.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLES: Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department
and ambulances, and emergency vehicles of Municipal corporations or public
service corporations.  (Ord. 1399, 12-17-84)



9-6-18-2:  USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS BY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES (TRUCKS):



   No person shall operate a commercial vehicle (truck) as herein defined
on the streets and alleys within the jurisdiction, control, and custody of
the Village, except for that portion of 153rd Street located between LaGrange
Road and West Avenue or except for the purpose of access to points of
destination within the Village by the shortest, most expeditious route. 
(Ord. 1486, 12-2-85)



   No person shall park any vehicle which 1) has a gross weight, in
pounds, including vehicle and maximum load, in excess of eight thousand
(8,000) pounds, or 2) exceeds twenty one feet (2l') in length, eight feet
(8') in width, or nine feet (9') in height, on the streets and alleys within
the jurisdiction, control and custody of the Village.  Exception is made for
commercial vehicles for the purposes of picking up and delivering property,
and then only for those periods of time as shall be reasonably necessary to
accomplish said purposes, provided, however, that there shall be included in
such reasonable time necessary for picking up and delivering property such
time as shall be required for the operator of such commercial vehicle (truck)
and any passengers therein to install or assemble such property delivered or
remove and prepare such property for loading.



   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to emergency vehicles as
herein defined, or to those stops necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or to comply with the directions of policemen or traffic control
devices; and provided further that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to relieve the operators of said motor vehicles from compliance
with all other Ordinances of the Village or Laws of the State of Illinois
regulating traffic on roads and highways.



9-6-18-3:  SIGNS TO BE ERECTED:



   Appropriate signs shall be erected to inform the public of the
restrictions on through traffic and parking herein established.



9-6-18-4:  PENALTIES:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense. 



(Ord. 1399, 12-17-84; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 7
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING REGULATIONS



SECTION:



9-7-1:   No Parking Rules



9-7-2:   Parking at Curbs



9-7-3:   Parking Vehicles for Sale



9-7-4:   Loading Zones



9-7-5:   Fire Lanes, Use Restricted



9-7-6:   Parking During Snow Removal



9-7-7:   Parking Spaces for Persons with Disabilities and Disabled Veterans



9-7-7-1:   Definition



9-7-7-2:   Vehicle Identification



9-7-7-3:   Regulation



9-7-7-4:   Exemptions



9-7-7-5:   Signs and Size of Spaces



9-7-7-6:   Placards or Devices



9-7-7-7:   Applicability



9-7-7-8:   Penalty



9-7-8:   Residents Parking Only



9-7-8-1:   Purpose



9-7-8-2:   Decals



9-7-8-3:   Street Designation; Signs Posted



9-7-8-4:   Use of Restricted Parking Areas



9-7-8-5:   Street Designations



9-7-8-6:   Resident-Only Parking Tow Zone



9-7-8-7:   Valet-Only Parking



9-7-9:   Parking Restricted for Trucks Carrying Hazardous  Materials



9-7-9-1:   Definitions



9-7-9-2:   Truck Parking Restricted



9-7-9-3:   Penalty



9-7-10:   Parking Regulations for Commercial Centers



9-7-10-1:   Definitions



9-7-10-2:   Drawing of Parking Areas Submitted



9-7-10-3:   Maintenance of Fire Lane



9-7-10-4:   Parking Stall Markings and Signs Posted



9-7-10-5:   No Parking Places



9-7-10-6:   Parking for Persons with Disabilities



9-7-10-7:   Penalty



9-7-11:   Regulations for Parking Areas of Schools



9-7-11-1:   Definitions



9-7-11-2:   One-Way Traffic



9-7-11-3:   Stop and Yield Intersections



9-7-11-4:   Yield Right of Way



9-7-11-5:   Prohibition of Stopping, Standing or Parking



9-7-11-6:   Prohibition of Stopping, Standing or Parking in Loading Zone
or Service Area



9-7-11-7:   Prohibition of Stopping, Standing or Parking in Specified
Places



9-7-11-8:   Prohibition of Parking in Spaces Designated for Persons with
Disabilities



9-7-11-9:   Unauthorized Parking or Abandonment of Motor Vehicles



9-7-11-10:   Speed Limits



9-7-11-11:   Violation



9-7-1:  NO PARKING RULES:



   At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other vehicles or in compliance with the
direction of a traffic policeman or signal, to stand in any of the following
places:



   1.   In an intersection.



   2.   In a crosswalk.



   3.   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway approach thereto.



   4.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within twenty
feet (20') of a point on the curb Immediately opposite the end of a safety
zone.



   5.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or a through
street sign on the approaching side.



   6.   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection.



   7.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle reduces the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').



   8.   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.



   9.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a
driveway.



   10.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail or railroad
crossing.



   11.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any Fire
Department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to
such station within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance.



   12.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



   13.   At any place for a period of time in excess of twenty four
(24) hours.



   14.   Vehicles with trailers attached, and vehicles exceeding twenty
two feet (22') in length, including vehicle and cargo, shall not be left
standing on streets or alleys.



9-7-2:  PARKING AT CURBS:



   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle at the
curb, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other
than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle
within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except
upon those streets which have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall
be parked at the curb at the angle indicated by such marks.



9-7-3:  PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE:



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street with any sign,
placard or other device on the vehicle which displays the vehicle for sale,
or to park any vehicle upon any street from which vehicle merchandise is
peddled.  (Ord. 4593 – 10/4/10)



9-7-4:  LOADING ZONES:



   During the time specified herein it shall be unlawful for the driver of
a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for longer than it is necessary to
load or unload passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the
driver to stand any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than
is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30)
minutes at any of the following places:



   1.   In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night;



   2.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the
curb before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time;



   3.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the
curb before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sunday;



   4.   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time
the theater is open for business;



   5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand any freight
carrying vehicle in any public street, alley or public way for the purpose of
transferring freight or livestock from one vehicle to another except in case
of a disabled vehicle, and then not to exceed one hour.  (Ord. 80A, 10-27-41)



9-7-5:  FIRE LANES, USE RESTRICTED:



   No person shall stop or park a vehicle at anytime except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
policemen or traffic-control devices on or along that portion of any street
in the Village which has been designated as a fire lane.



   That side of each street in the Village on which is located a fire
hydrant or fire hydrants shall be designated as a fire lane.



   Appropriate signs shall be erected to inform the public of the
restrictions on parking herein established.



(Ord. 447, 1-11-71)



9-7-6:  PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL:



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time longer
than three (3) minutes for unloading or loading of passengers or thirty (30)
minutes for loading and unloading of property on any street at any time after
snow begins to fall and for a period of eight (8) hours after snow stops
falling, if snow on the street exceeds two inches (2") in depth, provided,
that said parking restriction shall continue during snow removal operations
until completed.



   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any ambulance or to
any emergency vehicle of any government agency nor to the vehicles of any
public utility while the operation of such vehicle is engaged in the
necessary performance of emergency duties, and provided further, that this
Section shall not apply to any vehicle brought to a stop to avoid collision
or standing in compliance with the order of any police officer or the
direction of any traffic direction control signal.



   Members of the Police Department of the Village are hereby authorized
to remove any vehicle in violation of this Section from any public way to the
Village vehicle pound or authorized garage as determined and designated by
the Police Commissioner at the expense of the owner or operator of said
vehicle.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle as a snow
plow on the streets of the Village without having been authorized so to do by
the Police Commission of the Village.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner deposit, push or
shovel any snow removed from other areas into the public streets in the
Village.  (Ord. 354, 12-4-67)



9-7-7:  PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES AND DISABLED VETERANS:



9-7-7-1:  DEFINITION:



   The following persons shall be classified as persons with disabilities
and disabled veterans for the purpose of this Section:



   Every natural person who is unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or
more unassisted by another person or without the aid of a walker, crutches,
braces, prosthetic device or a wheelchair or without great difficulty or
discomfort due to the following impairments: neurologic, orthopedic,
respiratory, cardiac, arthritic disorder, blindness, or the loss of function
or absence of a limb or limbs.



   The term “persons with disabilities” and “disabled veterans”
are interchangeable for purposes of this Section and Title 9 of the Orland
Park Village Code.



(Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-7-2:  VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION:



A motor vehicle operated by or for a disabled person shall be identified by
one or more of the following methods:



   1.   State of Illinois registration plates issued to a disabled
person or disabled veteran pursuant to State law;  (Ord. 4496, 7-20-09)



   2.   State of Illinois special decal or device issued to a person
with a disability by the office of the Secretary of State, or other state
agency or local government, pursuant to law;



   3.   Temporary placard or devices conforming to state law and
regulations issued by the Village; or



   4.   Disabled person registration plates, special placards or device
issued by any other municipality or jurisdiction. (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-7-3:  REGULATION:



   (a)   Any motor vehicle not displaying the registration plates or
placard issued to a person with disabilities or a disabled veteran is
prohibited from parking or being parked in any private or public on or off
street parking place designated by the posting of signs for motor vehicles
displaying such plates or placards.  It is also prohibited to park or be
parked any motor vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to such
parking place.



   It is also a violation of this subsection (a) if the authorized holder
of the disability license plate or placard does not enter or exit the vehicle
at the time the parking privileges are being used.



   (b)   Any motor vehicle displaying the registration plates or a
placard issued to a person with disabilities or a disabled veteran, but not
being used by, or for the transportation of, the authorized holder of the
disability plates or placard is prohibited from being parked in a parking
space designated for the parking of such vehicles or the designated access
aisle for such space. (Ord. 4496, 7-20-09; Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-7-4:  EXEMPTIONS:



   A vehicle which is designated as being operated by or for a person with
disabilities shall be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and from
any ordinances imposing time limitations on parking, except limitations of
one hour or less.



   However, these exemptions shall not apply if the parking of the motor
vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard whereby such motor vehicle shall be
moved at the direction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location
designated by said officer.  (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-7-5:  SIGNS AND SIZE OF SPACES:



   Signs in conformance with the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-301 and
11-1301.3 shall be posted to designate the reservation of parking facilities
for use by persons with disabilities.



   Owners, operators or managing agents of any commercial or business
center with a parking lot containing parking stalls for persons with
disabilities which are designated on approved building or site plans shall
cause such parking stalls for persons with disabilities to be identified by
pavement markings and also to be identified by a sign posted at the front of
the stall.  The sign shall conform to State standards, and the bottom of the
sign shall not be less than four feet (4') from the ground.



   Beginning October 1, 1992, all parking spaces reserved for persons with
disabilities except for those reserving on-street parking areas, shall be at
least sixteen (16) feet wide.



   It is not a defense to a violation of this section if the signs posted
or the intended accessible parking spaces do not comply with technical
requirements or local regulations, if the actual sign or space would make a
reasonable person aware that the space is reserved for persons with
disabilities.



(Ord. 4496, 7-20-09; Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-7-6:  PLACARDS OR DEVICES:



   Placards or devices are available to Orland Park residents from the
Orland Township office upon proper proof from the requestor.



   The placard shall be the property of such person with a disability or
organization and may be used by that person or organization to designate a
vehicle not designated as disabled by registration plates when the said
vehicle is being used to transport persons with disabilities; thus entitling
the vehicle to all the privileges that would be afforded a disabled licensed
vehicle.



   The placard shall be displayed from the rear view mirror.



   The placards for temporary use shall be issued by the Police Department
for persons with temporary disability and said placards shall contain an
expiration date.  (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-7-7:  APPLICABILITY:



   Parking privileges granted by this Section are strictly limited to the
person to whom the special registration plates, decal or device were issued
and to qualified operators acting under the disabled person's express
direction while the disabled person is present. (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-7-8:  PENALTY:



   (a)   Any person who violates the prohibition of Subsection
9-7-7-3(a) (use of space for persons with disabilities or associated aisle
without disabled plates or placard or use of space for persons with
disabilities when authorized holder of plates or placard does not enter or
exit the vehicle) shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be convicted. Signs
shall be posted indicating the fine amount.



   (b)   Any person who violates the prohibition of Subsection
9-7-7-3(b) (use of disabled plates or placard to exercise the privilege of
such plates or placard by one who is not either the authorized holder of the
plates or placard or transporting the authorized holder) shall be fined
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted.  In addition, the Secretary of State
may revoke the person's driving privileges or suspend them for a period of
time to be determined by the Secretary of State for a second, third or
subsequent offense.



(Ord. 4496, 7-20-09; Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-7-8:  RESIDENTS PARKING ONLY:



9-7-8-1:  PURPOSE:



   The purpose of this Section is to designate parts of specific Village
streets which are located in areas zoned residential as "residents parking
only" and to establish a decal to identify vehicles belonging to residents
who reside adjacent to a street containing restricted parking.



9-7-8-2:  DECALS:



   The office of the Village Clerk shall issue an identification decal for
each vehicle of a Village resident whose residence adjoins a Village street
containing "resident parking only" when a resident shows proof of residence
and proof of vehicle ownership.  Proof of residence is made by showing a
driver's license, and proof of vehicle ownership is made by showing a vehicle
registration card.  The decal shall be posted in the lower right side of the
front windshield.



   Prior to January 1, 1985, the proper number of decals shall be issued
to the appropriate residents upon request.  Beginning January 1, 1985, and
each year thereafter, the decals shall be issued to the appropriate residents
in conjunction with the vehicle stickers.



9-7-8-3:  STREET DESIGNATION; SIGNS POSTED:



   Parts of Village streets which are restricted for "resident parking
only" on Monday through Friday from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. or other specified hours are described in Section 9-7-8-5, and
those parts of streets so designated shall be posted with signs identifying
the restricted areas.



9-7-8-4:  USE OF RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS:



   No person shall park a vehicle in a posted "resident parking only" area
unless his vehicle contains an identification decal which has been obtained
from the Clerk's office for his vehicle or the vehicle has been identified to
the Police Department as belonging to a guest of a resident who resides
adjacent to a "resident parking only" area.  To identify a vehicle of a
guest of a resident, the resident shall inform the Police Department of the
number of days that the guest's vehicle will occupy space in the restricted
area.  The resident shall specify the make and model of his guest's car.



9-7-8-5:  STREET DESIGNATIONS:



   The following described parts of streets which are located in areas
zoned for residential use are designated for "resident parking only" from 6
A.M. to 9 A.M. Monday through Friday, unless other days or times are
specified below:



   (1).   First Street - Both sides



   (2).   Second Street - Both sides



   (3).   Third Street - Both sides



   (4).   Beacon Avenue - 144th Place to 145th Place, both sides



   (5).   Ravinia Avenue - 143rd Street to 145th Street, east side



   (6).   Ravinia Court - North side



   (7)   Ravinia Lane - South side



   (8).   144th Street - West Avenue to Viaduct, south side; Brook
Avenue to Viaduct, 6 A.M. to 5:59 A.M., north side; Viaduct to Beacon Avenue,
both sides



   (9).   144th Place - East of Beacon Avenue to Route 45, south side;
West of Beacon to West Avenue, south side



   (10).   145th Place - West Avenue to Beacon Avenue, both sides



   (11).   145th Street - Both sides



   (12).   Jefferson Avenue - East side



   (13).   Union Avenue - East and west sides of north half of block
which is north of 143rd Street  (Ord. 1286, 10-24-83)



   (14).   Sherwood Drive - East of Laurel Drive, on any day between
the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.  (Ord. 2619, 8-1-94)



   (15).   143rd Place - West Avenue to Brook Avenue, 6 A.M. to 5:59
A.M., north side



   (16).   Brook Avenue - 143rd Street to 143rd Place, 9 P.M. to 9
A.M., both sides; 143rd Place to 144th Street, 6 A.M. to 5:59 A.M., both sides



(Amd. Ord. 4898, 5-5-14)



9-7-8-6:  RESIDENT-ONLY PARKING TOW ZONE:



Any vehicle parked on the street at the following locations in violation of
the posted parking regulations are subject to towing and fees, along with
related parking fines, except for those vehicles displaying a valid permanent
or temporary Orland Park Parking Permit on the front dashboard or front
windshield of the vehicle:



(9/15)



   (1).   Brook Avenue from 143rd Street to 144th Street, both sides
except for the east side, north of the alley;



   (2).   143rd Place from Brook Avenue to West Avenue; and



   (3).   144th Street from West Avenue east to the viaduct on the
north side of the street. (Ord. 5015, 8-17-15)



9-7-8-7:  VALET-ONLY PARKING:



The following described parts of streets which are located in areas zoned for
commercial use are designated for “valet parking only” from 5:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday, unless other days or times are specified
below:



   (1).   143rd Place - from the west property line of 9925 W. 143rd
Place to the east property line of said real estate. (Ord. 5015, 8-17-15)



9-7-9:  PARKING RESTRICTED FOR TRUCKS CARRYING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:



9-7-9-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For the purposes of this Section, the following words shall be defined
as follows:



   CORROSIVE:  Any substance which in contact with living tissue causes
destruction of tissue by chemical action; but does not refer to action on
inanimate surfaces.



   FLAMMABLE-COMBUSTIBLE:  Any substance which has a flashpoint of above
twenty degrees (20 ) to and including eighty degrees (80 ) Fahrenheit as
determined by the Tagliabue Open Cup Tester, and "extremely flammable" means
any substance which has a flashpoint at or below twenty (20) degrees
Fahrenheit as determined by the Tagliabue Open Cup Tester, and "combustible"
means any substance which has a flashpoint above eighty (80) degrees
Fahrenheit to and including one hundred fifty (150) degrees, as determined by
the Tagliabue Open Cup Tester.



   HIGHLY TOXIC:  Any substance which produces death within fourteen (14)
days in at least half of a group of ten (10) or more laboratory white rats
each weighing between two hundred (200) and three hundred (300) grams, when a
single dose of fifty (50) milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight, is
orally administered or when inhaled continuously for a period of one hour or
less at an atmospheric concentration of two hundred (200) parts per million
by volume or less of gas or vapor or two (2) milligrams per liter by volume
or less of mist or dust, provided such concentration is likely to be
encountered by man when the substance is used in any reasonably foreseeable
manner, or which produces death within fourteen (14) days in at least half of
a group of ten (10) or more rabbits tested in a dosage of two hundred (200)
milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight, when administered by
continuous contact with the bare skin for twenty four (24) hours or less.



   IRRITANT:  Any substance, not corrosive, which on immediate, prolonged
or repeated contact with normal living tissue will induce local inflammatory
reaction.



   RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCE:  Any substance which emits ionizing radiation.



   TOXIC: Any substance (other than an radioactive substance) which has
the capacity to produce bodily injury or illness to man through ingestion,
inhalation, or absorption through any body surface.



   TRUCK:  Every motor vehicle being, used or maintained for the
transportation of property which includes any of the above-listed substances
or any transported substances which are either in a frozen state or heated
state, contact with which would destroy living tissue.



9-7-9-2:  TRUCK PARKING RESTRICTED:



   No person shall stop or park a truck or permit a truck to stand at any
time, at any place, within the Village within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any building or structure used for residential purposes, except: In the case
where the property on the truck is being unloaded for use on the premises
where the truck is parked, and the truck departs the premises as soon as
reasonably possible after unloading is complete, or not longer than two (2)
hours, whichever is less.  However, the two (2) hour restriction may be
extended by two (2) hours, if the Police Department and Fire Protection
District are notified prior to the expiration of the initial two (2) hour
period.



   In the event that the driver and/or operator of the truck should be 
unable to move the truck further than the one thousand feet (1,000') of a
residential structure due to mechanical problems, the driver and/or operator
shall, as soon as possible, notify the Police Department and Fire Protection
District and advise said agencies of the location and cargo of said truck.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to stop or park a truck or permit a
truck to stand within the Village in violation of the hereinabove regulations.



   No truck or other commercial vehicle which has a weight exceeding 8,000
pounds (calculated by adding the vehicle weight plus the weight of its
maximum load capacity) or which exceeds twenty-one (21) feet in length or
exceeds eight (8) feet in width or exceeds nine (9) feet in height may be
parked on any public street or alley.  The overnight parking of such
vehicles is not permitted in any residential front, rear or side set back
(including a residential driveway) or in any commercial parking lot (unless
properly parked at a loading dock) or on any vacant parcel within a
commercial or residential zoning district. 



(Amd. Ord. 5344, 10-15-18)



9-7-9-3:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense. 



(Ord. 1494, 12-23-85; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-7-10:  PARKING REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL CENTERS:



9-7-10-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   For purposes of this Section, the following words shall be defined as
follows:



   COMMERCIAL CENTER:  A building or group of buildings with retail and
office uses which share a common parking lot and having a total roof area of
in excess of forty five thousand (45,000) square feet.



   FIRE LANE: An emergency access lane not less than twelve feet (12')
wide and available for use by emergency vehicles including but not limited
to, fire trucks, ambulances, and police vehicles.



   PARKING AREA: The area or areas of land near or contiguous to the
commercial center, including interior private roadways and drives used by the
public as the means of access to and egress from the buildings, stores and
business establishments within the commercial center and that part of the
commercial center designated for the parking of motor vehicles.



9-7-10-2:  DRAWING OF PARKING AREAS SUBMITTED:



   The Manager, managing agent or managing agency of every commercial
center which has not previously done so shall, within thirty (30) days of the
effective date hereof, submit an "as is" drawing of the parking area showing
the parking row configuration, parking spaces, spaces for persons with
disabilities and fire lanes, directions for traffic movement within the area,
ingress and egress out of and into the area, and any parking signs for spaces
designated for persons with disabilities, stop signs, yield signs, and no
parking signs.  (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-10-3:  MAINTENANCE OF FIRE LANE:



   Every commercial center shall maintain a designated fire lane, a side
of which shall not be farther than twenty feet (20') from the front entrance
door of any retail or office use located in the center.  The front entrance
door shall also mean the common entrance(s) to the interior of a building
where numerous retail and/or office uses are located.



9-7-10-4:  PARKING STALL MARKINGS AND SIGNS POSTED:



   All parking stalls shall be striped, handicapped spaces properly
marked, including signage, parking aisle access lanes marked with pavement
directional arrows at each end of the aisle, and "No Parking - Fire Lane"
signs posted for the emergency access lanes, and two (2) directional roadways
shall be marked with a center stripe.



   All paint markings required by this Section in the parking area shall
be maintained in a reasonable condition which apprises the reasonable driver
of the traffic regulations under reasonable weather conditions.



   All vehicular traffic exiting the parking area onto public streets
shall be required to either yield or stop before entering the public
street.  Appropriate indicating "yield" or "stop" signs shall be posted and
maintained by the commercial center.



9-7-10-5:  NO PARKING PLACES:



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or
park such vehicle in any of the following places which may exist in the
parking area except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer:



   1.   Within an intersection;



   2.   On a crosswalk;



   3.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
feet (30') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety
zone;



   4.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or stop sign on
the approaching side;



   5.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;



   6.   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;



   7.   At any place where the standing of any vehicle will block the
use of any driveway;



   8.   On any sidewalk;



   9.   Alongside or opposite any excavation or obstruction when such 
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



   10.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   11.   On any fire lane;



   12.   At any place where signs have been erected prohibiting
stopping, standing or parking.



9-7-10-6:  PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:



   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in a designated parking
space for persons with disabilities unless the vehicle contains the
identification (license plate, placard or sticker) required by Section 9-7-7
of this Chapter, or the Illinois Compiled Statutes.  (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-
4-13)



9-7-10-7:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense. 



(Ord. 1640, 2-2-87; Amd. Ord. 4496, 7-20-09; Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13; Amd.
Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-7-11:  REGULATIONS FOR PARKING AREAS OF SCHOOLS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a motor
vehicle in the parking areas of all public and private schools except in
conformity with the parking and traffic control regulations hereinafter set
forth in this Section 9-7-11.  (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-11-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   Whenever in these regulations the following words and phrases are used,
they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them hereunder:



   PARKING AREA:  The area, areas or land near or contiguous to Prairie
School, Center School, High Point/ Orland Junior High School, Park School and
Liberty/Jerling Junior High School, including interior private roadways and
drives used by the public as the means of access to, and egress from the
buildings and other facilities within the said schools and those parts of the
school premises designated for the parking of motor vehicles.



   PLANS:  The plans and drawings prepared for the coordination and
control of parking and traffic control within the said schools, which
documents are entitled:



      1.   Prairie Elementary School Traffic and Parking Control
Plan.



      2.   High Point/Orland Junior High School Traffic and Parking
Control Plan.



      3.   Liberty/Jerling Junior High School Traffic and Parking
Control Plan.



      4.   Park School Parking and Traffic Control Plan.



      5.   Center Elementary School Traffic and Parking Control Plan.



   and dated October 30, 1990, true and correct copies of which are
available for inspection at the office of the Village Clerk of the Village.



9-7-11-2:  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC:



   Upon drives or roadways in the parking area designated for one-way
traffic, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when
signs, signals or other devices indicating the direction of traffic are
erected and maintained at intersections and alleys where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive any vehicle in violation of signs, signals or other devices so placed
to designate drives or roadways, parts thereof or specific lanes thereon upon
which vehicular traffic shall proceed In one direction.



   Appropriate signs, signals or other devices designating certain
roadways in the parking area for one-way traffic shall be erected in
conformity with the said Plans.



9-7-11-3:  STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS:



   When stop signs or signals are erected pursuant to the Plans at or near
the entrance to any intersection in the parking area, every operator of a
vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or signal or at a clearly marked
stop line before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by
a police officer.



   After the operator of a vehicle has stopped in obedience to a stop sign
or signal at an intersection in the parking area where a stop sign Is erected
at one or more entrances thereto, such operator shall proceed cautiously,
yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the Intersection
or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then
proceed.



   Appropriate stop signs or signals shall be erected in conformity with
the Plans.



9-7-11-4:  YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:



   Where preference is given to traffic through any intersection on any
roadway and specified entrances to said intersections are designated as yield
right-of-way entrances by the erection of yield right-of-way signs or signals
in the parking area, the driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield
right-of-way sign or signal shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right of
way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting roadway either from
the right or left of which are approaching so closely on said intersecting
roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver having so
yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.



   Appropriate yield signs or signals shall be erected in conformity with
the Plan.



9-7-11-5:  PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:



   When signs, signals or other devices have been erected upon any roadway
or in any other portion of the parking area indicating that stopping,
standing or parking is prohibited during designated hours or prohibited for a
longer time than is designated, no person shall park any vehicle in violation
of any such signs, signals or other devices.



   The provisions of this Section prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles in the parking area shall apply at all times or at those
times therein specified or as indicated on signs except when it is necessary
to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer.



   Appropriate signs prohibiting stopping, standing or parking or
prohibiting stopping, standing or parking during designated hours or
prohibiting stopping, standing or parking for a longer time than is
designated shall be erected in conformity with the said Plans.



9-7-11-6:  PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN LOADING ZONE OR
SERVICE AREA:



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a passenger vehicle to stop,
stand or park said vehicle in any place marked as a loading zone or service
area, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers and
in no case for a period longer than three (3) minutes.



   Appropriate signs prohibiting stopping, standing or parking in a
loading zone or service area shall be erected in conformity with the said
Plans.



9-7-11-7:  PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN SPECIFIED PLACES:



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or
park such vehicle in any of the following places in the parking area except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
directions of a police officer:



   1.   Within an intersection.



   2.   On a crosswalk.



   3.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty
feet (30') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety
zone.



   4.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or stop sign on
the approaching side.



   5.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.



   6.   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.



   7.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will block the use
of any driveway.



   8.   On any sidewalk.



   9.   Alongside or opposite any excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.



   10.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.



   11.   On any fire lane.



   12.   At any place where signs have been erected prohibiting
stopping, standing or parking.



   13.   Parking shall not be permitted along 159th Street (Illinois
Route 7) from the Will-Cook County line to a point 656.1 lineal feet east of
Will-Cook Road being within the Village limits of the Village of Orland
Park.  (Ord. 2999, 4-21-97)



9-7-11-8:  PROHIBITION OF PARKING IN SPACES DESIGNATED FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES:



   It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to occupy any parking space
within the parking area designated and marked for the use of persons with
disabilities unless such vehicle is operated by a person defined as disabled
according to this Code or as defined in section 5/11-209(d) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code of the State of Illinois, 625 ILCS 5/11-209(d); a driver of a
vehicle who does not qualify as disabled under either definition shall not
park in a space marked or designated for the use of persons with
disabilities. (Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13)



9-7-11-9:  UNAUTHORIZED PARKING OR ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, to leave unattended or to
abandon any vehicle in the fire lanes, or in entrances of any of the parking
areas.  The Village Chief of Police is authorized to remove from said areas
to the nearest vehicle pound or authorized garage as determined and
designated by him, any vehicle parked, left unattended or abandoned In any of
the said three (3) areas of the parking area; provided, that the owner or
operator of such vehicle shall be responsible for the payment of reasonable
charges for such removal and storage in accordance with Ordinance No. 1319
passed and approved on February 13, 1984.



9-7-11-10:  SPEED LIMITS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a
speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in any portion of the parking
area.



   Appropriate signs shall be erected posting the speed limits in
conformance with the Plan.



9-7-11-11:  VIOLATION:



   Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall, upon
conviction, be according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each
offense which such person shall be convicted.



   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any vehicle
removed from the parking area pursuant to Section 9-7-11-9, he shall furnish
evidence of his identity and ownership of the vehicle and right to possession
thereto, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay a fee at the
prevailing rate determined by the Traffic Administrator in accordance with
those rates established by the Illinois State Police to cover the cost of
towing or removal to a vehicle pound or authorized garage, and in addition
thereto, the cost of storage at the prevailing rate at the garage or parking
lot at which said vehicle is stored. In some cases, the tow companies may
deviate up or down from the regular rates if they determine the particular
situation merits the adjustments. In doing so, they may be required to
justify the adjustments.



(Ord. 2085, 2-4-91; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 8
PARKING LOT REGULATIONS



SECTION:



9-8-1:   Definitions



9-8-2:   Acts Prohibited



9-8-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   PARKING AREA: Any space, blacktopped or otherwise, used and designed
for off-street parking purposes for any business, church, school or
residential use.



   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn.



   MOTOR VEHICLE:  Every vehicle which is self-propelled.



   MOTORCYCLE:  Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to be driven on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground but excluding a tractor.



   RACING OF MOTOR:  Racing of motor is the sudden acceleration or
deceleration of the motor of a motor vehicle or motorcycle.



   STUNTING:  Operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a manner causing
it to weave or suddenly change course, or the loss of body contact with the
seat by a driver or passenger, and not for the purpose of safe operation of
such vehicle.



   TOURING:  Any repetitious driving in the same area which causes a
disturbance or is done with the intention of calling attention to an operator
of a motor vehicle or motorcycle.



   CRUISING:  The driving upon a parking area where there is no intention
of parking therein for the purposes of making use of the services offered by
the business, school or church providing such parking area.



9-8-2:  ACTS PROHIBITED:



   General:  It shall be unlawful for any person while in any parking
area as herein defined to race the motor, as herein defined, of any motor
vehicle or motorcycle or to suddenly start or stop any such motor vehicle or
motorcycle such that the tires on such vehicle shall squeal or to cause to be
made any other loud or unusual noise.  It shall also be unlawful for any
person in any parking area to engage in stunting, touring or cruising as
herein defined. lt shall also be unlawful for any person in any parking area
as herein defined to blow the horn on any motor vehicle or motorcycle. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed however to prevent the sudden
stopping of a motor vehicle or motorcycle or the blowing of the horn thereon
when legitimately necessary to avoid collision with another vehicle or with a
person or persons, and while not performing an act herein prohibited.



   Motor Running on Unattended Vehicle:  No person driving or in charge
of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any parking area
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the key.



   Loitering: It shall be unlawful for a group of three (3) or more
persons to loiter in any parking area as herein defined.  (Ord. 368, 8-24-68)



CHAPTER 9
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



SECTION:



9-9-1:   Speed Restrictions



9-9-2:   Through Streets Designated



9-9-3:   Stop Intersections



9-9-4:   One-Way Streets



9-9-5:   Limited Load Streets



9-9-6:   School Crosswalks



9-9-7:   Parking Restricted During Certain Times



9-9-8:   Parking Prohibited at All Times



9-9-9:   Angle Parking Restrictions



9-9-10:   Parking Restricted Near Fire Hydrants



9-9-11:   Specific Parking Lot Regulations



9-9-11-1:   Beacon Avenue



9-9-11-2:   McCarthy's Parking Lot



9-9-11-3:   Commuter Parking Lots



9-9-12:   Orland Park Place Shopping Center



9-9-13:   Yield Right-of-Way Streets



9-9-14:   Driving on Left Prohibited



9-9-15:   Right Turn on Red Prohibited



9-9-16:   Main Street Triangle



9-9-1:  SPEED RESTRICTIONS:



   Based on an engineering and traffic investigation, the following local
speed levels are established:



   1   No vehicle traveling along or upon that portion of 94th Avenue
lying south of the south line of 143rd Street and north of a line three
hundred thirty feet (330') south of and parallel to the north line of the
southwest quarter of Section 10, Township 36 North, Range 12, east of the
Third Principal Meridian in Cook County, Illinois shall be operated of driven
at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour.  (Ord. 572, 1-14-74)



   2.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon 88th Avenue between 135th
Street and Butterfield Lane within the Village at a speed which is greater
than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use
of the street or endangers the safety of any person or property or at a speed
greater than twenty (20) miles per hour.  (Ord. 1412, 2-4-85)



   3.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon 151st Street from LaGrange
Road to Orlan Brook Drive within the Village at a speed which is greater than
is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the
street or highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property or at a
speed greater than thirty five (35) miles per hour.  The fact that the speed
of a vehicle does not exceed thirty five (35) miles per hour shall not
relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and
crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when
approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway
or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic
or by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speeds shall be decreased
as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or
entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.



   4.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon 151st Street from Orlan
Brook Drive to 82nd Avenue, within the Village at a speed which is greater
than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use
of the street or highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property
or at a speed greater than forty (40) miles per hour.  The fact that the
speed of a vehicle does not exceed forty (40) miles per hour shall not
relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and
crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when
approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway
or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic
or by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speeds shall be decreased
as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or
entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.



   5   No person shall drive a vehicle upon 151st Street from 82nd
Avenue, to Harlem Avenue, within the  Village at a speed which is greater
than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use
of the street or highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property
or at a speed greater than forty five (45) miles per hour.  The fact that
the speed of a vehicle does not exceed forty five (45) miles per hour shall
not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and
crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when
approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway
or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic
or by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speeds shall be decreased
as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or
entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.  (Ord. 2003, 6-18-90)



   6.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any portion of Ravinia
Avenue between 144th Place and 147th Street and on West Avenue from 153rd
Street to its intersection with Ravinia Avenue in the Village of Orland Park,
Cook and Will Counties, Illinois, at a speed which exceeds thirty (30) miles
per hour.  A lower speed shall be required if thirty (30) miles an hour is
greater than reasonable and proper with regard to the traffic conditions and
the use of the street or highway, or endangers the safety of any person or
property.  The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed thirty (30)
miles per hour shall not relieve a driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow
or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions;
and speeds shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.  (Ord. 3673,
8-19-02)



   7.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any portion of 143rd
Street from Harlem Avenue to 80th Avenue in the Village of Orland Park, Cook
and Will Counties, Illinois, at a speed which exceeds forty-five (45) miles
per hour.  A lower speed shall be required if forty-five (45) miles an hour
is greater than reasonable and proper with regard to the traffic conditions
and the use of the street or highway, or endangers the safety of any person
or property.  The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed
forty-five (45) miles per hour shall not relieve a driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or
highway conditions; and speeds shall be decreased as may be necessary to
avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in
compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due
care.  (Ord. 3770, 6-16-03)



   8.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any portion of Will-Cook
Road from 159th Street to 167th Street in the Village of Orland Park, Cook
and Will Counties, at a speed which exceeds forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
A lower speed shall be required if forty-five (45) miles per hour is greater
than reasonable and proper with regard to the traffic conditions and the use
of the street or highway, or endangers the safety of any person or
property.  The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed forty-five
(45) miles per hour shall not relieve a driver from the duty to decrease
speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and
going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions;
and speeds shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.  (Ord. 4520,
12-7-09)



   9.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any portion of Will-Cook
Road from 167th Street to the north curb of Brookshire Drive in the Village
of Orland Park, Cook and Will Counties, at a speed which exceeds forty (40)
miles per hour.  A lower speed shall be required if forty (40) miles per
hour is greater than reasonable and proper with regard to the traffic
conditions and the use of the street or highway, or endangers the safety of
any person or property.  The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not
exceed forty (40) miles per hour shall not relieve a driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or
highway conditions; and speeds shall be decreased as may be necessary to
avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in
compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due
care.  (Ord. 4520, 12-7-09)



   10.   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any portion of 131st
Street from U.S. Route 45 (LaGrange Road) to Illinois Route 7 (Southwest
Highway) in the Village of Orland Park, Cook and Will Counties, at a speed
which exceeds forty (40) miles per hour.  A lower speed shall be required if
forty (40) miles per hour is greater than reasonable and proper with regard
to the traffic conditions and the use of the street or highway, or endangers
the safety of any person or property.  The fact that the speed of a vehicle
does not exceed forty (40) miles per hour shall not relieve a driver from the
duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or
highway conditions; and speeds shall be decreased as may be necessary to
avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in
compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due
care.  (Ord. 4521, 12-7-09)



9-9-2:  THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:



   The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be
through streets:



   1.   143rd Street, throughout its length in the Village.



   2.   Southwest Highway, throughout its length in the Village.



   3.   Middle Street (renamed 143rd Place, West Avenue To Union
Avenue, Ord. 116, 7-28-52), throughout its length in the Village.



   4.   Mannheim Road, throughout its length in the Village.  (Ord
80A, 10-27-41)



   United States Route 45 at its intersection with the driveways providing
ingress and egress to the parking lot of the Orland Park Shopping Center and
143rd Street at its intersection with the driveways providing ingress and
egress to the parking lot of the Orland Park Shopping Center are each hereby
designated as through streets and all vehicles traveling in said
aforementioned driveways are hereby required to come to a full stop before
entering said United States Route 45 and 143rd Street.  (Ord. 186, 12-15-58)



9-9-3:  STOP INTERSECTIONS:



   All vehicular traffic moving on the streets and in the directions
hereinafter designated, these streets being within the Village, shall come to
a full and complete stop at the stop signs hereinafter provided for before
entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police
officer, or otherwise provided by law:



 

Intersection
 
Stop Street
 
Direction




(1)
Highland Avenue
Huntington Court
 
 
 
4-way


(2)
Hale Drive
Huntington Court
 
Hale Drive
 
Northbound


(3)
Highland Avenue
151st Street
 
 
 
4-way


(4)
Huntington Court
151st Street
 
Huntington Court 
 
Northbound
Southbound


(5)
Hale Drive
151st Street
 
Hale Drive 
 
Southbound


(6)
Jefferson Street
144th Place
 
Jefferson Street
 
Northbound


(7)
Ravinia Avenue
144th Place
 
Ravinia Avenue
 
Northbound
Southbound


(8)
Brook Street
143rd Street
 
 
 
4-way


(9)
West Avenue
(100th Avenue)
151st Street
 
 
 
4-way


(10)  Highland Avenue
147th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(11)
Fairway Drive
Birch Street
 
 
 
4-way


(12)
Willow Street
Birch Street
 
 
 
4-way


(13)
87th Avenue
144th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(14)
88th Avenue
147th Street
 
 
 
3-way


(15)
88th Avenue
Poplar Drive
 
 
 
3-way


(16)
88th Avenue
Biloba Avenue
 
 
 
3-way


(17)
94th Avenue
95th Avenue
 
94th Avenue
95th Avenue
 
Northbound


(18)

94th Avenue
143rd Street
 
94th Avenue
 
Northbound


(19)
Poplar Road
147th Street
 
Poplar Road
 
Northbound
Southbound


(20)
94th Avenue
John Humphrey Drive
 
94th Avenue
John Humphrey Drive
 
3-way


(21)
Sherwood Drive
163rd Street
 
 
 
4-way


(22)
84th Avenue
Spruce Drive
 
84th Avenue
Spruce Drive
 
3-way


(23)
Concord Drive
Yorktown Drive
 
 
 
3-way


(24)
88th Avenue
Golfview Drive
 
88th Avenue
Golfview Drive
 
Northbound
Southbound
Eastbound


(25)
88th Avenue
Fairway Drive
 
Fairway Drive
 
Eastbound


(26)
91st Avenue
140th Street
 
91st Avenue
 
Southbound


(27)
Huntington Court
Hiawatha Trail
 
 
 
3-way


(28)
Timber Trails
(NE-SW)
 
Timber Trails
(NE-SW)
 
Southwestbound


Timber Trails
(N-S)
 
Timber Trails
(N-S)
 
Northbound


(29)
Lincolnshire Drive
Timber Trails
 
 
 
3-way


(30)
Timber Trails
Coghill Lane
 
 
 
3-way


(31)
84th Avenue
Cedar Street
 
 
 
4-way


(32)
Raintree Drive
Wheeler Drive
 
Raintree Drive
 
Southbound


(33)
Blackfriars Road
Wheeler Drive
 
Blackfriars Road
 
Southbound


(34)
Royal Georgian Road
Wheeler Drive
 
 
 
3-way


(35)
82nd Avenue
Sunset Ridge Drive
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 3075, 11-17-97)


(36)
Christina Avenue
141st Street
 
 
 
4-way


(37)
88th Avenue
144th Street
 
 
 
3-way


(38)
Golfview Drive
88th Avenue
 
Golfview Drive
88th Avenue
 
Northbound
Southbound
Westbound


(39)
Edgewood Drive
Wheeler Drive
 
Edgewood Drive
 
Southbound


(40)
Evergreen Drive
73rd Avenue
(both intersections)
 
Evergreen Drive
 
Eastbound


(41)
Robinhood Drive
167th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(42)
Bob-O-Link Road
82nd Avenue
 
 
 
4-way


(43)
Country Club Lane
Golfview Drive
 
 
 
3-way


(44)
Poplar Road
147th Street
(eastern intersection)
 
 
 
4-way


(45)
94th Avenue
142nd Street
 
94th Avenue
 
Northbound


(46)
88th Avenue
167th Street
 
88th Avenue
167th Street
 
Northbound
Southbound
Eastbound


(47)
Catherine Drive
(northern most intersection)
 
143rd Street
 
3-way


(48)
Wheeler Drive
Regent Drive
 
 
 
3-way


(49)
West Avenue
147th Street
 
 
 
3-way


(50)
88th Avenue
Butterfield Lane
 
 
 
4-way


(51)
76th Avenue
Tiffany Drive
 
 
 
4-way


(52)
Oakley Avenue
144th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(53)
Highland Avenue
144th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(54)
Raney's Lane
145th Street
(western most intersection)
 
 
 
4-way


(55)
80th Avenue
Sioux Road
 
 
 
3-way


(56)
Peachtree Drive
Sunrise Lane
 
 
 
3-way


(57)
Charleston Drive
139th Street
 
Charleston Drive
 
Northbound


(58)
138th Street
139th Street
 
138th Street
 
Southwestbound


(59)
Oakley Avenue
145th Street
 
Oakley Avenue
 
Northbound
Southbound


(60)
Highland Avenue
145th Street
 
145th Street
 
Eastbound
Westbound


(61)
88th Avenue
144th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(62)
Westwood Drive
147th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(63)
Lakeview Drive
Franklin Court
 
Lakeview Drive
Franklin Court
 
Northbound
Westbound


(64)
Lakeview Drive
Greencastle Lane
 
Lakeview Drive
Greencastle Lane
 
Southbound
Eastbound


(65)
76th Avenue
157th Street
 
 
 
3-way


(66)
Peachtree Drive
Wheeler Drive
 
Peachtree Drive
 
Northbound


(67)
Ravinia Avenue
147th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(68)
Parkhill Drive
Sunrise Lane
 
Parkhill Drive
 
Northbound


(69)
14650 South
Ravinia Avenue
(public driveway)
 
Public Driveway
 
Eastbound


(70)
Teebrook Drive
Hollywood Drive
 
 
 
4-way


(71)
86th Avenue
Orlan Brook Drive
 
86th Avenue
 
Westbound


(72)
86th Avenue
157th Street
 
157th Street
 
Westbound


(73)
Sunset Ridge Drive
157th Street
 
Sunset Ridge Drive
 
Northbound
Southbound


(74)
80th Avenue
139th Street
 
 
 
3-way


(75)
Birch Street
147th Street
 
 
 
4-way


(76)
71st Court
Wheeler Drive
 
71st Court
 
Northbound


(77)
Regent Drive
Windsor Drive
 
 
 
3-way


(78)
Brook Hill Drive
Highwood Drive
 
 
 
4-way


(79)
77th Avenue
157th Street
 
77th Avenue
 
Southbound


(80)
Plum Tree
157th Street
 
Plum Tree
 
Northbound
Southbound


(81)
Chapel Hill
157th Street
 
Chapel Hill
 
Northbound
Southbound


(82)
82nd Avenue
157th Street
 
82nd Avenue
 
Southbound


(83)
Westminster Drive
Wheeler Drive
 
 
 
3-way


(84)
Brassie Court
157th Street
 
Brassie Court
 
Northbound
Southbound


(85)
139th Street
Catherine
 
Catherine
 
Eastbound
Northbound


(86)
138th Street
Catherine
 
138th Street
 
Westbound


(87)
Brassie Drive
Wheeler Drive
 
Brassie Drive
 
Northbound
Southbound


(88)
South Parking Lot
Orland Park Village Hall at Ravinia
 
Parking Lot
 
Eastbound


(89)
Parking Lot
Orland Park Civic Center at Ravinia
 
Parking Lot
 
Eastbound


(90)
149th Street
Ravinia Avenue
 
149th Street
 
Westbound


(91)
Parking Lot
Orland Park Police Dept. at Ravinia
 
Parking Lot
 
Eastbound


(92)
Parking Lot
for 14807 Ravinia at Ravinia
 
Parking Lot
 
Westbound


(93)
Regent Drive
Pembroke Lane
 
Regent Drive
Pembroke Lane
 
Northbound
Southbound
Eastbound


(94)
91st Avenue
140th Street
 
140th Street
 
Eastbound
Westbound


(95)
Beacon Avenue
145th Street
 
Beacon Avenue
145th Street
 
Northbound
Southbound
Eastbound


(96)
Charlestown Drive
142nd Street
 
Charlestown Drive
 
Southbound


(97)
Will-Cook Road
179th Street
 
179th Street
 
Eastbound
Westbound


(98)
William Drive
142nd Street
 
William Drive
 
Southbound


(99)
Raintree Drive
152nd Street
 
Raintree Drive
152nd Street
 
Northbound
Southbound
Westbound


(100)
80th Avenue
Cambridge Drive
 
Cambridge Drive
 
Eastbound
Westbound


(101)
80th Avenue
Binford Drive
 
Benford Drive
 
Eastbound
Westbound


(102)
Poplar Road
Biloba Court
 
Biloba Court
 
East bound
Westbound


(103)
Sunrise Lane
Carnoustie Drive
 
Sunrise Lane
Carnoustie Drive
 
Northbound
Southbound
Westbound


(104)
Beacon Avenue
144th Street
 
Beacon Avenue
144th Street
 
Northbound
Southbound
Eastbound


(105)
1st Avenue 
144th Street
 
144th Street
 
Eastbound
Westbound


(106)
Exiting 143rd St.
Commuter Lot
 
144th Street
 
Southbound


(107)
77th Avenue
157th Street
 
77th Avenue
157th Street
 
Southbound
Eastbound
Westbound


(108)
Kingsport Road
Bear Island Ave.
 
Kingsport Road
Bear Island Ave.
 
Northbound
Westbound


(109)
Timber Trails
Pebble Beach Lane
 
Timber Trails
Pebble Beach
 
Northbound
Southbound
Westbound


(110)
104th Avenue
Eagle Ridge Drive
 
Eagle Ridge Drive
 
Eastbound


(111)
Royal Georgian Rd.
Thistlewood
 
Royal Georgian Rd.
Thistlewood Lane
 
Northbound
Southbound
Westbound


(112)
10th Avenue
139th Street
 
139th Street 
 
Eastbound
Westbound


(113)
137th Street
92nd Avenue
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 3076, 11-17-97)


(114)
Crystal Creek Drive
88th Avenue
 
Crystal Creek Drive
 
Westbound
(Ord. 3036 8-4-97)


(115)
144th Place
Ravinia Avenue
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 3038, 8/4/97)


(116)
154th Street
Ravinia Avenue
 
Ravinia Avenue
 
Eastbound
(Ord. 3152, 7-20-98)


(117)
Wilshire Drive
153rd Street
 
153rd Street
 
Northbound
(Ord. 3153, 7-20-98)


(118)
Ravinia Avenue
153rd Street
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 3186, 10-19-98)


(119)
Brookshire Drive
Will-Cook Road
 
Will-Cook Road
 
Westbound
(Ord. 3226, 2-15-99)


(120)
140th Street
Charleston Drive
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 3227, 2-15-99)


(121)
Pine Street
Lincolnshire Drive
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 3336, 2-22-00)


(122)
Wheeler Drive
70th Court
 
70th Court
 
Northbound
Southbound
(Ord. 3403, 8-21-00)


(123)
John Humphrey Drive
144th Place
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 3514, 7-16-01)


(124)
Merion Drive
Sunrise Lane
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 3526, 8-20-01)


(125)
157th Street
Tiffany Drive
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 3535, 9-04-01)


(126)
140th Street
84th Avenue
 
140th
 
Eastbound
Westbound
(Ord. 3617, 3-18-02)


(127)
85th Avenue
Cedar Street
 
85th
 
Northbound
Southbound
(Ord. 3830, 11-3-03)


(128)
141st Street
Boxwood
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 3847, 2-2-04)


(129)
East/West portion of 163rd Street coming off LaGrange Road
 
163rd Street
 
Southbound
(Ord. 3863, 4-5-04)


(130)
East/West portion of Wheeler Drive at 70th Court
 
70th Court
 
Eastbound
(Ord. 3900, 7-6-04)


(131)
84th Avenue
Cedar Street
 
84th
 
Northbound
Southbound
(Ord. 3927, 9-7-04)


(132)
Deer Point Drive
 
Deer Creek Drive
 
4-way
(Ord. 4081, 10-3-05)


(133)
142nd Street
John Humphrey Drive
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 4116, 3-6-06)


(134)
104th Avenue/Emile Lane
At 183rd Street
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 4150, 7-17-06)


(135)
Marley Creek Boulevard
Twin Lakes Drive
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 4222, 2-19-07)


(136)
183rd Place
115th Avenue
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 4256, 7-2-07)


(137) 84th Avenue
140th Street
 
 
 
4-way
(Ord. 4279, 8-20-07)


(138)
Long Run Drive
Cornhill Drive
 
 
 
3-way
(Ord. 4318, 12-3-07)




 



   Appropriate signs shall be placed at the intersections described above
to apprise the public that all vehicular traffic must come to a full and
complete stop at said intersections.  Any person violating the provisions of
this subsection shall be subject to a fine according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-9-4:  ONE-WAY STREETS:



   The following are designated as one-way streets.  Appropriate signage
shall be posted concerning such restrictions in appropriate locations and in
accordance with law.



 

Street
 
Prohibited Direction
 
Between


(1)
145th Street
 
West
 
94th Avenue
Willow Street


(2)
Union Street
 
North, Northeast
 
143rd Street
143rd Place


(3)
143rd Place
 
East
 
Union Street
Brook Street


(4)
144th Place
 
East
 
Beacon Avenue
West Avenue


(5)
145th Street
 
East
 
Irving Avenue
Highland Avenue



 



9-9-5:  LIMITED LOAD STREETS:



   Heavy Vehicles Prohibited in Excess of Ten Ton:  Except as hereinafter
provided, and except as to those streets enumerated in this Section as to
which a less weight restriction is established, no motor vehicle or other
vehicle having a gross weight, including the weight of the load carried, in
excess of ten (10) tons shall be operated over, along, across or upon any
existing street located within the Village, and under the jurisdiction of the
Village.



   Heavy Vehicles Prohibited in Excess of Eight Ton:  Except as
hereinafter provided, no motor vehicle or other vehicle having a gross
weight, including the weight of the load carried, in excess of eight (8) tons
shall be operated over, along, across or upon any portion of the following
streets located within the Village, and under the jurisdiction of the
Village, to-wit



      Huntington Court



      Hawthorne Drive



      Hale Drive



      Highland Avenue (South of 147th Street)



      151st Street



      Hopkins Court



      Hibiscus Drive



      Hazel Court



      Holiday Court



      Hyacinth Drive



      Hiawatha Trail



      Will-Cook Road from 159th Street to Southwest Highway  (Ord.
3273, 7-19-99)



      104th Avenue from 179th Street to 183rd Street (Ord. 3273,
7-19-99)



      183rd Street from 104th Avenue to 108th Avenue  (Ord. 3273,
7-19-99)



   Heavy Vehicles Prohibited in Excess of Five Tons:  Except as hereafter
provided, no motor vehicles or other vehicle having a gross weight, including
the weight of the load carried, in excess of five (5) tons shall be operated
over, along, across or upon any portion of the following streets located
within the Village, and under the jurisdiction of the Village, to-wit:



      Grove Street



      Oak Street



      Ridge Avenue



      Woodland Avenue



      Irving Avenue



      Greenland Avenue



      Highland Avenue (except that part thereof described above)



      Exemption:



      The restrictions set forth in this Section shall not apply to any
vehicle entering any streets aforesaid solely for the purpose of making a
delivery to some place of residence or business on said streets, or making a
service call on said streets, which vehicles are to be entitled to exemption
from such restrictions and shall use the shortest practicable route from the
point of entry on said streets to the place where the delivery is to be made
or service is to be performed and shall leave said streets by the shortest
practicable route, and provided further that said restrictions shall not
apply to school buses and to fire-fighting equipment or other emergency
vehicles during an emergency.



   Persons Having Contractual Obligations With Village:



   This Section shall in no way be construed to relieve any subdivider,
developer, bonding company or any other persons having contractual
relationships with the Village with respect to the construction, repair and
completion of any of the aforesaid streets from any liabilities or
obligations with respect to said contracts requiring the construction, repair
or completion of any of the aforesaid streets and it is not intended by the
enactment of this Section to so relieve any of said aforementioned
subdividers, developers, bonding companies or any other persons from any
contractual liabilities or obligations which they may have with respect to
the construction, repair or completion of any of the aforementioned streets.



9-9-6:  SCHOOL CROSSWALKS:



   That portion of 143RD STREET which lies between the east and west 
lines of Brook Avenue as extended north across 143rd Street in the Village,
be and the same hereby is designated as a school crosswalk and that no pupil
enroute to or from the public school which is located on the north side of
143rd Street just west of the west line of said Brook Avenue, shall cross
that portion of said 143rd Street which lies directly south of the school
grounds of said public school except at the crosswalk above designated.



   The appropriate officials of the Village be and they hereby are
authorized and designated to arrange for and procure the installation of two
Eagle school crossing signals for the purpose of controlling vehicular
traffic and providing protection for the school pupils making use of the
crosswalk aforesaid.  That such signals shall be installed one on either
side of said 143rd Street in the vicinity of its intersection with said Brook
Avenue and in the particular places as may be designated by the President of
the Village Board and approved by the appropriate officials of the Division
of Highways of the State of Illinois; and in accordance with the existing
rules and regulations of the said Division of Highways of the State of
Illinois as now in force relating to the installation of such school crossing
signals.



   Such school crossing signals, when installed, shall be operated under
the general supervision of the Chief of Police of the Village and in
accordance with such rules or regulations concerning the operation thereof as
are now in force or hereafter may be promulgated by the Division of Highways
of the State of Illinois acting pursuant to appropriate statutes relating
thereto.



   Such school crossing signals shall be operated for an appropriate
period of time not exceeding sixty (60) minutes duration immediately
preceding the opening and immediately following the closing of each school
period both morning and afternoon, of the public school hereinabove referred
to, and at such other time or



   times as in the judgment of the President of the Village Board or the
Chief of Police the operation of such signals may be necessary or desirable
for the protection of school pupils or other pedestrians enroute to or from
said public school, and all vehicular traffic passing along or upon said
143rd Street shall stop or proceed, as the case may be, in response to such
signals at all times while the same are in operation.



   All school students and other pedestrians crossing that portion of said
143rd Street which lies immediately south of the school grounds of said
public school, shall cross the same at the crosswalk aforesaid and at all
times while such school crossing signals are in operation, shall cross only
when directed so to do by such school crossing signals.  (Ord. 169, 1-13-58)



   School crossings shall be designated on Royal Georgian Road and on
Knightsbridge Lane at the point of intersection within the Village.  The
pavement shall be clearly marked on both Knightsbridge Lane and Royal
Georgian Road to indicate the crossings at the said intersection.  The
markings for the school crossings shall be made with appropriate materials
and shall be appropriate widths and distances from the corners.  (Ord. 2019,
7-16-90)



9-9-7:  PARKING RESTRICTED DURING CERTAIN TIMES:



   1.   Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. on Monday to Saturday, both inclusive, of each week, no person
shall park a vehicle along that portion of the north and south sides of 143rd
Street in the Village lying between the west line of the right of way of the



   Wabash Railroad and the east line of West Avenue for a continuous
period of more than two (2)   hours at any one time.  (Ord. 169, 1-13-58)



   2.   No person shall park or stop his vehicle for in excess of three
(3) hours at any one time during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the days Monday through Friday inclusive,
excluding holidays, on the following described portions of Village streets:



      Brook Street, east side between 143rd Street and 143rd Place.



      Union Street, both sides between 143rd Street and 143rd Place.



      143rd Place, both sides from Union to Brook.



      Beacon Street (renamed Beacon Avenue Ord. 1949, 12-18-89), west
side from 143rd Street to 144th Place. (Ord.1300, 12-19-83)



   3.   No person shall park or stop his vehicle for in excess of six
(6) hours at any one time during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the days Monday through Friday inclusive, excluding
holidays, on the following described portions of Village streets:



      Brook Street both sides between 143rd Place and 144th Street.



      143rd Place, south side from Brook to West Avenue.



      Oak Street, both sides from 144th Street for one block north. 
(Ord. 1300, 12-19-83)



   4.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle at any time except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device during the hours
of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on or along either
the eastern or western sides of Royal Georgian Road from 151st Street to
Knightsbridge Lane in the Village from the effective date hereof to and
including July 31, 1989.  (Ord. 1723, 12-7-87, eff. 1-1-88)



   5.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle at any time except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device on or along that
portion of the north and south sides of Brookhill Drive from Wolf Road to
Ashwood Lane during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and from four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in
the Village.  Appropriate signs shall be erected to inform the public of the
restrictions on parking herein established.  (Ord. 1904, 8-21-89)



   6.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle from eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days school is in session, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, on or along that
portion of the north side of Hemlock Drive from Heather Court to Palm Drive,
in the Village.



   7.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle from eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days school is in session, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device, on or along that
portion of the southwest side of Palm Drive from Hemlock Drive to Lilac
Court, in the Village.



   8.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle from eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days school is in session, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer of a traffic control device, on or along that
portion of the east side of Larkspur Lane between Hemlock Drive and Palm
Court, in the Village.



(Ord. 2100, 3-25-91)



   9.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device on or along the east side of Beacon
Avenue from 143rd Street to 144th place except that vehicles may be parked at
said location on Saturdays and Sundays from 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.  (Ord.
2384, 4-19-93)



   10.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle from one-thirty (1:30)
P.M. o'clock (8:00) to three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on days school is in
session, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer of a traffic-control
device, on or along that portion of the east side of Raintree Drive from
152nd Street to Thistlewood Lane in the Village.



(Ord. 2701, 3-6-95)



   11.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle at any time except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device in on the north and
south sides of 151st Street between West Avenue and Holiday Court from 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. - Monday through Friday.  (Ord. 3023, 7-8-97)



   12.   No person shall stop, stand or park between the hours of 9:00
PM to 6:00 AM behind MoJoe's at 15447 94th Avenue between the east side of
the building and the east curb line, at any time except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
policemen or traffic control device.  (Ord. 3752, 5-19-03)



   13.   No person shall park a vehicle at any time except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of policemen or traffic control devises along Circle Drive, Monday
thru Friday from 7:00 AM to 11:00 AM  (Ord. 3753, 5-19-03)



   14.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle between the hours of
3:00 P.M. and 3:30 P.M. on days school is in session, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
a police officer or traffic control device at the following locations:



      a)   On both sides of Royal Georgian Road from Huguelet Place
to Knightsbridge Lane;



      b)   On the west side of Royal Georgian Road from
Knightsbridge Lane to Croydon Lane; and



      c)   On both sides of Knightsbridge Lane from the school
parking lot west to Royal Foxhunt Road.



      The above restrictions shall not apply to vehicles of those
persons residing immediately adjacent to the above restricted areas. (Ord.
4929, 10-6-14)



   15.   No person shall stop or park a vehicle between the hours of
seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. on Thursdays and
the days other than Thursdays scheduled for garbage and trash collection
following a legal holiday at the following locations:



      a)   On the north side of Lunar Court and Kennedy Court; and



      b)   On the south side of Franklin Court, Lincoln Court and
Orland Court. (Ord. 5349, 11-19-18)



   Appropriate signs shall be erected to inform the public of the parking
restrictions herein established.



9-9-8:  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES:



   No person shall stop or park a vehicle at any time, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of police or traffic-control devices, on or along:



 

Street
 
Location




(1)
Highland Avenue
 
West side from 143rd to 144th


(2)
West Avenue
 
West side from 143rd Street to 143rd Place


(3)
143rd Street
 
Both sides from Beacon Street (renamed Beacon Avenue Ord. 1949, 12-18-89) to
West Avenue


(4)
West Avenue
 
West side from 143rd Place to 151st Street


(5)
147th Street
 
North and west sides
Park Lane from Highland and 147th to south edge of public park drive way


(6)
Jefferson Street
 
West side between 143rd Street and the south line of lot 9 in Ravinia Lane


(7)
87th Avenue
 
Both sides, from 143rd Street to 143rd Place


(8)
Ravinia Avenue
 
West side from 143rd Street to 143rd Place


(9)
Ravinia Lane
 
South side from  Ravinia Avenue to the west line of the Ravinia Lane
cul-de-sac.


(10)
Ravinia Court
 
South side from Ravinia Avenue to the Village parking lot


(11)
Highland Avenue
 
East side from 151st Street to 146th Street


(12)
146th Street
 
South side from Highland Avenue to West Avenue


(13)
88th Avenue
 
West side from 151st to Golfview Drive


(14)
94th Avenue
 
West side from 151st to the south line of the Village


(15)
Park Lane
 
East side between 147th Street and south end of Lot 11 in Cameno Real Unit 31


(16)
96th Avenue
 
Both sides, from 829.69 feet south of center line of 143rd Street to 387.85
feet north of northern ROW line or 159th Street


(17)
96th Avenue
 
Both sides from Southwest Highway to 143rd Street


(18)
Southwest Highway
 
Both sides, within Village boundaries


(19)
82nd Avenue
 
Both sides a distance of 500 feet north and south of the center line of 143rd
Street


(20)
143rd Street
 
Both sides, a distance of 500 feet east and west of the center line of 82nd
Avenue.


(21)
Harlem Avenue
 
Both sides of distance of 300 feet north of the center line at 159th Street
to said center line


(22)
Harlem Avenue
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet north and south of the center line of
Wheeler Drive


(23)
Concord Drive
 
West side from Yorktown Drive to 143rd Street


(24)
88th Avenue
 
Both sides from the north driveway of Fernway School a distance of 150 feet
north


(25)
Harlem Avenue
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet north and south of the center line of 157th
Street


(26)
157th Street
 
Both sides a distance of 300 east and west of the center line of Harlem Avenue


(27)
Route 45
 
Both sides a distance of 300 north and south of the center line of 167th
Street


(28)
167th Street
 
Both sides a distance of 300 east and west of the center line of  Route 45


(29)
U.S. Route 6
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet east and west of the center line of 88th
Avenue


(30)
88th Avenue
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet north and south of the center line of U.S.
Route 6


(31)
U.S. Route 6
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet east and west of the center line of 71st
Court


(32)
71st Court
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet north and south of the center line of U.S.
Route 6


(33)
Hemlock Drive
 
South side from Wheeler Drive to 300 feet east of Wheeler


(34)
Wheeler Drive
 
East side from Hemlock Drive to 300 feet south of Hemlock


(35)
Christina Drive
 
East side from 141st Avenue to 900 feet south of 141st Street


(36)
U.S. Route 45
 
Both sides from 600 feet north of Southwest Highway to 900 feet south of
Illinois Route 83


(37)
Lexington Circle
 
All that part of the circle portion of the cul-de-sac


(38)
U.S. Route 45
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet north and south of the center line of 144th
Place


(39)
144th Place
 
Both sides a distance of 300 feet east and west of the center lineof U.S.
Route 45


(40)
Wheeler Drive
 
Both sides from Harlem to 71st Court


(41)
156th Street
 
Both sides from Harlem to 71st Court


(42)
157th Street
 
Both sides from Harlem to 71st Court


(43)
158th Street
 
Both sides from Harlem to 71st Court


(44)
164th Place
 
Both sides from 104th Avenue to 105th Court


(45)
163rd Place
 
Both sides, west of 104th Avenue


(46)
105th Court
 
Both sides from 164th Place to 163rd Place


(47)
Sycamore Drive
 
North side from 7536 Sycamore to Catalina Drive


(48)
Ravinia Drive
 
East side from the south line of 143rd  Street a distance of 190 feet south


(49)
151st Street
 
North side from LaGrange Road to West Avenue


(50)
Lakeview Drive
 
East and north sides from Franklin Court to Ring Road


(51)
Berkhansted Court
 
All of the north side, the westernmost side and the easternmost side


(52)
Stonehenge Drive
 
All of the north side, the westernmost side and the easternmost side


(53)
Millbank Court
 
All of the north side, the westernmost side and the easternmost side


(54)
144th Place
 
North side from John Humphrey Drive to LaGrange Road


(55)
159th Street
 
Both sides from LaGrange Road and Wolf Road


(56)
Ravinia Avenue
 
Both sides from 151st Street to 15600 South


(57)
153rd Street
 
Both sides from LaGrange Road to West Avenue


(58)
157th Street
 
Both sides from Harlem Avenue to Tiffany Drive


(59)
Quail Hollow Drive
 
Both sides from 151st Street to 40 feet south of 151st Street


(60)
Shagbark Court
 
The "bubble" of the cul-de-sac


(61)
U.S. Route 6
 
Both sides from 88th Avenue to 94th Avenue


(62)
Sycamore Avenue
 
North side from Larkspur Lane to Catalina Drive


(63)
Beacon Avenue
 
West side a distance of 50 feet north of the north side and 50 feet south of
the south side of 144th Street


(64)
Clearview Drive
 
Both sides from 143rd Street to Kathy Court


(65)
Clearview Drive
 
Both sides, from the center of 143rd Street to 80 feet south of 143rd Street


(66)
76th Avenue
 
Both sides from 159th Street to 158th Court


(67)
Larkspur Lane
 
West side between 151st Street and Sequoia Court


(68)
70th Court
 
Both sides from Wheeler Drive to Village boundaries


(69)
U.S. Route 6
 
Between Brook Hill Drive Wolf Road and the Norfolk and Southern Railroad


(70)
U.S. Route 6
 
Between Wolf Road and Southwest Highway Brook Crossing Drive


(71)
70th Court
 
East side for a distance of 240 feet north of a point 230 feet north of the
center line of Wheeler Drive  (Ord. 2648, 10-3-94)
East side for a distance of 205 feet from a point  560 feet north of the
centerline of 157th Street  (Ord. 2649, 10-3-94)


(72)
143rd Street
 
Within the corporate limits  of the Village (Ord. 2693, 2-6-94)


(73)
145th Street
 
West side from Highland Avenue to the south end of Highland Avenue


(74)
West Avenue
 
East and west sides from 151st Street to 153rd Street  (Ord. 2871, 4-15-96)


(75)
Ravinia Avenue
 
East side from 147th Street to 151st Street west side from 149th Street to
151st Street


(76)
159th Street
 
Both sides between Wolf Road (Illinois Route 7) and Will-Cook Road within the
corporate Limits of the Village
(Ord. 2999, 4-12-97)


(77)
Constitution Court
 
The "bulb" of the cul-de-sac
(Ord. 3007, 5-19-97)


(78)
Brook Hill Drive
 
North side from east Ashwood Lane to west Winding Creek Drive across from the
Discovery Park parking area  (Ord. 3037, 8-4-97)


(79)
Lunar Court
Kennedy Court
Lincoln Court
Orland Court
 

South side
South side
North side 
North Side (Ord. 3346, 3-20-00)


(80)
Brookhill Drive
 
Both sides from Wolf Road to Kroop Court (3361, 6-5-00)


(81)
97th Avenue
 
Entire current length from (West Side) approximately 162nd St. to 165th St. 
(Ord. 3468, 2-5-01)


(82)
Louetta Lane
 
Ryan Lane to Bernard Drive on the Northwest Side of the street (Ord. 3520,
8-6-01)


(83)
U.S. Route 45   
 
Both Sides 179th Street and 191st Street (Ord. 3552, 11-5-01)


(84)
El Cameno Place
 
North side from El Cameno Real along entrance curb to parking area only. 
(Ord. 3746, 4-21-03)


(85)
104th Avenue
 
Both sides from 159th Street on the north, to Great Egret on the south. (Ord.
3940, 10-4-04)


(86)
167th Street
 
Both sides from a point 4/10s of a mile east of 104th Avenue on the east, to
108th Avenue on the west. (Ord. 3940, 10-4-04)


(87)
See (95)
165th Street
 
South side from LaGrange Road west, to the dead end of 165th Street. (Ord.
3983, 2-7-05; Amd. Ord. 4495, 7/20/09)


(88)
Claridge Court
 
South of the south lot line of Lot 4, known as 14330 Claridge Court. (Ord.
4074, 9-6-05)


(89)
90th Avenue
 
West side between 164th Street and  Chadbrourn Drive. (Ord. 4087, 11-7-05)


(90)
Somerglen Drive
 
Both sides of east and west direction from 108th Avenue on the west, to Park
Station Boulevard on the east. (Ord. 4151, 7-17-06)


(91)
Foxbend Court
 
Both sides from 157th Street on the north to the first driveways on the
south. (Ord. 4152, 7-17-06)


(92)
Garnet Court
 
Garnet Court Cul-De-Sac circle only, both sides around the island. (Ord.
4153, 7-17-06)


(93)
Willowood Court
 
On both sides of Willowood Court - east of Catalina Drive and on cul-de-sac
at the end of Willowood Court from 7 PM to 7 AM all days. (Ord. 4416, 9-15-08)


(94)
Silo Ridge Road South
Silo Ridge Road West
 
On the north side of the curved portions (Ord. 4446, 1-19-09)


(95)
Amending (87)
165th Street
 
Allow parking on both sides of 165th Street from 165th Street at LaGrange
Road to 97th Avenue. (Ord. 3983 2-7-05 (87); Amd. Ord. 4495, 7-20-09)


(96)
183rd Place
Wolf Road
 
On the south side of 183rd Place from Wolf Road west for 200 feet. (Ord.
4591, 10-4-10)


(97)
165th Street
South 97th Ave.
Alden Health Care Access Drive
 
On the north side of 165th Street 50 feet east and 50 feet west of south
access drive to Alden Health Care 16450 South 97th Avenue. (Ord. 4642, 5-2-11)


(98)
164th Place
(Apple Knoll Industrial Park)
 
North side from 75 feet west of 104th Avenue to 105th Court (excluding the
Court).  Parking is permitted on the south side of 164th Place at that
location. (Ord. 4977, 4- 6-15)




 



   The operator of any vehicle violating the provisions of this section
shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each
offense of which such person shall be convicted and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-9-9:  ANGLE PARKING RESTRICTIONS:



   Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or  official
traffic signs or signals or when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of policemen or traffic-control
devices, the operator of a vehicle shall not stand or park such vehicle along
that portion of the shoulder on the south side of 143RD STREET lying between
Beacon Street (renamed Beacon Avenue Ord. 1949, 12-18-89) and West Avenue
other than parallel with the edge of the paved roadway headed in the
direction of traffic.



   Appropriate signs shall be erected with the wording thereon "Parallel
Parking Only" to inform the public of the restrictions on parking herein
established.



   No provisions of this Section shall be construed to permit angle
parking in any other portion or part of 143rd Street or any other portion or
part of any street within the Village.  (Ord. 304, 5-24-65)



9-9-10:  PARKING RESTRICTIONS NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS:



   No person shall stop or park a vehicle at any time except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of policemen or traffic-control devices on that side of the
following described streets in the Village on which the fire hydrants are
located:



      La Reina Real



      Avenida Del Norte



      El Cameno Real



      Avenida Del Este



      La Reina Court



   All of the foregoing streets being streets in that certain subdivision
known as Cameno Real Unit No. 1, a subdivision of part of the west half of
the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 36 north, Range 12, East of the
Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois.



   Appropriate signs shall be erected to inform the public of the
restrictions on parking herein established.



(Ord. 497, 6-26-72)



9-9-11:  SPECIFIC PARKING LOT REGULATIONS:



9-9-11-1:  BEACON AVENUE:



   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in
the Beacon Avenue Parking lot between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on any day Monday



   through Friday of any week without having paid a parking fee in the
amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per calendar month.



   2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the
parking area described in subsection (1) between the times specified and on
the days specified in said subsection (1) unless there is displayed on the
rear window of said vehicle a permit in the form of a sticker authorizing
said parking provided, however, that for any vehicle not having a rear
window, said sticker may be placed on a back door or on the back of one rear
fender.



   3.   Any vehicle which is parked on the Beacon Avenue Commuter
Parking Lot between the hours designated in subsection (1) and which does not
display a permit authorizing the parking of said vehicle, as provided for in
this Section, shall be towed at owner's expense.



   4.   An application for a permit to park in the Beacon Avenue
Commuter Lot shall be made to the Clerk of the Village.  The fee for the
issuance of such permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00) a month payable on a
monthly or quarterly basis.  Upon payment of the appropriate fee, the
Village Clerk shall issue a permit in the form of a sticker or stickers.  A
permit shall only be issued to a person who can furnish evidence that such
person is a commuter on the Norfolk & Western commuter trains, and such
person shall be entitled to only one permit per month.



   5.   No person shall park or operate a vehicle in violation of the
no parking areas, fire lanes, stop signs, or parking spaces for handicapped
persons.



   6.   Except for emergency vehicles, no person shall drive or operate
or cause to be driven or operated any vehicle along, upon or over the parking
areas in the Beacon Avenue Commuter Parking Lot in the Village at a speed in
excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.



   7.   Approved free standing signs shall be installed by the Village
informing the public that vehicle speed is limited as hereinabove provided.



   8.   Special parking areas for the exclusive use of handicapped
persons shall be provided and installed in the Beacon Avenue Commuter Parking
Lot at the specific locations designated on Exhibit B which is on file in the
office of the Village Clerk.



   9.   Except for emergency vehicles and vehicles being driven or
operated by or for the use of handicapped persons, parking or standing of any
motor vehicle, or otherwise obstructing any of the special parking areas
established by this Section for the exclusive use of handicapped persons is
prohibited at all times.  The vehicles of handicapped persons shall be
identified by the license issued by the Motor Vehicles Division of the
Secretary of State.



   10.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale
any goods or services within said Beacon Avenue Commuter Parking Lot without
the express written approval of the President and Board of Trustees.



   11.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle
overnight in said Beacon Avenue Commuter Parking Lot.



   12.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in said Beacon
Avenue Commuter Parking Lot, to dump or otherwise deposit any waste or refuse
of any kind thereon, to permit any animals to run loose thereon, or consume
any alcoholic beverage thereon.



   13.   Persons using said Beacon Avenue Commuter Parking Lot will do
so on the condition that the Village will not be responsible for lost or
stolen properly thereon and on the further condition that the Village
reserves the right to close said parking lot for normal maintenance or
construction thereon.



   14.   With respect to a motor vehicle parking in violation of the
provisions of this Section, it shall be presumed that the person in whose
name said vehicle is registered is the person who illegally parked said
vehicle.  (Ord. 1164, 2-16-82)



9-9-11-2:  MCCARTHY'S PARKING LOT:



   Right Turns Only:  All vehicular traffic entering 143rd Street from
the parking lot driveway located at 9869 West 143rd Street, in the Village,
shall only enter 143rd Street by making a right turn thereon from the said
driveway, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or except as
otherwise provided by law.  (Ord. 1652, 3-16-87)



9-9-11-3:  COMMUTER PARKING LOTS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on that
real estate located within the Village and designated as the 143rd Street,
153rd Street, and 179th Street Commuter Parking Lots between the hours of six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on any day Monday through
Friday of any week, except under the following conditions:



   1.   A motor vehicle may be parked in any numbered stall upon
payment of daily fee of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) deposited in the
coin box slot corresponding to the stall number indicated on the adjacent
sign and on the pavement.



   2.   A motor vehicle may be parked in any stall other than those
described in subsection (1) above by displaying an appropriate monthly
parking permit sticker issued for the applicable commuter parking lot in the
rear window of the vehicle, (as described in subsection (4) of this Section)
or, if the vehicle has no rear window, then on a rear door or rear bumper of
the vehicle. The lot monthly sticker shall not authorize the vehicle to be
parked in a numbered spot described in subsection (1) above, unless the said
daily fee is paid for that spot, nor in any other lot than designated on the
sticker without payment of the required fee for parking in such other lot.



   3.   Any vehicle parked in the Commuter Parking Lots between the
hours designated in Section 9-9-11-3 and which does not display a permit
authorizing the parking of said vehicle in said lot, or pay the dally fee as
provided for in this Section, shall be ticketed.



   4.   An application for a permit to park in any Village Commuter
Parking Lot shall be made to the Finance Department of the Village. The fee
for the issuance of such permit shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) a month
payable on a monthly or quarterly basis. Upon payment of the appropriate fee,
the Village Finance Department shall issue a permit in the form of a sticker
or stickers specifically issued and identified for the specific lot. A permit
shall only be issued to a person who can furnish evidence that such person is
a commuter on the Norfolk and Western Commuter trains, and such person shall
be entitled to only one permit per month. Such permit shall be valid only for
the specific commuter lot designated and identified on the permit.



   5.   "No Parking" areas, fire lanes, stop signs and parking spaces
for persons with disabilities and other regulations for the Commuter Parking
Lots shall be as designated by Village Ordinance, in addition to those set
forth in this Section.



   6.   No person shall park or operate a vehicle in any Commuter
Parking Lot in violation of the restrictions set forth in subsection (5)
above.



   7.   Except for emergency vehicles, no person shall drive or operate
or cause to be driven or operated any vehicle along, upon or over Commuter
Parking Lots in the Village at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per
hour.



   8.   Approved freestanding signs shall be installed by the Village
in the Commuter Parking Lots, informing the public that vehicle speed is
limited as hereinabove provided and that other restrictions are applicable as
set forth in subsection (5).



   9.   Special parking areas for the exclusive use of handicapped
persons shall be provided and installed in the Commuter Parking Lots.



   10.   Except for emergency vehicles and vehicles being driven or
operated by or for the use of persons with disabilities, parking or standing
of any motor vehicle, or otherwise obstructing any of  the special parking
areas established by this Section for the exclusive use of persons with
disabilities is prohibited at all times. The vehicles of persons with
disabilities shall be identified by the license issued by the Motor Vehicle
Division of the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.



   11.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
sell or offer for sale any goods or services within the Commuter Parking Lots
without the express written approval of the President and Board of Trustees.



   12.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle
overnight in any Commuter Parking Lot.



   13.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any Commuter
Parking Lot, to dump or otherwise deposit any waste or refuse of any kind
thereon, to permit any animals to run loose thereon, or for any person to
consume any alcoholic beverage thereon.



   14.   Persons using the Commuter Parking Lots will do so on the
condition that the Village will not be responsible for lost or stolen
property thereon and on the further condition that the Village reserves the
right to close said parking lot for normal maintenance or construction
thereon.



   15.   With respect to a motor vehicle parked in violation of the
provisions of this Section, it shall be presumed that the person in whose
name said vehicle is registered is the person who illegally parked said
vehicle.



   16.   All vehicles shall come to a complete stop before entering the
adjacent right of way, and such stop shall be made at the stop line on the
pavement.



   17.   Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be
subject to a fine according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for
each offense of which such person shall be convicted, except that violations
of parking regulations for persons with disabilities shall be as provided in
Section 9-7-7 of this Code.



(Ord. 4276, 8-6-07; Amd. Ord. 4797, 3-4-13; Amd. Ord. 4873, 12-16-13; Amd.
Ord. 4956, 12-1-14; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-9-12:  ORLAND PARK PLACE SHOPPING CENTER:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a motor
vehicle in the parking area of Orland Park Place Shopping Center except in
conformity with the parking and traffic control regulations hereinafter set
forth:



   1.   DEFINITIONS:



   Whenever in these regulations the following words and phrases are used,
they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them hereunder:



   PARKING AREA:  Shall include the area or areas of land near or
contiguous to the shopping center, including interior private roadways and
drives used by the public as the means of access to and egress from the 
buildings, stores and business establishments within the  shopping center
and that part of the shopping center designated for the parking of motor
vehicles.



   PLAN:  The plan and drawing prepared for the coordination and control
of parking and traffic control within the parking area, which document is
entitled, "Orland Park Place Traffic and Parking Control Plan" and dated May
15, 1988, revised August 23, 1988, a true and correct copy of which is
available for inspection at the office of the Village Clerk.



   2.   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC:



      (a)   Upon any drive or roadway in the parking area designated
for one-way traffic, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated
direction when signs, signals or other devices indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at intersections and alleys where movement
in the opposite direction is prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle in violation of signs, signals or other devices
so placed to designate drives or roadways, parts thereof or specific lanes
thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction.



      (b)   Appropriate signs, signals or other devices designating
certain roadways in the parking area for one-way traffic shall be erected or
installed in conformity with the plan.



   3.   STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS:



      (a)   When stop signs or signals are erected or installed
pursuant to the plan at or near the entrance to any intersection in the
parking area, every operator of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such
sign or signal or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the
intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer.



      (b)   After the operator of a vehicle has stopped in obedience
to a stop sign or signal at an intersection in the parking area where a stop
sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, such operator shall proceed
cautiously yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the
intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard,
but may then proceed.



      (c)   Appropriate stop signs or signals shall be erected or
installed in conformity with the plan.



   4.   YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:



      (a)   Where preference is given to traffic through any
intersection on any roadway and specified entrances to said intersections are
designated as yield right-of-way entrances by the erection of yield
right-of-way signs or signals in the parking area, the driver of a vehicle in
obedience to a yield right-of-way sign or signal shall slow down to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting
roadway either from the right or left of which are approaching so closely on
said intersecting roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said
driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.



      (b)   Appropriate yield signs or signals shall be erected or
installed in conformity with the plan.



   5.   PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:



      (a)   When signs, signals or other devices have been erected
upon any roadway or in any other portion of the parking area indicating that
stopping, standing or parking is prohibited during designated hours or
prohibited for a longer time than is designated, no person shall park any
vehicle in violation of any such signs, signals or other devices.



      (b)   The provisions of this Section prohibiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles in the parking area shall apply at all times
or at those times therein specified or as indicated on signs except when it
is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer.



      (c)   Appropriate signs prohibiting stopping, standing or
parking or prohibiting stopping, standing or parking during designated hours
or prohibiting stopping, standing or parking for a longer time than is
designated shall be erected or installed in conformity with the plan.



   6.   PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN LOADING ZONE OR
SERVICE AREA:



      (a)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a passenger
vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicle in any place marked as a loading
zone or service area other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers and in no case for a period longer than three (3) minutes.



      (b)   Appropriate signs prohibiting stopping, standing or
parking in a loading zone or service area shall be erected or installed in
conformity with the plan.



   7.   PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN SPECIFIED
PLACES:



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or
park such vehicle in any of the following places in the parking area except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
directions of a police officer:



      (a)   Within an intersection;



      (b)   On a crosswalk;



      (c)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
thirty feet (30') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a
safety zone;



      (d)   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or stop
sign on the approaching side;



      (e)   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an
intersection;



      (f)   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;



      (g)   At any place where the standing of any vehicle will
block the use of any driveway;



      (h)   On any sidewalk;



      (i)   Alongside or opposite any excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (j)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (k)   On any fire lane;



      (l)   At any place where signs have been erected or installed
prohibiting stopping, standing or parking.



   8.   PROHIBITION OF PARKING IN SPACES DESIGNATED HANDICAPPED PARKING
SPACES:



   It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to occupy any parking space
within the parking area designated and marked for the use of handicapped
persons unless such vehicle is operated by a person defined as  handicapped
according to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1435 - an Ordinance regulating
the use of handicapped parking spaces in the Village of Orland Park,
Illinois, passed April 22, 1985.



   9.   UNAUTHORIZED PARKING OR ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit an Inoperable
vehicle to remain in the parking area within the view of the public. 
Inoperable vehicles may be towed pursuant to Ordinance No. 1736.



   10.   SPEED LIMITS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a
speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on, over or along the roadway
designated on the plan or in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in any
other portion of the parking area.



   Appropriate signs shall be erected posting the speed limits in
conformance with the plan.



   11.   PENALTY:



      1.   Any person who violates any provision of this Section
shall upon conviction be fined according to the fine schedule located in
Appendix B for each offense of which such person shall be convicted.



      2.   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any
vehicle removed from the parking area pursuant to Section 9-7-11-9 to
subsection (8) of this Section may reclaim such vehicle, he shall furnish
evidence of his identity and ownership of the vehicle and right to possession
thereto, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay a fee at the
prevailing rate determined by the Traffic Administrator in accordance with
those rates established by the Illinois State Police to cover the cost of
towing or removal to a vehicle pound or authorized garage, and in addition
thereto, the cost of storage at the prevailing rate at the garage or parking
lot at which said vehicle is stored. In some cases, the tow companies may
deviate up or down from the regular rates if they determine the particular
situation merits the adjustments. In doing so, they may be required to
justify the rate adjustment. 



(Ord. 1826, 11-7-88; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-9-13:  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS:



   All vehicular traffic moving in a southerly direction over, upon, and
along Patricia Lane at Sunrise Lane, being intersecting streets in the
Village, shall yield right of way to traffic on Sunrise Lane by granting the
privilege of immediate use of the said intersection to traffic within and
approaching the said intersection on Sunrise Lane from either the west or
east before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a
police officer or except as otherwise provided by law.  (Ord. 1873, 4-3-89)



   All vehicular traffic moving in an easterly or westerly direction over,
upon and along Padre Lane at Louetta Drive, being intersecting streets in the
Village of Orland Park, Cook and Will Counties, Illinois, shall yield Right
of Way to traffic on Louetta Drive by granting the privilege of immediate use
of the said intersection to traffic within and approaching the said
intersection, except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or except
as otherwise provided by law.  (Ord. 3816, 10-6-03)



   All vehicular traffic moving in a southeasterly and northwesterly
direction on Harvest Hill Drive, being intersecting streets in the Village of
Orland Park, Cook and Will Counties, Illinois shall yield Right of Way to
traffic on Brook Hill Drive by granting the privilege of immediate use of the
said intersection to traffic within and approaching the said intersection,
except when directed to proceed by a Police Officer or except as otherwise
provided by law.  (Ord. 3899, 7-6-04)



9-9-14:  DRIVING ON LEFT PROHIBITED:



   All vehicular traffic moving in an easterly or westerly direction over,
upon, or along 157th Street between Harlem Avenue and Tiffany Drive, a street
within the Village, shall not drive on the left of the roadway or overtake
and pass a vehicle on the left side of the roadway except in compliance with
the directions of a police officer.  (Ord. 1934, 11-20-89)



9-9-15:  RIGHT TURN ON RED PROHIBITED:



   All vehicular traffic moving in an easterly direction over, upon, or
along 151st Street at 88th Avenue, being intersecting streets in the Village,
shall not turn right while facing a red signal Monday through Friday from
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to three o'clock (3:00) P.M. except when directed
to proceed by a police officer or except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 2115, 5-6-91)



9-9-16:  MAIN STREET TRIANGLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a motor
vehicle in or on any street, roadway or parking area of the Main Street
Triangle except in conformity with the parking and traffic control
regulations hereinafter set forth.



   1.  DEFINITIONS:



   Whenever in these regulations the following words and phrases are used,
they should have the meanings respectively ascribed to them hereunder:



      MAIN STREET TRIANGLE:  The geographic area of land within the
Village bounded on the east by LaGrange Road (U.S. Route 45), on the south by
143rd Street (Illinois Route 7) and on the north and west by the Norfolk and
Southern Railroad right- of-way.



      PARKING AREA:  The area or areas of land near or contiguous to
the Main Street Triangle, including interior public and private roadways and
drives used by the public as a means of access to and egress from the
buildings, stores, business establishments and residences within the Main
Street Triangle and that part within the Main Street Triangle designated for
the parking of motor vehicles.



      ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS:  All definitions set forth in Chapters
1, 2, 6, 7 and 8 of this Title 9 are hereby included for purposes of this
Chapter 9.



   2.  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC:



         (a)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor
vehicle to drive the vehicle:



            (i)   Eastbound on 142nd Street between Crescent
Park Circle and Main Street;



            (ii)   Northbound on Main Street between 142nd
Street and Crescent Park Circle;



            (iii)   West and south (counterclockwise) on
Crescent Park Circle between Main Street and 142nd Street.



         (b)   Upon any drive or roadway in the parking area
designated for one-way traffic, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction when signs, signals or other devices indicating the
direction of traffic are erected and maintained at intersections and alleys
where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in violation of signs, signals
or other devices so placed to designate drives or roadways, parts thereof or
specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one
direction.



         (c)   Appropriate signs, signals or other devices
designating certain roadways in the parking area for one-way traffic shall be
erected or installed in conformity herewith.



   3.  NO LEFT TURNS:



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn left:



         (a)   From northbound Ravinia Avenue to westbound
Crescent Park Circle, or



         (b)   From westbound 142nd Street to southbound Crescent
Park Circle.



   4.  STOP INTERSECTIONS:



   All vehicular traffic moving on the streets and in the directions
hereinafter designated shall come to a full and complete stop at the stop
signs hereinafter provided for before entering the intersection, except when
directed to proceed by a police officer, or otherwise provided by law:



      Intersection               Stop
Street             Direction



   (a)   Ravinia Avenue            Ravinia
Avenue         Northbound



      Crescent Park Circle



   (b)   Main Street               Main
Street             Southbound



      143rd Street



   (c)   Main Street               Main
Street             Southbound



      Crescent Park Circle



   (d)   Crescent Park Circle            Crescent Park
Circle          Northbound



      142nd Street



   (e)   142nd Street               142nd
Street             Westbound 



      Crescent Park Circle



   (f)   Jefferson Avenue            Jefferson
Avenue          Southbound



      142nd Street



   After the operation of a vehicle has stopped in obedience to a stop
sign or signal, such operator shall proceed cautiously yielding to vehicles
not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed. 
Appropriate stop sign or signals shall be erected or installed at the above
location.



   5.  NO PARKING ZONES.



   No person shall stop or park a motor vehicle at any of the following
locations except as hereinafter provided under "EXCEPTIONS":



      (a)   In the designated loading zone of the 9750 Crescent Park
Circle building located on the east side of Main Street adjacent to the 9750
Crescent Park Circle building, except when personal property is being loaded
on or unloaded from the vehicle and the vehicle departs the loading zone as
soon as reasonably possible after loading/unloading is completed but not
longer than two (2) hours, such vehicle may be ticketed and towed;



      (b)   Both sides of Ravinia Avenue from 143rd Street north to
the driveway of the 9750 Crescent Park Circle building, such vehicle may be
ticketed and towed;



      (c)   Both sides of Ravinia Avenue from the 9750 Crescent Park
Circle parking garage driveway to Crescent Park Circle;



      (d)    Both sides of Main Street to 142nd Street with the
exception of the Metra parking spaces on the west side of Main Street;



      (e)    On 142nd Street from Jefferson Avenue to Crescent Park
Circle;



      (f)   On Crescent Park Circle from Main Street to 142nd Street;



      (g)   South side of Crescent Park Circle between Main Street
and Ravinia Avenue for more than thirty (30) minutes;



      (h)   In any of the twenty (20) public parking spaces inside
the 9750 Crescent Park Circle garage accessed off of Ravinia Avenue; and



      (i)   Both sides of Jefferson Avenue from 143rd Street to
142nd Street;



      (j)   In the designated loading zone located on the east side
of Jefferson Avenue and under the Downtown Main Street Park Structure, except
when goods are being loaded on or unloaded from the vehicle and the vehicle
departs the loading zone as soon as reasonably possible after loading/
unloading is completed but not longer than two (2) hours, after which such
vehicle may be ticketed and towed; and



      (k)   Both sides of "B" Street between Ravinia Avenue and
Jefferson Avenue.



      (l)   On Village property north of 142nd Street between
Jefferson Avenue and LaGrange Road (U.S. Route 45).



(Amd. Ord. 5274, 2-19-18)



   EXCEPTIONS:



      (a)   Overnight parking is permitted between the hours of 9:00
o'clock p.m. and 6:00 o'clock a.m. at all locations listed in (c) through and
including (h) in this Subsection 5, above, and after 3:00 o'clock p.m. on
Fridays, Saturdays and legal holidays in the thirty (30) railroad commuter
parking spaces on the west side of Main Street between 143rd Street and
Crescent Park Circle;



      (b)   Three (3) hour parking is permitted between the hours of
6:00 o'clock a.m. and 9:00 o'clock p.m. at all locations listed in (c)
through and including (i) in this Subsection 5, above.



      (c)   Appropriate signs, signals or other devices designating
certain roadways in the parking area for one way traffic shall be erected or
installed in conformity herewith; and



      (d)   Motor vehicle parking is permitted for no more than
thirty (30) minutes on the south side of Crescent Park Circle from Main
Street to Ravinia Avenue.



   6.  YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:



      (a)   Where preference is given to traffic through any
intersection on any roadway and specified entrances to said intersections are
designated as yield right-of-way entrances by the erection of yield
right-of-way signs or signals in the parking area, the driver of a vehicle in
obedience to a yield right-of-way sign or signal shall slow down to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting
roadway either from the right or left of which are approaching so closely on
said intersecting roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said
driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.



      (b)   Appropriate yield signs or signals shall be erected or
installed in conformity herewith.



   7.  PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:



      (a)   When signs, signals or other devices have been erected
upon any roadway or in any other portion of the parking area indicating that
stopping, standing or parking is prohibited during designated hours or
prohibited for a longer time than is designated, no person shall park any
vehicle in violation of any such signs, signals or other devices.



      (b)   The provisions of this Section prohibiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles in the parking area shall apply at all times
or at those times therein specified or as indicated on signs except when it
is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer.



      (c)   Appropriate signs prohibiting stopping, standing or
parking or prohibiting stopping, standing or parking during designated hours
or prohibiting stopping, standing or parking for a longer time than is
designated shall be erected or installed in conformity herewith.



   8.  PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OF PASSENGER VEHICLES
IN LOADING ZONE OR SERVICE AREA:



      (a)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a passenger
vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicle in any place marked as a loading
zone or service area other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers and in no case for a period longer than three (3) minutes.



      (b)   Appropriate signs prohibiting stopping, standing or
parking in a loading zone or service area shall be erected or installed in
conformity herewith.



   9.  PROHIBITION OF STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN SPECIFIED PLACES:



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or
park such vehicle in any of the following places in the parking area except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
directions of a police officer:



      (a)   Within an intersection;



      (b)   On a crosswalk;



      (c)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
thirty feet (30') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a
safety zone;



      (d)   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or stop
sign on the approaching side;



      (e)   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an
intersection;



      (f)   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;



      (g)   At any place where the standing of any vehicle will
block the use of any driveway;



      (h)   On any sidewalk;



      (i)   Alongside or opposite any excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (j)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (k)   On any fire lane;



      (l)   At any place where signs have been erected or installed
prohibiting stopping, standing or parking.



   10.   HOURS OF OPERATION, PARKING SPACE DESIGNATION AND SPECIFIC
REGULATIONS FOR THE DOWNTOWN MAIN STREET PARKING STRUCTURE LOCATED AT THE
NORTHEAST CORNER OF 143RD STREET AND RAVINIA AVENUE (9650 143RD STREET):



   No person shall stop or park a motor vehicle within the Downtown Main
Street Parking Structure located at the northeast corner of 143rd Street and
Ravinia Avenue except during the hours and at the locations hereinafter
specified:



   (a)   Public parking location and hours:



      (i)   Levels 1, 2, 3, and part of Level 4 as indicated by
signs;



         a.   Numbered Spaces: 1-335; 360-376; and 412-430;



         b.   Daily: 5 o'clock a.m. to 2 o'clock a.m.;



      (ii)    Part of Level 4 as indicated by signs and Level 5;



         a.   Numbered Spaces: 336-359; 377-411; and 431-456;



         b.   Monday to Friday: 5 o'clock p.m. to 2 o'clock a.m.;



         c.   Saturday: 5 o'clock p.m. to 2 o'clock a.m.;



         d.   Sunday: 5 o'clock a.m. to 2 o'clock a.m.;



   (b)   Reserved parking (for The University of Chicago Medicine)
location and hours:



      (1)   Part of Level 4 as indicated by signs and Level 5;



         a.   Numbered Spaces: 336-359; 377-411; 431-546;



         b.   Monday to Friday: 5 o'clock a.m. to 5 o'clock p.m.;



         c.   Saturday: 5 o'clock a.m. to 5 o'clock p.m.;



   (c)   Regulations:



      (i)   Facility closed from 3 o'clock a.m. to 5 o'clock a.m.;



      (ii)   No public parking for longer than 6 hours;



      (iii)   No overnight parking;



      (iv)   No commuter parking;



      (v)   Maximum speed 5 miles per hour;



      (vi)   No camping, soliciting or loitering;



      (vii)   No parking across multiple numbered spots;



      (viii)   No parking where prohibited or reserved as indicated
by signs;



      (ix)   No skateboarding, roller-blading or bicycling;



      (x)   No alcohol, controlled substances, firearms or other
dangerous weapons;



      (xi)   All regulations are subject to exemptions from the
Village of Orland Park for special events or emergency situations;



      (xii)   Vehicles are parked at owner's risk and the Village
assumes no responsibility for loss or damage to cars or contents; and



      (xiii)   Any person who stops or parks a motor vehicle in
violation of the above provisions of this Subsection 10 shall be subject to
the penalty provided for in Subsection 14 of this Section 9-9-16 and the
motor vehicle will be towed from the Parking Structure at the owner's expense.



   11.  PROHIBITION OF PARKING IN SPACES DESIGNATED HANDICAPPED PARKING
SPACES:



   It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to occupy any parking space
within any parking area designated and marked for the use of handicapped
persons unless such vehicle is operated by a person defined as handicapped
according to the provisions of Ordinance No. 1435, an Ordinance regulating
the use of handicapped parking spaces in the Village of Orland Park,
Illinois, passed April 22, 1985.



   12.  UNAUTHORIZED PARKING OR ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES, TRUCK
TRACTORS  OR SEMI-TRAILERS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit an inoperable
vehicle to remain in any parking area of the Main Street Triangle within any
view of the public. It shall also be unlawful for the operator of a truck
tractor or semi-trailer (as those terms are defined in the Illinois Vehicle
Code) to stop, stand or park said  truck tractor or semi-trailer in any area
of the Main Street Triangle except for designated areas on Main Street.  Any
vehicles stopped, standing or parked in violation of this subsection 12 may
be towed pursuant to Ordinance No. 1736.



   13.  SPEED LIMITS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a
speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on, over or along any street,
drive or roadway within the Main Street Triangle, or in excess of twenty (20)
miles per hour in any parking area. Appropriate signs shall be erected
posting the speed limits in conformance with the plan.



   14.  PENALTY:



   Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall upon
conviction be fined no less than sixty dollars ($60.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense of which such person shall be
convicted.



(Ord. 4832, 8-5-13; Amd. Ord. 4885, 2-3-14; Amd. Ord. 4932, 10-6-14; Amd.
Ord. 5153, 12-19-16)



CHAPTER 10
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, CONDITION



SECTION:



9-10-1:   Clear Vision



9-10-2:   Unnecessary Noise, Mufflers Required



9-10-3:   Horn



9-10-4:   Gas and Smoke



9-10-5:   Projecting Loads



9-10-6:   Brakes



9-10-7:   Lights



9-10-8:   Non-Skid Devices; Tires



9-10-9:   Weight of Vehicles



9-10-1:  CLEAR VISION:



   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in
such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts
of the roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle.  Any vehicle
which is constructed or loaded so that the driver's view of the roadway to
the rear is obstructed shall be equipped with a mirror so attached as to give
him a view of the roadway behind.



9-10-2:  UNNECESSARY NOISE, MUFFLERS REQUIRED:



   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon the street which makes
an unusually loud or unnecessary noise.



   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is
provided with a muffler in efficient working condition; and the use of a
cutout is prohibited.



9-10-3:  HORN:



   Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient
audible signaling device in efficient working order.  Such signaling device
shall be sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the
vehicle, but such horn or other signaling device shall not be sounded for any
purpose other than as a warning of impending danger.



   No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with
a siren or gong signaling device.



9-10-4:  GAS AND SMOKE:



   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense clouds of
gas or smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the
health of persons or as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles.



9-10-5:  PROJECTING LOADS:



   The maximum width of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed eight
feet (8'), excepting loads of loose hay, straw, corn fodder or similar farm
products, agricultural implements and threshing machines.



   No passenger type vehicle shall be operated upon the streets with a
load extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle
nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the
right side of the vehicle.



   No vehicle, unladen or with a load shall exceed a length of thirty five
feet (35') extreme dimension; a truck trailer and a semi-trailer shall be
regarded as one vehicle for the purpose of determining length.



   No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than
two (2) units, and no such combination shall exceed a total length of forty
feet (40') whether with or without a load; but such length limitation shall
not apply to vehicles operated in the day time when transporting poles,
pipes, machinery or other objects which cannot readily be dismembered, nor to
such vehicles operated at night time by a public utility when engaged in
emergency repair work; but such loads carried at night shall be clearly
marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of the load.



   No part of a load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3')
in front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle.



9-10-6:  BRAKES:



   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle upon any street unless such
motor vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working
condition, as required by the State Traffic Law, or to operate any vehicle
which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the
mechanism operating the brakes of such vehicle.



9-10-7:  LIGHTS:



   It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not
equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of State law.



9-10-8:  NON-SKID DEVICES; TIRES:



   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle upon any street,
equipped with any non-skid device so constructed that any rigid or
nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway.



   It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which
is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the State
Traffic Law.



9-10-9:  WEIGHT OF VEHICLES:



   It shall be unlawful to drive on any street, any motor vehicle with a
weight, including the weight of the load, in excess of that permitted by the
State Traffic Law for driving on improved highway or with weight distributed
in a manner not conforming to such Laws.  (Ord. 80A, 10-27-41)



CHAPTER 11
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES



SECTION:



9-11-1:   Definitions



9-11-2:   Abandonment of Vehicles



9-11-3:   Leaving of Wrecked, Nonoperating Vehicle on Street



9-11-4:   Parking or Storing Vehicles on Public Streets



9-11-5:   Disposition of Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles



9-11-6:   Impounding



9-11-7:   Payment of Expenses of Impounding



9-11-8:   Procedures For Use of Vehicle Towing Companies



9-11-8-1:   Purpose



9-11-8-2:   Towing List



9-11-8-3:   Eligibility Requirements



9-11-8-4:   Utilization of Companies on the List



9-11-8-5:   Removal From the List



9-11-8-6:   Appeal



9-11-8-7:   Emergencies



9-11-8-8:   Resignation from Towing List



9-11-8-9:   Penalty



9-11-9:   Towing Hearings



9-11-9-1:   Request for Hearing



9-11-9-2:   Time of Request



9-11-9-3:   Method of Request



9-11-9-4:   Dates for Hearing



9-11-9-5:   Times and Places for Hearings



9-11-9-6:   Hearing Officer



9-11-9-7:   Contents of Hearing



9-11-9-8:   Findings



9-11-9-9:   Post Hearing Procedure



9-11-9-10:   Notification of Right to a Hearing



9-11-9-11:   Scope of Hearing



9-11-10:   Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment of Motor Vehicles used in
Connection with Illegal Activities



9-11-10-1   Violations Authorizing Seizure



9-11-10-2   General Regulations



9-11-10-3   Notice



9-11-10-4   Preliminary Hearing



9-11-10-5   Hearing



9-11-10-6   Administrative Penalty



9-11-10-7   Vehicle Possession



9-11-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this Chapter:



   CHIEF OF POLICE:  The Chief of Police of the Village or his authorized
representatives.



   PERSON:  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PROPERTY:  Any real property within the Village or any Village
property within or without the corporate limits which is not a street or
highway.



   STREET or HIGHWAY:  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   VEHICLE:  A machine propelled by power other than human power designed
to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.



9-11-2:  ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:



   No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Village or on Village
property within or without the corporate limits, and no person shall leave
any vehicle at any place within the Village or on Village property within or
without the corporate limits for such time and under such circumstances as to
cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.



9-11-3:  LEAVING OF WRECKED, NONOPERATING VEHICLE ON STREET:



   No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked
or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the Village or on Village
property within or without the corporate limits.



9-11-4:  PARKING OR STORING VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS:



   No person shall park or store any vehicle on any public street, alley,
or public way for more than forty eight (48) successive hours.



9-11-5:  DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES:



   No person in charge or control of any property other than Village
property within the Village, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall allow any dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or
discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than thirty (30) days or
on Village property within or without the corporate limits for a longer time
than forty eight (48) hours; except that this Section shall not apply with
regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a
business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to
the lawful operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an
appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the Village.



9-11-6:  IMPOUNDING:



   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any
vehicle left at any place within the Village or on any Village property
within or without the corporate limits which reasonably appears to be in
violation of this Chapter or abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed.  Such
vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq. and provisions of this Chapter;
provided, however, that any vehicle left at any place, other than on Village
property, shall not be removed and impounded as provided herein until the
Chief of Police shall have given written notice to either the owner of such
vehicle or the person owning or controlling the property on which such
vehicle is located to remove said vehicle after a waiting period of seven (7)
days or more (in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4-201(b)) after the mailing or
giving of such notice and of the intention of the Chief of Police to remove
and impound such vehicle if it has not been removed by the end of such
waiting period.  Such notice shall be given by at least two (2) of the four
(4) following described notification methods:



   1.   Affixing notice on such vehicle;



   2.   Sending notice by mail to the owner of such vehicle at his/her
last known address if the owner is reasonably ascertainable;



   3.   By sending notice by mail to the person owning or controlling
the property on which such vehicle is located; and



   4.   By making reasonable attempts to contact the owner of such
vehicle, if the owner is reasonably ascertainable, by telephone or other
electronic means.



   The Chief of Police or his/her designee may enter upon private property
at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting such vehicle, posting
notice thereon and removing and impounding such vehicle, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to prevent the Chief of Police or his/her designee
from entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his/her duties
under the provisions of this Chapter.  The Chief of Police may tow, or cause
to be towed, any vehicle abandoned, parked or otherwise kept in violation of
the provisions of this Chapter, to a suitable storage area. 



(Amd. Ord. 5198, 7-3-17)



9-11-7:  PAYMENT OF EXPENSES OF IMPOUNDING:



   The owner of or person abandoning, parking or otherwise keeping a
vehicle in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, which is impounded
under the provisions of law and this Chapter, shall be charged a fee in a sum
sufficient to cover the charges and expenses of impounding and the
enforcement of this Chapter, payable to the Chief of Police, which fee may be
collected by the Village In an action at law against said violator, and which
fee must be paid prior to the release of the vehicle so impounded.  This fee
shall be in addition to a fine provided for herein for the violation of this
Chapter.  (Ord. 344, 5-22-67)



9-11-8:  PROCEDURES FOR USE OF VEHICLE TOWING COMPANIES:



9-11-8-1:  PURPOSE:



   There is hereby established a procedure for the determination and use
of towing companies by the Village Police Department In carrying out vehicle
towing pursuant to Police Department procedure.



9-11-8-2:  TOWING LIST:



   The Village Manager shall maintain a list of a maximum of three (3)
eligible towing companies, and the Village Manager shall forward the list of
eligible towing companies to the Police Chief.  The eligibility list shall
be prepared after this Ordinance is published and three (3) companies
qualified pursuant to Ordinance No. 1261 as amended shall be deemed qualified
provided said companies provide the Village Manager sufficient documentation
to show that they meet the requirements as set forth in this Ordinance; and
the list shall be updated from time to time when a towing company resigns or
is removed from the list.



9-11-8-3:  ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS:



   The Village Manager shall include a towing company on the list on a
first come, first serve basis, and maintain the company's name on the list
provided the company:



   1.   Maintains a vehicle storage facility located within the
corporate limits of Orland Park, which includes both an outside storage
facility secured by a protective fence and structure for the dry storage of
at least three (3) towed vehicles, should the Police Department request dry
storage.



   2.   If required by Village Code, holds an applicable current
Village business license and holds current Village licenses for its business
vehicles registered in the Village.



   3.   Agrees to and provides prompt response to the Police Department
request for towing any time during the day or night.  A prompt response
means arrival on the scene which may be any location within the Village
within twenty (20) minutes of request from the Police Department.



   4.   Agrees to and provides courteous treatment to citizens and
members of the Police Department.



   5.   Agrees to and does clean accident scenes of debris (i.e.,
glass, metal and plastics) as necessary.



   6.   Maintains the following minimum insurance coverages:



      a.   General liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence;



      b.   Automobile liability insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000 combined single and limit each occurrence;



      c.   Worker's Compensation and Employers' liability insurance
with limits of $500,000, but not less than the minimum statutory amount;



      d.   Garage Keeper's legal liability insurance of $250,000
with first dollar coverage or on a direct primary basis in a minimum amount
to cover the Village of Orland Park's interest.



   7.   Agrees to defend, indemnify, keep and hold harmless the Village
of Orland Park, it's officers, representatives, elected and appointed
officials, agents and employees against any and all losses, including
reasonable attorneys' fees and cost of defense.  A certificate of insurance
is required listing the Village of Orland Park as additional insured on a
primary and non-contributory basis.  Insurance must be maintained with an
insurance carrier with an A.M. Best rate of A- or better.



   8.   Agrees to and makes towed vehicles available for release during
business hours, eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through five o'clock (5:00) P.M.,
Monday through Friday, and, if available, on Saturdays from nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) P.M.



   9.   Agrees to and shall base towing charges upon the most recently
published Memorandum from the Chief of Police detailing the authorized
charges for towing and other related services, and shall not charge for the
first twenty-four (24) hours of storage or for basic crash scene clean-up, as
that is part of the towing charge. The Chief of Police may use the most
recent Illinois State Police Schedule and other sources as a guide to set all
acceptable charges for tows and related services.



   A copy of the memorandum setting forth authorized charges shall be
posted in the office of all tow companies in a conspicuous place where
vehicle owners will have access and be most likely to see the document.



   10.   Provides the Orland Park Police Department, on no less than a
weekly basis, with a receipt for each tow listing all charges, the date and
time of the tow, related police incident/report number and any other
information to properly identify the tow.



   Two receipts will list only services relevant to the Police requested
tow.  Any additional charges agreed to by any other responsible party shall
be listed on a separate receipt.  Each tow company will provide for a log
book detailing all information regarding each police tow, keep the log book
current and make it accessible to the Chief of Police, or designee upon
request.



   11.   Performs all Police requested tows of vehicles within the
Village of Orland Park at no cost to the Village, to include tow of Police
vehicles, seized vehicles and those vehicles seized and held for evidentiary
purposes.



   12.   Responds to Police Department requests for Police tows with
the appropriate number of trucks needed to safely and efficiently clear the
roadway in a timely manner.



   13.   Allows access to the vehicle owner as follows:



      a.   Allow vehicle owner or third parties directed and
authorized by the vehicle owner to have access to remove personal property
from towed and stored vehicles during normal business hours for no additional
fee, provided that the vehicle owner has insurance for the vehicle;



      b.   Request for after hour or non-business day recovery of
property shall be accommodated at the discretion of the tow company and may
be subject to reasonable additional fees set forth by the company.



      c.   Request to remove personal property from stored vehicles
shall be subject to the rules of the towing company and any limitations
provided by law.  The tow company shall not allow the owner access to any
vehicle that is the subject of a written hold order without written consent
of the Chief of Police or designee.



   14.   Complies with applicable Village Codes, ordinances and other
applicable laws; and



   15.   Shall be responsible for meeting the needs of oversized
vehicles such as semi-tractor trailers and vehicles similar in size and
weight, which require larger super-sized tow trucks. The maximum response
time provided in paragraph 3 of this section may be extended if necessary to
provide for a super-sized tow truck. The tow company may sub-contract for
heavy-duty towing service during its on-call period if it does not have a tow
vehicle capable of handling heavy-duty towing services.



   Before the list is finalized, the Village Manager shall notify the
Police Chief of the three (3) tentatively approved companies.  The Police
Chief will have seven (7) days within which to make a recommendation of
whether to accept or reject any or all of the companies.  A recommendation
of rejection shall specify the reason.



   Accepted companies shall be finalized for the towing list, and the
names of those companies shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police for use in
towing.  If any or all of the tentatively approved companies are rejected,
the Village Manager shall publish the availability of an opening or openings
on the list and accept applications. (Ord. 4684, 12-5-11)



9-11-8-4:  UTILIZATION OF COMPANIES ON THE LIST:



   The Police Department shall call the companies on a rotating schedule;
the schedule shall be based upon equal time for each  company.  In the
event that the primary tow company for each schedule fails to respond to, or
does not promptly respond to the  Police Department's  request, the next
available company will be contacted.



9-11-8-5:  REMOVAL FROM THE LIST:



   If a company which is listed on the list fails to or refuses at any
time to comply with any of the requirements contained In subsection C above,
the Chief of Police shall remove the  company's name from the list and
notify the affected company of his decision and the reason for his action. 
Any company so  removed shall not be eligible to reapply for two (2) years
subsequent to removal.



9-11-8-6:  APPEAL:



   A company which has had its application rejected or its name removed
from the list by the Chief of Police may appeal the  decision to the Village
Manager within fourteen (14) working days of receipt of notice from the Chief
of Police.  The Village Manager shall accept or reject the Chief of Police's
recommendation.



9-11-8-7:  EMERGENCIES:



   In the event of emergency or instances wherein there are no eligible
companies available, the Chief of Police or his designee may in his
discretion utilize any available towing company or companies.



9-11-8-8:  RESIGNATION FROM TOWING LIST:



   If a towing company desires to be removed from the towing list, the
company shall notify the Village Manager's office in writing.  The Village
Manager shall remove the name from the list and will notify the Police Chief
of the action.  After removal of the name, the vacancy on the list will be
published and applications will be accepted by the Village Manager until a
qualified replacement is found.  The Police Chief shall be notified of the
qualified replacement.



9-11-8-9:  PENALTY:



   In addition to removal from the tow list, an action for violation of
Ordinance may be taken against an offending company.  Any person violating
the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person
shall be convicted. 



(Ord. 2075, 12-17-90; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-11-9:  TOWING HEARINGS:



9-11-9-1:  REQUEST FOR HEARING:



   A request for a hearing shall be made in accordance with the provisions
of this Section by registered or legal owner of towed vehicle before a
hearing will be held to determine the validity of a police ordered tow.



9-11-9-2:  TIME OF REQUEST:



   In cases where the registered or legal owner is present at the time of
the tow, the owner will be advised of the right to a tow hearing and shall
have ten (10) working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from
the date of the tow to request a hearing; or



   In cases where notice is given prior to a tow, the request for a
hearing shall be made within ten (10) working days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, after receipt of the notice; or



   In all other cases, the request for a hearing must be made not later
than ten (10) working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from
receipt of notice that the vehicle has been towed.



9-11-9-3:  METHOD OF REQUEST:



   The request for a tow hearing must be made in person by the registered
or legal owner of the towed vehicle at the Village police station.  The
person requesting the hearing must put the request in writing, and present
proper identification to verify vehicle ownership.



9-11-9-4:  DATES FOR HEARING:



   In cases where a notice precedes the tow, the hearing, if possible,
shall be held prior to the designated tow date.



   In cases where the owner was present at the time of the tow and the
vehicle has not been released, the hearing shall take place within twenty
four (24) hours of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
provided that the request was made within the ten (10) working days of the
tow.



   If the request was made in response to written notification of the tow
and right to hearing as required above, the hearing will take place within
ten (10) working days of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays.



   In cases where the time frames above are not practical, the hearing
shall be held at a time which is mutually agreeable to the parties. 
Additionally, the owner requesting the hearing may ask for only one
continuance to a time mutually convenient to all parties.



9-11-9-5:  TIMES AND PLACES FOR HEARINGS:



   Hearings shall be held Monday through Friday between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., excluding holidays, at the
Village of Orland Park Police Department.



9-11-9-6:  HEARING OFFICER:



   The Inspector of Police, the field operations commander or other police
officer designated by the Chief of Police shall be the tow hearing officer.



9-11-9-7:  CONTENTS OF HEARING:



   The hearing officer shall consider the following items at the hearing:



   1.   Any statements by the police officer ordering the tow;



   2.   The police tow report, copy of any citation relating to the
towed vehicle, inventory receipt for the vehicle, vehicle registration and
receipts for tow payment for the vehicle which has been released; and



   3.   Evidence of ownership and any evidence presented by the owner
regarding the law.



9-11-9-8:  FINDINGS:



   If the preponderance of evidence indicates that the tow of the vehicle
was authorized by the laws of the State, by an ordinance of the Village, or
the vehicle was impeding the orderly flow of traffic on a public way, the
hearing officer will find the tow and storage of the vehicle was "justified".



   If the preponderance of evidence indicates that the tow and storage of
the vehicle was not authorized by the laws of the State, by an ordinance of
the Village, or the vehicle was not impeding the orderly flow of traffic on a
public way, the hearing officer will find the tow and storage of the vehicle
"unjustified".



   The hearing officer shall give his finding at the conclusion of the
hearing.



9-11-9-9:  POST HEARING PROCEDURE:



   A finding of a "justified" tow and storage of a vehicle may be appealed
in writing to the Chief of Police within three (3) working days, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after the decision.  The Chief of Police or
person acting as Chief shall issue his decision within seven (7) working
days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.



   If the tow and storage of a vehicle is found to be "unjustified" the
Police Department shall immediately take the appropriate measures for the
reimbursement of the owner for tow and storage costs or the release of the
vehicle, or the release of the vehicle without cost to the owner, whichever
is applicable.



9-11-9-10:  NOTIFICATION OF RIGHT TO A HEARING:



   Personal notice will be given to the owner by the police officer when
the owner is present at the time of the tow.



   Notice of the right to a hearing shall be contained in all notices of
planned impoundment and notices of impoundment.



   All towing companies which perform police towing for the Village shall
prominently post two (2) signs indicating the right to a hearing to contest
the validity of the tow.  The signs shall be posted In locations where the
public transacts business.



   The Police Department will prominently post signs in the lock-up area,
report processing room and main reception area of its station indicating the
right to a hearing to contest the validity of a tow.



9-11-9-11:  SCOPE OF HEARING:



   The tow hearing is not determinative of or adjudicative of any citation
issued relative to the towed vehicle.



(Ord. 1319, 2-13-84)



9-11-10:  VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN
CONNECTION WITH ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES.



9-11-10-1:  VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING SEIZURE:



   A motor vehicle operated with the permission, express or implied, of
the owner of record, that is used in connection with the following
violations, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the Village, and
the owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an
administrative penalty in addition to any towing and storage fees as
hereinafter provided.



      1.   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving
while their driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle
is suspended or revoked in violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-303 or Section 9-3-2 of
the Village of Orland Park Village Code, an administrative according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense..  For the purposes of
this Section, the terms "revoked" or "suspended," when used in the context of
driving privileges or drivers licenses, shall have the same meaning as
contained in 625 ILCS 5/6-100 et seq.



      2.   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving
while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating
compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of 625 ILCS
5/11-501(a), an administrative penalty according to the fine schedule located
in Appendix B for each offense.



      3.   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving
against whom a warrant has been issued by a Circuit Court in Illinois for
failing to answer charges that the driver violated Subsection 9-11-10-1(1) or
9-11-10-1(2) above, an administrative penalty according to the fine schedule
located in Appendix B for each offense.



      4.   Any motor vehicle that contains any controlled substance
or cannabis, as defined in the Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100,
et. seq., and the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1, et. seq., or that is
used in the purchase, attempt to purchase, sale or attempt to sell such
controlled substances or cannabis, an administrative penalty according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



      5.   Any motor vehicle used in connection with a violation of
Article 24 (Deadly Weapons) of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS
5/24-1 et seq.) or that contains a firearm or ammunition for which a Firearms
Owner's Identification Card is required under the Illinois Owners
Identification Card Act (430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq.) and is not presented, an
administrative penalty according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B
for each offense.



      6.   Any motor vehicle that is used, with the knowledge of the
owner of record, in the commission of prostitution as defined in the Illinois
Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/11, et. seq.), soliciting for a prostitute
or a sexual act as defined in said Code, soliciting for a juvenile prostitute
as defined in said Code, patronizing a juvenile prostitute as defined in said
Code, or pimping or juvenile pimping as defined in said Code, an
administrative penalty according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B
for each offense..



      7.   Any motor vehicle that is used by a person who does not
hold a valid Illinois driver's license or permit or a restricted driver's
permit issued under the provision of Section 6-205, 6-206, or 6-113 of 625
ILCS 5/6-101 et seq., an administrative penalty according to the fine
schedule located in Appendix B for each offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-11-10-2:  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   1   This Section shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any
existing State or Federal laws or Village Ordinances or Codes pertaining to
vehicle seizure and impoundment, and these penalties shall be in addition to
any penalties that may be assessed by a court for any criminal charges.



   2.   This Section shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the
violation was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was
discovered; or (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the
violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the
vehicle; or (3) with respect to Subsections 9-11-10-1(4) or 9-11-10-1(5)
above, the owner proves that the item found is not unlawful.



   3.   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this Section
shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all towers authorized to
tow for the Police Department.



9-11-10-3:  NOTICE



   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized
by the Village.  Before or at the time the vehicle is towed, the police
officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the owner of the
vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle
and of owner's right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing to
be conducted under this Section.  Said vehicle shall be impounded pending
the completion of the hearings provided for in Subsection 9-11-10-4 herein,
unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the Village a cash bond in the
amount of $500.00 and pays the towing and storage charges.



9-11-10-4:  PRELIMINARY HEARING



   If the owner of record of a vehicle seized pursuant to this Section
desires to appeal the seizure, said owner must make a request for said
hearing within twenty-four (24) hours of the seizure.  Said request shall be
in writing and filed with the Deputy Chief of Police or his designee who
shall, if the appeal is timely filed, conduct such preliminary hearing within
24 hours after receipt of the request excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or
Village holidays.  All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing.  The
formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably-prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.  If, after the
hearing, the Deputy Chief of Police or his designee determines there is
probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this Section, he shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this Section, unless the owner of
the vehicle posts with the Village a cash bond in the amount of $500.00, and
pays the tower any applicable towing and storage fees.  If the Deputy Chief
of Police or his designee determines that there is no such probable cause,
the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees.



9-11-10-5:  HEARING



   Within ten days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to
this Section, the Village shall notify by certified mail, return receipt
requested, the owner of record of the date, time, and location of a plea
hearing that will be conducted, pursuant to this Section.  The owner will
appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea of guilty or not guilty.  If a
plea of guilty is entered, the case will be disposed of at that time.  If
the owner pleads not guilty, a final hearing shall be scheduled and held,
unless continued by order of the Hearing Officer, no later than 30 days after
the vehicle was seized.  All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the hearing.  At any time prior to the hearing
date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.  The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably-prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs.  If, after the hearing, the Hearing
Officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used
in connection with a violation set forth in this Section, the Hearing Officer
shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly
liable to the Village for an administrative penalty in an amount not to
exceed $500.00 and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until
the owner pays the administrative penalty to the Village plus fees to the
tower for the towing and storage of the vehicle.  If the owner of record
fails to appear at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall enter a default
order in favor of the Village.  If the Hearing Officer finds that no such
violation occurred, the Hearing Officer shall order the immediate return of
the owner's vehicle or cash bond without fees.



9-11-10-6:  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY.



   If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this Section, such
penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing to the Village.  If a cash
bond has been posted pursuant to this Section, the bond shall be applied to
the penalty.  If a vehicle has been impounded when such a penalty is
imposed, the Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce
such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law.  Except as provided
otherwise in this Section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until the
penalty is paid to the Village and any applicable towing and storage fees are
paid to the tower, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to
the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is
sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as
provided by law.  If the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not
paid within 30 days after an administrative penalty is imposed against an
owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing, the vehicle
shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by
law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles.  In all other cases, if the
administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid within 30 days after
the expiration of time at which administrative review of the Hearing
Officer's determination may be sought, or within 30 days after an action
seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the Village,
whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed
vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code.  (625 ILCS 5/4-208)



9-11-10-7:  VEHICLE POSSESSION



   1.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner,
lien holder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of
a vehicle impounded under this Section until the administrative penalty and
fees applicable under this Section have been paid.  However, whenever a
person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced
foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that
person if he or she agrees in writing to refund to the Village the amount of
the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay
all lien holders of record, not to exceed the administrative penalty, plus
the applicable fees.



   2.   For purposes of this Section, the "owner of record" of a
vehicle is the record title holder as registered with the Secretary of State,
State of Illinois.



(Ord. 4154, 7-17-06)



CHAPTER 12
SNOWMOBILES, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES



SECTION:



9-12-1:   Definition



9-12-2:   Operation of Snowmobiles Prohibited



9-12-3:   Operation of Motor Driven Cycles Prohibited



9-12-4:   Permitting Unauthorized Person to Drive



9-12-1:  DEFINITION:



   For the purpose of this Chapter, "snowmobile" shall mean any vehicle
powered by gasoline, gasoline-oil mixture, propane or other fuel, or electric
power, suspended upon skis, treads or wheels and designed primarily for
recreational use and operation on snow.



   For the purpose of this Chapter, "motor driven cycle" means any
motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, or motor scooter with less than 150 cubic
centimeters piston displacement, any electric cycle or electric scooter, any
electric or motorized pedal cycle, or any electric or motor driven
skateboard, but does not include any electric toy with a maximum speed of 4
miles per hour.  (Ord. 3875, 5-3-04)



9-12-2:  OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED:



   No person shall use and operate a snowmobile in any public park within
the Village or upon any public streets and highways or other public lands
within the Village and such use and operation is hereby prohibited, provided,
however, that this Section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of
snowmobiles in the aforesaid designated places by authorized personnel of the
Village, the authorized personnel of the Civil Defense Unit of the Village,
or the use thereof by authorized personnel of any other governmental body or
agency when said use shall be required for emergency purposes.  (Ord. 470,
11-22-71)



9-12-3:  OPERATION OF MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES PROHIBITED:



   (a)   Prohibited. No person shall operate a motor driven cycle upon
any public or private street, sidewalk, parking lot, bike path or public park.



   (b)   Exemptions.



      1.   Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, or other Village
vehicle driven by an employee in the course of his/her duties shall be
permitted to use any public or private street, parking lot, sidewalk, bike
path or public park when it is necessary in the performance of his/her duties.



      2.   Motorized wheelchairs and any other motor driven cycle
that is specifically subject to Article 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



      3.   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the use
of motor driven cycles by authorized personnel of any governmental body or
agency when said use shall be required for emergency purposes.



   (c)   Penalty.  Any person, firm or corporation violating this
Section shall be fined according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B
for each offense of which such person shall be convicted, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a
violation continues or exists.



(Ord. 3875, 5-3-04; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-12-4:  PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE:



   (a)   Prohibited.  No person shall cause, authorize or knowingly
permit a motor vehicle, including a motor driven cycle, owned or under his
control, to be driven upon any public or private street, sidewalk, parking
lot, bike path or public park, by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code or prohibited by Ordinance.



   (b)   Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement
of any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of
which such person shall be convicted.



(Ord. 3875, 5-3-04; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 13
BICYCLES



SECTION:



9-13-1:   Definitions



9-13-2:   Registration Required



9-13-3:   Registration Decals



9-13-4:   Transfer of Ownership of Bicycle



9-13-5:   Damaging, Defacing Bicycle Numbers, Decals, Cards



9-13-6:   Registration Fees



9-13-7:   Rental Bicycles



9-13-8:   Reports Required



9-13-9:   Equipment



9-13-10:   Administration; Suspension, Revocation of Registration;
Impounding Bicycles



9-13-11:   Compliance With Traffic Laws, Regulations



9-13-1:  DEFINITIONS:



   BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels.



   CHIEF OF POLICE:  The Chief of Police of the Village or any member of
the Police Department of the Village designated by the Chief of Police to act
in his place and stead.



   DEALER IN BICYCLES:  A person engaged in the business of buying and
selling new or used bicycles.



   RENTAL AGENCY: Any person engaged in the business of offering for
rental and renting bicycles for use by the public.



9-13-2:  REGISTRATION REQUIRED:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle upon
any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the Village without first
having the bicycle registered with the Village Clerk and procuring a
registration number, decal and card therefor.



9-13-3:  REGISTRATION DECALS:



   Issuance, Duration: The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and
directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle registration decals and
registration cards which shall be effective on the date the registration
decal is purchased to and including the date that registrant sells, trades or
otherwise disposes of said bicycle.



   Type of Registration Decals, Cards; Decals to be Displayed: The Village
shall provide a decal, together with registration cards, said registration
decal and registration cards having a number stamped thereon in numerical
order, beginning with number one, and the name Orland Park stamped thereon;
such decal shall be suitable for attachment upon the bicycles.  Such decal
shall remain attached during the existence of such registration.



9-13-4:  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF BICYCLE:



   It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership
of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the Police
Department the registration card issued to such person named therein,
together with the name and address of the person to whom said bicycle was
sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within five (5) days of
the date of said sale or transfer. it shall be the duty of the purchaser or
transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor
within five (5) days of said sale or transfer.



9-13-5:  DAMAGING, DEFACING BICYCLE NUMBERS, DECALS, CARDS:



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the serial or frame number of any bicycle
registered pursuant to this Chapter. lt shall also be unlawful for any person
to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any registration decal or registration
card during the time in which such registration decal or registration card is
operative; provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the
Chief of Police from requiring the stamping of numbers on the frames of
bicycles on which no serial or frame number can be found, or on which said
number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.



9-13-6:  REGISTRATION FEES:



   The annual registration fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be fifty
cents ($.50) and shall be paid in advance.  All registration fees collected
under this Chapter shall be paid into the Corporate Fund of the Village.



9-13-7:  RENTAL BICYCLES:



   Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped with
such safety equipment as is required by this Chapter, and shall be kept in
good and safe working order.  Rental agencies shall comply, in all respects,
with all of the provisions of this Chapter, and shall be responsible for the
condition of the bicycles they rent.  The Chief of Police shall make
periodical inspections of rental agencies to ascertain that they are
complying with the provisions of this Chapter.



9-13-8:  REPORTS REQUIRED:



   Secondhand Bicycle Buyers: All persons engaged in the business of
buying secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make daily reports to the
Police Department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each
bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame
number thereof, and the number of the registration decal found thereon, if
any.



   Bicycle Sellers:  All persons engaged in the business of selling new
or secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make daily reports to the
Police Department, giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which
list shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind
of bicycle sold, together with a description and frame number thereof, and
the number of the registration decal attached thereto, if any.



9-13-9:  EQUIPMENT:



   Every bicycle when in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear which
shall be visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500'); or a red light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used
in lieu of a red reflector.



   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a horn or bell in good working
order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions for a
distance of over one hundred feet (100'), but no horn or other device shall
emit a harsh sound.  No bicycle shall be equipped with nor shall any person
use a siren or whistle upon a bicycle.



   Every bicycle operated in the Village shall be kept in good running
order and equipped with adequate brakes, readily operated by foot or hand. 
Such brakes shall enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry,
level, clean pavement.



   The Chief of Police shall inspect each bicycle previous to the issuance
of a registration decal and card therefor, and he may refuse to approve any
bicycle which is not properly equipped or is in unsafe condition.



   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provision
of this Chapter.



9-13-10:  ADMINISTRATION; SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION; IMPOUNDING
BICYCLES:



   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to administer
the provisions of this Chapter.  The Chief of Police is hereby authorized
and empowered to suspend for a period of not to exceed thirty (30) days or
revoke any registration issued under the provisions of this Chapter, for any
violation thereof, or of any of the ordinances of the Village relating to
street traffic, insofar as they are applicable, and to impound for a period
of not to exceed thirty (30) days any unregistered or improperly registered
bicycle, or the bicycle of any person who violates any of the provisions of
this Chapter, or of the ordinances of the Village relating to street traffic,
insofar as they are applicable.  The action of the Chief of Police in
suspending or revoking any registration or impounding a bicycle, as provided
in this Section, shall be conclusive and final.  The suspension or
revocation of a registration or the impounding of a bicycle shall not
preclude the infliction of any other penalties upon the person whose
registration is suspended or revoked, or the person whose bicycle is
impounded.



9-13-11:  COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC LAWS, REGULATIONS:



   Every person operating a bicycle in the Village shall conform to the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and shall also be subject to the
regulations of this Chapter.



   Riding Abreast:  When two (2) or more persons in a group are operating
bicycles they shall not ride abreast but shall ride single file.



   Duty to Keep to Right:  All bicycles shall be operated as near to the
right-hand curb as conditions will permit, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   Emerging From Alley, Driveway, Garage:  Any person operating a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or garage, shall stop the bicycle
immediately prior to driving onto or across a sidewalk or onto or across a
sidewalk line projected across any alley, and shall exercise extreme care in
these cases.



   Clinging, Attaching to Moving Vehicles:  No person operating a bicycle
shall cling to or attach himself to any other moving vehicle.



   Attaching Other Vehicles to Bicycles:  No bicycle shall have attached
to it any other vehicle such as a wagon or sled.



   Riding on Sidewalks:



      1.   No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk in the
business district of the Village.



      2.   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk
other than in the business district, such person shall yield the right of way
to any pedestrian and shall give audible signals before overtaking and
passing such person.



   Pedestrians' Right of Way: The pedestrian has the right of way over
bicycles at all times.



   Obstructing Streets, Sidewalks:  No bicycle shall be left lying upon
any street or sidewalk or in such position as to obstruct or interfere with
the use of any street or sidewalk.



   Carrying Passengers Prohibited:  A bicycle which is designed to carry
no more than one person shall not be used to carry more than one person.



   Riding "No Hands"; Fancy Riding:  No rider of a bicycle shall remove
both hands from the handlebars or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on
any street or sidewalk.



   Hand Signals:  Proper hand signals should be used at all times.



   Carrying Articles:  No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, article or bundle which prevents the rider from keeping both hands
on the handlebars or obstructs his vision.



   Obedience to Traffic Signs:  Every person operating a bicycle must
obey all traffic signs.  (Ord. 491, 6-19-72)



CHAPTER 14
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE VIOLATIONS, CITATIONS AND SETTLEMENT



SECTION:



9-14-1:   Illinois Vehicle Code Sections Adopted



9-14-2:   Interpretation



9-14-3:   Citations



9-14-4:   Administrative Settlement



9-14-5:   Enforcement Procedure



9-14-6:   Penalty



9-14-1:  ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE SECTIONS ADOPTED



   Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/20-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the
following specifically listed sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code
identified by section number and title are adopted by reference, and are made
a part of this Chapter and shall be applicable in the Village:



   Definitions:



      5/1-102   Alley



      5/1-102.1   Ambulance



      5/1-105   Authorized emergency vehicle



      5/1-106   Bicycle



      5/1-113(a)   Crosswalk



      5/1-116   Driver



      5/1-126   Highway



      5/1-131   Improved Highway



      5/1-132   Intersection



      5/1-136   Laned Roadway



      5/1-144   Metal Tire



      5/1-146   Motor Vehicle



      5/1-147   Motorcycle



      5/1-156   Park or Parking



      5/1-158   Pedestrian



      5/1-160   Pneumatic Tire



   Certificates of Title and Registration of Vehicle:



      5/3-401   Effect of provisions  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/3-404    Vehicles of second division carrying persons or
property-Required documents (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/3-411    Registration card to be carried and exhibited on
demand (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/3-413    Display of registration plates, registration
stickers and drive-away permits (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/3-416    Notice of change of address or name (Ord. 4494,
7-20-09)



      5/3-417    Lost or damaged or stolen cards, plates and
registration stickers (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/3-501    Registration expires on transfer by owner (Ord.
4494, 7-20-09)



   Certificates of Title and Registration of Vehicle (Cont.)



      5/3-502    New owner must secure new registration  (Ord.
4494, 7-20-09)



      5/3-601    Operation of vehicles under special plates (Ord.
4494, 7-20-09)



      5/3-701   Operation of vehicles without evidence of
registration-Operation under mileage plates when odometer broken or
disconnected.



      5/3-702   Operation of vehicle when registration cancelled,
suspended or revoked.



      5/3-703   Improper use of evidences of registration or
certificate of title.



      5/3-801   Registration.



   Abandoned Vehicles



      5/4-201   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.



      5/4-204    Police Tow; Reports Release of vehicles, payment
(Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/4-214    Violations of 4-201  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/4-214.1    Failure to pay fines, charges, and costs on an
abandoned vehicle (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



   Licensing Law



      5/6-101   (a) and (b) Drivers must have licenses or permits.



      5/6-102   What persons are exempt



      5/6-104   (2nd Paragraph only from Section [a] Classification
- special restrictions.



      5/6-104   (b, c, d, e and f) Classification of driver -
special restrictions.



      5/6-112   License and permits to be carried and exhibited on
demand.



      5/6-113   (d) Restricted Permits



      5/6-303   Driving while license or permit revoked



      5/6-304   Permitting unauthorized person to drive



   Rules of the Road



      5/11-203   Obedience to Police



      5/11-701   Drive on right side of roadway - Exceptions



      5/11-702   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions



      5/11-703   Overtaking a vehicle on the left



      5/11-704   When overtaking on the right is permitted



      5/11-705   Limitations on overtaking on left



      5/11-706   Limitations on driving left of center of roadway



      5/11-707   No passing zones



      5/11-708   One way roadways and rotary traffic islands



      5/11-709   Driving on roadways laned for traffic



      5/11-709.1   Driving on shoulder



      5/11-710   Following too closely



      5/11-711   Restrictions on us of controlled access highway



      5/11-801   Required position and method of turning at
intersection



      5/11-802   Limitations on U-turns



      5/11-803   Starting parked vehicle



      5/11-804   When signal required



      5/11-805   Signal by hand or arm or signal device



      5/11-806   Method of giving hand or arm signal's



      5/11-901   Vehicle approaching or entering intersection



      5/11-901.1   Vehicles approach or entering a "T" intersection



      5/11-902   Vehicle turning left



      5/11-903   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk



      5/11-904   Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection



      5/11-905   Merging traffic



      5/11-906   Vehicle entering highway from private road or
driveway



      5/11-907   Operation of vehicles and street cars on approach
of authorized emergency vehicles



      5/11-908   Vehicle approaching highway construction or
maintenance area



      5/11-1001   private road or driveway



      5/11-1301    Stopping, standing or parking outside of business
or residence district  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/11-1301.3   Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for
persons with disabilities (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/11-1303    Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in
specified places  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/11-1304    Additional parking regulations  (Ord. 4494,
7-20-09)



      5/11-1401   Unattended motor vehicles



      5/11-1404    Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles,
motor driven cycles or motorized pedalcycles  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/11-1405    Required equipment on motorcycles (Ord. 4494,
7-20-09)



      5/11-1406   Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanisms



      5/11-1407   Opening and closing vehicle doors



      5/11-1410   Coasting prohibited



      5/11-1411   Following fire apparatus prohibited



      5/11-1413   Putting glass, etc., on highway prohibited



      5/11-1416   Obstructing persons in highways



      5/11-1417   Travel regulated



      5/11-1418   Farm tractor operation regulated



      5/11-1419.01   Failure to display Motor Fuel Tax
Identification card



      5/11-1420   Funeral processions



      5/11-1421   Conditions for operation



      5/11-1423   Passengers boarding or exiting a school bus



      5/11-1425   Stop when traffic obstructed



      5/11-1503    Riding on bicycles (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/11-1504    Clinging to vehicles (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/11-1507    Lamps and other equipment on bicycles (Ord. 4494,
7-20-09)



      5/11-1512    Bicycles on sidewalks (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



   Equipment



      5/12-101   Scope and effect of equipment requirements



      5/12-201   When lighted lamps are required (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-202   Clearance, identification and side marker lamps



      5/12-203   Lamps on parked vehicles



      5/12-204   Lamp or flag on projecting load



      5/12-205   Lamps on other vehicles and equipment



      5/12-205   1 Implements of husbandry or slow-moving vehicles -
Display of amber signal lamp



      5/12-207   Spot lamps and auxiliary driving lamps



      5/12-208   Signal lamps and signal devices



      5/12-209   Additional lighting equipment



      5/12-210   Use of head lamps



      5/12-211   Number of driving lamps required or permitted



      5/12-212   Special restrictions on lamps



      5/12-214   Special lighting equipment on rural mail delivery
vehicles



      5/12-215   Oscillating, rotating or flashing lights on motor
vehicles



      5/12-301   Brakes



      5/12-401   Restriction as to tire equipment



      5/12-402   Sale or offer of sale of first division motor
vehicle



      5/12-403   Sale or offer of sale of second division motor
vehicle tires with other than original grooves



      5/12-404   Sale or offer of sale of any regrooved motor
vehicle tires with marking



      5/12-405   Operating Condition of Pneumatic Tires  (Ord.
4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-500   Definitions



      5/12-501   Windshields and safety glazing material in motor
vehicles  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-502   Mirrors



      5/12-503   Windshields must be unobstructed and equipped with
wipers



      5/12-600   Definitions



      5/12-601   Horns and warning devices



      5/12-602   Mufflers, prevention of noise



      5/12-602.1   Excessive engine braking noise  (Ord. 4494,
7-20-09)



      5/12-603   Seat safety belts



      5/12-603.1   Driver and passenger required to use safety
belts, exceptions and penalty (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-604   Television receivers



      5/12-604.1   Video devices (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-605.1   Buses and 2-way radios



      5/12-606   Tow trucks, identification - equipment - insurance



      5/12-607   Suspension system



      5/12-607.1   Frame and floor height (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-608   Bumpers



      5/12-610   Headset receivers



      5/12-610.1   Wireless Telephones (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-610.2   Electronic communication devices (Ord. 4785,
2-4-13)



      5/12-610.5   Registration plate covers (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-611   Sound amplification systems (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/12-701   Tractors, traction engines and motor trucks
Operation on highways - Turning on highways during farming operations -
Violations



      5/12-702   Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning
devices



      5/12-703   Road oil vehicles - dripping on certain highways
forbidden



      5/12-704   Vehicles transporting explosives



      5/12-704.1   Vehicles transporting radioactive material



      5/12-705   Vehicles transporting flammable liquids when lights
required - Marked with reflectorized paint -  Placarding



      5/12-706   Fire apparatus - safety belts



      5/12-707   Vehicle passenger capacity



      5/12-708   Operator protective frames on tractor-mower
combinations 5/12-709 Slow-moving vehicle emblem



      5/12-710   Rear fender splash guards



   Inspections of Vehicles  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/13-111   Operation without certificate of safety attached;
Effective date of Certification (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



   Size, Weights, Loads and Permits



      5/15-102    Width of vehicles  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/15-103    Height of vehicles  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/15-105   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles



      5/15-106   Protruding members of vehicles



      5/15-107    Length of vehicles  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/15-108    Planking edge of a pavement  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/15-109    Spilling loads on highways prohibited  (Ord.
4494, 7-20-09)



      5/15-109.1    Covers or tarpaulins required for certain
loads  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      5/15-110    Towed vehicles  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



   Child Passenger Protection  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      25/4    Transporting child under age of 8; Restraint system 
(Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      25/4a    Children 8 years of age or older but under age of 16;
Restraint system  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      25/4b    Children 8 years of age or older but under the age of
19; Seat belts  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



   Snowmobile Registration and Safety  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      40/3-1    Operation of unnumbered snowmobiles  (Ord. 4494,
7-20-09)



      40/4-1    Snowmobile equipment  (Ord. 4494, 7-20-09)



      40/5-2   Snowmobile operation of highways  (Ord. 4494,
7-20-09)



9-14-2:  INTERPRETATION:



   Phrases or references in the adopted portions of the Illinois Vehicle
Code such as "within this State" or similar language of equal import shall be
interpreted and construed for purposes of this Chapter as meaning within or
upon the streets and highways of the Village or any extensions thereof
including public and semipublic areas upon which vehicle traffic moves.



9-14-3:  CITATIONS:



   Every numbered section or part thereof herein adopted shall be referred
to by the Ordinance number and number of said section. All citations so
issued shall be issued in the name of the Village and referred to in the
uniform traffic ticket, complaint, or notice to appear ("P" ticket), as an
ordinance violation.



9-14-4:  ADMINISTRATIVE SETTLEMENT:



   Administrative Settlement:



   (i)   Any person accused of violating any of the following sections
adopted and made a part of this Chapter;



   Section 5/11-1406 (obstruction to drivers view or control),



   Section 5/11-1407 (improper opening of door into traffic),



   Section 5/11-1410 (coasting on downgrade),



   Section 5/11-1411 (following fire apparatus),



   Section 5/11-1419.01 (Motor Fuel Tax I.D. Card),



   Section 5/12-101 (driving vehicle which is in unsafe condition or
improperly equipped),



   Section 5/12-201(a) (daytime lights on motorcycles),



   Section 5/12-202 (clearance, identification and side marker lamps),



   Section 5/12-204 (ramp or flag on projecting load),



   Section 5/12-205 (failure to display the safety lights required),



   Section 5/12-401 (restrictions as to tire equipment),



   Section 5/12-502 (mirrors),



   Section 5/12-503 (windshields must be unobstructed and equipped with
wipers),



   Section 5/12-601 (horns and warning devices),



   Section 5/12-602 (mufflers, prevention of noise or smoke),



   Section 5/12-603 (seat safety belts),



   Section 5/12-702 (certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning
devices),



   Section 5/12-710 (splash guards and replacements),



or



   (ii)   Any person accused of violating Chapter 1 of this Title 9,
which requires the display of the Village vehicle sticker



   May settle and compromise the claim by paying the Village the fine
according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense under
9-15-9-1 with the exception of  Section 5/12-603 (seat safety belts), the
fine amount should be consistent with fine schedule for  9-3-5-N.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-14-5:  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:



   (i)   The officer on observing and stopping a vehicle that is in
violation of an offense listed above in the Administrative Settlement Section
(9-14-4) may in lieu of an arrest, issue the driver a minor ordinance
violation notice to appear ("P" ticket), and attach an explanation sheet.



   (ii)   The driver has ten (10) days to appear at the police station,
show proof of compliance and pay the twenty dollars ($20.00) administrative
fee.  If the driver requests a court date, one shall be selected and set out
on the "P" ticket.  The case shall be transferred to the Clerk of the
Circuit Court for placement on the court docket on the date specified on said
ticket.



   (iii)   If the driver fails to appear within the ten (10) days, the
final notice copy of the "P" ticket shall be sent with a letter requesting
disposition within the next ten (10) days by showing compliance and payment
of forty dollars ($40.00).



   (iv)   If the driver does not pay within ten (10) days of receipt of
the "final notice copy", the "P" ticket shall be transferred to the Clerk of
the Circuit Court for placement on the court docket on the date specified on
the said ticket.



9-14-6:  PENALTY:



   Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Chapter, shall upon conviction be fined according to the
fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense. 



(Ord. 2138, 7-22-91; Amd. Ord. 5103, 6-6-16; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR STANDING, PARKING AND COMPLIANCE
VIOLATIONS



SECTION:



9-15-1:   Purpose



9-15-2:   Administrative Composition



9-15-2-1:   Traffic Compliance Administrator



9-15-2-2:   Hearing Officer



9-15-2-3:   System Coordinator/Computer Operator



9-15-2-4:   Hearing Room Personnel



9-15-2-5:   Appointments



9-15-2-6:   Compensation



9-15-3:   Procedure



9-15-3-1:   Violation Notice



9-15-3-2:   Authorization



9-15-3-3:   Detection of Violations



9-15-3-4:   Contents of Notice



9-15-3-5:   Service



9-15-3-6:   Certification



9-15-3-7:   Retention



9-15-3-8:   Prime Facia Evidence of Correctness



9-15-3-9:   Admissibility



9-15-4:   Administrative Hearings



9-15-4-1:   Regulations



9-15-4-2:   Representation By Attorney



9-15-4-3:   Review



9-15-5:   Additional Notices



9-15-5-1:   To the Registered Owner or Lessee



9-15-5-2:   To the Lessee



9-15-5-3:   First Class Mail



9-15-5-4:   Service



9-15-5-5:   Sequence and Contents



9-15-6:   Final Determination Of Liability



9-15-7:   Administrative Review



9-15-7-1:   Petition



9-15-7-2:   Action



9-15-7-3:   Grounds for Setting Aside



9-15-7-4:   Notification



9-15-8:   Non-Resident Procedures



9-15-8-1:   Completing



9-15-8-2:   Signing



9-15-8-3:   Filing



9-15-8-4:   Filing a notarized statement of facts



9-15-8-5:   The Hearing Officer



9-15-8-6:   Notice



9-15-8-7:   Service



9-15-8-8:   Other provisions



9-15-9:   Schedule of Fines/Penalties



9-15-9-1:   Schedule



9-15-9-2:   Uniformly applied



9-15-9-3:   Adoption by reference



9-15-10:   Certified Report and Contesting Certified Report



9-15-11:   Immobilization/Towing & Impoundment



9-15-11-1:   Motor vehicles may be immobilized/towed and impounded



9-15-11-2:   Right to Prompt Hearing



9-15-11-3:   Release of Vehicle



9-15-11-4:   Towing Companies



9-15-12:   Judicial Review



9-15-13:   Debt To Municipality



9-15-14:   Judgment



9-15-14-1:   Obtaining



9-15-14-2:   Service of Summons



9-15-1:  PURPOSE:



   The stated purpose of this Chapter is to provide a fair and efficient
enforcement of Municipal vehicular standing, parking, and condition of
vehicle regulation violation(s) and other Municipal regulation violation(s)
as may be allowed by law, through an administrative adjudication of
violation(s) of Municipal Ordinances regulating the standing, parking, and
condition of vehicles within the geographic boundaries of this Municipality
and a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and authority and procedures
for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.



   For purposes of this Chapter "compliance violation" means a violation
of a municipal regulation governing the condition or use of equipment on a
vehicle or governing the display of a municipal wheel tax license.



9-15-2:  ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:



   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall provide for a Traffic
Compliance Administrator, Hearing Officer, Computer Operator/System
Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel (Deputy), with the power, authority
and limitations as are hereinafter set forth:



9-15-2-1:  TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR:



   Shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:



   A)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s).



   B)   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this Ordinance
or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance.



   C)   Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.



   D)   Conduct Hearings, as a Hearing Officer with the same power and
authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the appointed
Hearing Officer.



   E)   Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking,
and compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s)
verifying that the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation(s) liability was issued in accordance with this
Ordinance and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.



   F)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation
of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, hereinafter set forth, and those of Chapter 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.



   G)   Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking,
and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice of
impending impoundment or validity of notice of impending drivers license
suspension, in an administrative review capacity in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance, hereinafter set forth.



   H)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate
and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.



   I)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing Complaints in the
Circuit Court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of this Municipality in filing Complaints seeking Judgments for unpaid
fines or penalties and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by
current law.



   J)   To select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and
impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
hereinafter set forth.



9-15-2-2:  HEARING OFFICER:



   Shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:



   A)   Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein,
as the adjudicator.



   B)   Administer oaths.



   C)   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant papers or documentation.



   D)   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) as are established
in Section 9 hereof.



   E)   Make final determination of:



      1)   Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.



      2)   Validity of notice of impending impoundment.



      3)   Validity of notice of impending drivers license
suspension in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, hereinafter
set forth.



   F)   Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative
adjudication hearing(s).



9-15-2-3:  SYSTEM COORDINATOR/COMPUTER OPERATOR:



   Is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer
program(s) for the administrative adjudication system hereby created, on a
day to day basis, including but not limited to:



   A)   Input of violation notice information.



   B)   Hearing date(s) and notice dates.



   C)   Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).



   D)   Issue payment receipts.



   E)   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination
of liability, notice of impending impoundment, and notice of impending
drivers license suspension, as directed by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.



   F)   Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.



9-15-2-4:  HEARING ROOM PERSONNEL:



   Are hereby authorized and directed to:



   A)   Maintain hearing room decorum.



   B)   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies
of the Circuit Court.



   C)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required
and as directed by the Hearing Officer or Traffic Compliance Administrator.



   D)   This position is limited to off-duty, full-time, part-time or
auxiliary police officers.



9-15-2-5:  APPOINTMENTS:



   The Village President is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold
the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.



9-15-2-6:  COMPENSATION:



   To be paid for each of the above stated positions shall be as
determined by the Village President and approved by the Board of Trustees.



9-15-3:  PROCEDURE:



   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in accordance with
the following procedures and final determination(s) of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability.  Validity of
notice of impending impoundment, validity of notice of impending drivers
license suspension, impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only
in accordance with the provisions set forth below:



9-15-3-1:  VIOLATION NOTICE:



   Vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s)
notice(s) ("violation notice"(s)) shall be issued by the person(s) authorized
herein and shall contain information and shall be served, certified and have
evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.



9-15-3-2:  AUTHORIZATION:



   All full-time, part-time, auxiliary police and community service
officers, as well as other specifically appointed individuals, shall have the
authority to issue violation(s) notices.



9-15-3-3:  DETECTION OF VIOLATIONS:



   Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation(s) notices and who
detects a violation of any section of any applicable Municipal Ordinance,
shall issue a notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as
is hereinafter set forth.



9-15-3-4:  CONTENTS OF NOTICE:



   The vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation: "Violation
Notice" shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:



   A)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).



   B)   The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violated.



   C)   Vehicle make and state registration number.



   D)   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.



   E)   The signature and identification number of the person issuing
the notice.



   F)   A section entitled "Request for Hearing"  which shall clearly
set forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:



      1)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and
clearly identified "Request for Hearing"



      2)   Placing his/her name and current address in the place
provided.



      3)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.



      4)   Filing the violation notice with the "Request for
Hearing" portion fully completed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator,
postmarked within 10 days of the violation notice issuance.  The request
shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



   G)   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which
the violation may be contested on its merits.



   H)   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.



   I)   A section entitled, "Non-Resident Request for Hearing -
Non-Appearance", which clearly sets forth that a non-resident registered
owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest
the validity of the violation notice without personally appearing by:



      1)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and
clearly identified, "Non-Resident Request for Hearing - Non-appearance".



      2)   Placing his/her name and current address in the place
provided.



      3)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.



      4)   Filing the violation notice with the "Non-Resident
Request for Hearing" portion fully completed, with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, postmarked within 10 days of the violation notice issuance. 
The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator.



      5)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the
grounds for challenging the violation notice, which must be filed with the
Traffic Compliance Administrator, postmarked within 10 days of the violation
notice issuance.  The request shall be deemed filed, if postmarked by the
due dates herein specified.



      6)   A clearly marked statement that execution of the
Non-Resident Request for Hearing is waiver of the non-resident's right to a
personal appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the
notarized statement of facts submitted by the non-resident and the facts
contained in the violation(s) notice(s).



9-15-3-5:  SERVICE:



   Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the person
issuing such notice by:



   A)   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, or



   B)   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee
of the vehicle, if present.



9-15-3-6:  CERTIFICATION:



   The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s):



   Shall be certified by the person issuing said notice(s) by:



   A)   Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service, or



   B)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by
signing a single certificate, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while under his/her control.



9-15-3-7:  RETENTION:



   The original or a facsimile of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be
retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.



9-15-3-8:  PRIME FACIA EVIDENCE OF CORRECTNESS:



   Any violation(s) notice(s) issued, signed and served in accordance
herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facia correct and shall be
prima facia evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.



9-15-3-9:  ADMISSIBILITY:



   The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) shall be admissible in any
subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.



9-15-4:  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:



   An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits;



9-15-4-1:  REGULATIONS:



   Shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the "cited
vehicle", pursuant to Chapter 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the "cited
vehicle", pursuant to Chapter 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by
reference.



   Shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in the violation
notice issued and served, or such additional notices issued in accordance
with this Ordinance.  Violators shall be given no less than three (3)
opportunities to appear and failure to appear by the third (3rd) scheduled
hearing date will result in a "Final Determination of Liability" as
hereinafter set forth.



   Shall be Tape recorded.



   Shall culminate in a determination of liability or non-liability, made
by the Hearing Officer, who shall consider testimony and other evidence
without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence.  The
Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and
penalties in accordance with Section 9 hereof.



9-15-4-2:  REPRESENTATION BY ATTORNEY:



   Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing, parking, or
compliance violation on it's merits may be represented by counsel at their
own expense.



9-15-4-3:  REVIEW:



   The final determination of any matter which may be decided by the
Hearing Officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth.



9-15-5:  ADDITIONAL NOTICES:



   Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" 
to appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), or upon final
determination of violation liability, the Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which: 



9-15-5-1:  TO THE REGISTERED OWNER OR LESSEE:



   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle"
at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State.



9-15-5-2:  TO THE LESSEE:



   Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last
known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease.



9-15-5-3:  FIRST CLASS MAIL:



   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.



9-15-5-4:  SERVICE:



   Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.



9-15-5-5:  SEQUENCE AND CONTENTS: 



   The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:



   A)   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the
"cited vehicle" to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), additional
notice(s) shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be
limited to the following information:



      1)   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s).



      2)   Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violated.



      3)   Vehicle make and state registration.



      4)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late
payment.



      5)   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current
status, other than paid in full.



      6)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at
which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.



      7)   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any
applicable penalty or appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability for the
"cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.



      8)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance violation(s)
liability, or the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine
or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the Municipality.



   B)   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be sent following an
appearance by the violator and a determination of liability, or  the failure
to appear by the violate or by the third (3rd) and final hearing date upon
conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter
set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not  be limited to, the
following information and warnings:



      1)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed
is a debt due and owing the Municipality.



      2)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty
due and owing the Municipality within the time specified may result in the
Municipality's filing a Complaint in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid
fine or penalty rendered a Judgment in accordance with Chapter 625 ILCS
5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference.



      3)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and
located within the Municipality may be impounded for failure to pay fines or
penalties for three (3) or more vehicular standing, parking, compliance or
automated traffic law (also known as red light) regulation violations. 
(Ord. 4657, 7-5-11)



      4)   A warning that the person's drivers license may be
suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more
vehicular standing or parking violations under Chapter 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5,
incorporated herein by reference.



   C)   A notice of impending suspension of a person's drivers license
shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any
fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular
standing or parking regulation violations:



      1)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine
or penalty owing within forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice will
result in the Municipality's notifying the Secretary of State that the person
is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under Chapter 625 ILCS
5/6-306.5 incorporated herein by reference.



      2)   The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall
be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with
the Secretary of State.



9-15-6:  FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:



   A)   A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall occur following the
failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the Hearing Officer's
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any
administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth, or



   B)   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the
third (3rd) and final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged
violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior
served or mailed notice, the Hearing Officer's determination of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall
become final:



      1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination, or



      2)   Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition
without a filing having been made.



9-15-7:  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:



   A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) liability may be filed by a person
owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions
and grounds hereinafter set forth:



9-15-7-1:  PETITION:



   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not
latter than fourteen (14) days from the date the determination of liability
is made.



9-15-7-2:  ACTION:



   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall act upon the petition(s)
timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14) days of the
date filed.



9-15-7-3:  GROUNDS FOR SETTING ASIDE:



   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:



   A)   The person against whom the determination of liability is made
was not the owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) were
issued.



   B)   The person's having paid the fine or penalty prior to the
determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.



   C)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing.



9-15-7-4:  NOTIFICATION: 



   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall:



   A)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be,
that the determination of liability has been set aside.



   B)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of
a date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.



   C)   Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and
the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid
to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of
liability. 



   D)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the
notice(s) are deposited in the United States mail.



9-15-8:  NON-RESIDENT PROCEDURES:



   Non-residents of this Municipality who have been served vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in
accordance with this Ordinance, may contest the alleged violation on its
merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally
appearing at an administrative hearing by:



9-15-8-1:  COMPLETING: 



   Completing, in full, the "Non-Resident Request for Hearing" section of
the violation notice, served upon him/her pursuant to this Ordinance.



9-15-8-2:  SIGNING:



   Signing the Non-Resident Request for Hearing in the space specified in
the violation notice, and acknowledging that his/her personal appearance is
waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement
filed by him/her and the facts contained in the violation notice.



9-15-8-3:  FILING:



   Filing the violation notice with the "Non-Resident Request for Hearing"
section fully completed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked
within 10 days of the violation notice issuance.  The request shall be
deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



9-15-8-4:  FILING A NOTARIZED STATEMENT OF FACTS:



   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice, which must be filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator postmarked within 10 days of the violation notice
issuance.  The statement shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator.  The acceptance of a "Non-Resident Request for
Hearing" a notarized statement of facts after the due date shall be at the
discretion of the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



9-15-8-5:  THE HEARING OFFICER: 



   The Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set
forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the non-resident and those
contained in the violation notice.



9-15-8-6:  NOTICE:



   Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer shall be served upon
the non-resident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
non-resident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.



9-15-8-7:  SERVICE:



   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.



9-15-8-8:  OTHER PROVISIONS:



   All other provisions of this Ordinance shall apply equally to
non-residents of this Municipality.



9-15-9:  SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES:



9-15-9-1:  SCHEDULE:



   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for violation of
vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulations shall be according to
the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense of which such person
shall be convicted.



   Note that for a second offense of violation of 9-7-7-8(b), the
Secretary of State is to be notified.  The Secretary of State may revoke or
suspend driving privileges for a second offense and may revoke or suspend the
disability license plate or placard for a third or subsequent offense.



(Ord. 3742, 4-7-03; Amd. Ord. 4139, 6-5-06; Amd. Ord. 4190, 10-2-06; Ord.
4496, 7-20-09; Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



 

FINE AND PENALTY PAYMENT SCHEDULE A


 
 
SCHEDULE
 
GENERAL VIOLATION AMOUNT
 
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE


Step 1
 
Upon service of a ‘Violation Notice' issued and paid prior to the
commencement of the 1st Hearing Date, or on the 1st Hearing Date, the fine
will be:
 
$ 60.00   
 
$ 60.00   


Step 2
 
If the fine is not paid by or at the first Hearing Date, but before the
commencement of the 2nd Hearing Date, the fine amount will be
 
$100.00
 
$100.00


Step 3
 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 2 prior to the
commencement of the 2nd Hearing Date, the amount due if paid on the by or on
the 2nd Hearing Date, the fine amount will be:
 
$150.00
 
$150.00


Step 4
 
If the fine is not paid by or at the 2nd Hearing Date but before the
commencement of the 3rd Hearing Date, the fine amount due will be:
 
$200.00
 
$200.00


Step 5
 
Having failed to pay the fine amount and penalty specified in Step 4 prior to
the commencement of the 3rd Hearing Date, the amount due, if paid on the 3rd
Hearing Date or upon the finding of liability for the violation, after
failure to appear at the 3rd Hearing, the fine amount will be:
 
$250.00
 
$250.00



 



(Ord. 4607, 12-20-10)



 

HANDICAPPED PARKING FINE AND PENALTY PAYMENT SCHEDULE B


 
 
SCHEDULE
 
VIOLATION OF 9-7-7-8(a) USE OF HANDICAPPED SPACE WITHOUT LICENSE OR PLACARD
 
VIOLATION OF 9-7-7-8(b)
USE OF HANDICAPPED LICENSE OR PLACARD TO EXERCISE PRIVILEGES WITHOUT
AUTHORIZED USER




Step 1
 
Upon service of a "Violation Notice" issued and paid prior to the
commencement of the 1st Hearing Date, on the 1st Hearing Date, or prior to
the 2nd Hearing Date, the fine amount due will be:
 
$350.00
 
1st offense
 
$500.00


 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd offense*
 
$750.00


 
 
 
 
 
 
3rd offense* or subsequent
 
$1,000.00


Step 2
 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 1 prior to the
commencement of the 2nd Hearing Date, the amount due if paid on the 2nd
Hearing Date or prior to the 3rd Hearing Date will be:
 
$350.00
 
1st offense
 
$  550.00


 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd offense*
 
$  800.00


 
 
 
 
 
 
3rd offense*  or subsequent
 
$1,050.00


Step 3
 
Having failed to pay the fine amount and penalty specified in Step 2 prior to
the commencement of the 3rd Hearing Date, the amount due, if paid on the 3rd
Hearing Date or upon the finding of Liability for the violation, after
failure to appear at the 3rd Hearing, will be:
 
$350.00
 
1st offense
 
$  600.00


 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd offense*
 
$  850.00


 
 
 
 
 
 
3rd offense* or subsequent
 
$1,100.00




 



*note that for a second offense of violation of 9-7-7-8(b), the Secretary of
State is to be notified.  The Secretary of State may revoke or suspend
driving privileges for a second offense and may revoke or suspend the
disability license plate or placard for a third or subsequent offense.



(Amd. Ord. 5288, 4-16-18)



9-15-9-2:  UNIFORMLY APPLIED:



   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied for
each violation of any applicable Municipal Ordinance.



9-15-9-3:  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:



   The Municipality adopts by reference all current and future local
standing, parking or condition of vehicle ordinances, and those provisions of
the Illinois Complied Statues governing the standing, parking or condition of
vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the geographical
boundaries of the Municipality and in those areas subject to off-street
parking agreements.



9-15-10:  CERTIFIED REPORT AND CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT



   A)   Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing
the Village after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth
herein for ten (10) or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall make a Certified Report to the
Secretary of State stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed
to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the Village as a result of ten (10)
or more violations of Municipal vehicular standing or parking regulations and
thereby cause the suspension of that person's driver's license.



   B)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall take no further
action unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the Village are
paid or upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name of the
Certified Report was in error.  At such time, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall submit to the Secretary of State a notification which
shall result in the halting of a driver's license suspension proceeding. 
The person named therein shall receive a certified copy of such notification
upon request and at no charge.



   C)   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the Certified Report by
completing a form provided by the Office of the Traffic Compliance
Administrator.  The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge
is based.  Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:



      1)   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the
vehicle(s) receiving ten (10) or more violation notices on the date or dates
such notices were issued; or



      2)   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten
(10) or more violations indicated on the Certified Report.



   D)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall render a
determination within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the objection
form and shall notify the objector of the determination.



9-15-11:  IMMOBILIZATION/TOWING & IMPOUNDMENT:



9-15-11-1:  MOTOR VEHICLES MAY BE IMMOBILIZED/TOWED AND IMPOUNDED:



Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable for
three (3) or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation or
automated traffic law (also known as red light) violation(s), for which the
fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and
impounded if:



   A)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator has determined that a
person has been determined to be liable for three (3) or more vehicular
standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic law (also known
as red light) violation(s), the fines or penalties for which remain unpaid.



   B)   A Pre-Towing Notice has been sent to the registered owner of
the motor vehicle which contains, but shall not be limited to the following:



         1)   A final determination has been made of three (3) or
more vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic
law (also known as red light) violation(s), the fines and penalties for which
remain unpaid.



         2)   A listing of the violations for which the
registered owner has been determined to be liable, which shall include for
each violation:



            a)   The vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation or automated traffic law (also known as red light)
violation notice number.



            b)   Date of issuance.



            c)   Total amount of fine(s) and penalty(s)
assessed.



         3)   The motor vehicle(s) owned by the registered owner
is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and
penalties are not paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice,
and the vehicle is located within the geographical boundaries of the
Municipality.



         4)   The registered owner may contest the validity of
the notice by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of
the notice and by filing the request for hearing with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days of the date of
the notice. The request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator.



   C)   If the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to
make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and no
timely request for hearing has been filed with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator to contest the validity of the notice, then the motor
vehicle(s) may be immobilized, towed and/or impounded.



   D)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the
validity of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment,
the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing
where the registered owner may contest the validity of said notice by
disproving liability for the unpaid Final Determinations of parking,
standing, or compliance or automated traffic law (also known as red light)
violation liability listed on the Notice, on the next available hearing date,
but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than sixty (60) days
after the request for hearing is filed.



         1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall send
notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.



         2)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.



         3)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date
it is placed in the United States mail.



(Ord. 4727, 5-7-12)



9-15-11-2:  RIGHT TO PROMPT HEARING:



   The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and impounded
under this section, shall have the right to a prompt administrative hearing
without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties for
which final determination has been made.



   A)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve a post-towing
notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section which notice shall contain, but not be limited
to the following information:



      1)   Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.



      2)   Location of vehicle.



      3)   That the vehicle was immobilized under this section of
this Ordinance for non-payment of fines or penalties assessed for the
violation of three (3) or more violation(s) of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance or automated traffic law (also known as red light)
regulation(s) for which the registered owner has been determined liable and
notified of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.



      4)   Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment.



      5)   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the
request for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing
with the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not later than,
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice which shall be deemed field upon
receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



      6)   That if the vehicle is not claimed within 30 days from
the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4-   208, the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   B)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the
validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest
the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next
available hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be
scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.



      1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice
of the hearing date upon the registered owner.



      2)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid
to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.



      3)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is
placed in the United States mail.



   C)   An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of
the immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative
decision within the meaning of 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq., incorporated herein
by reference.



(Ord. 4657, 7-5-11)



9-15-11-3:  RELEASE OF VEHICLE; MOVING VEHICLES:



   A)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released
to the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of the fines and
penalties due and owing the Municipality as specified in the notice sent in
accordance with section 11-1(c) hereof and the payment of towing charges and
accrued daily impound charges or upon order of the hearing officer following
hearing contesting the validity of the impoundment. 



   B)   It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained
by an immobilization device without the approval of the Traffic Compliance
Administrator or his or her designee. The registered owner of the immobilized
vehicle and any person who relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of
this division shall each be subject to a penalty of $750 for the violation.



(Ord. 4657, 7-5-11)



9-15-11-4:  TOWING COMPANIES:



   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall appoint or retain the
services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in
accordance herewith, provided:



   A)   The individual, agency or company if fully licensed according
to local and state law.



   B)   The individual, agency or company is fully insured.



   C)   The individual, agency or company has available a secured
impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the
purpose of this Section a secured area shall mean an area bounded by a fence,
chain link or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as
to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.



(Ord. 4657, 7-5-11)



9-15-12:  JUDICIAL REVIEW:



   Judicial Review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) and final administrative decisions
issued after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and
impoundment made under this section shall be subject to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Law as is set forth in 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.
incorporated herein by reference.



9-15-13:  DEBT TO MUNICIPALITY:



   Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter or assessed in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 10 of Title 6 (Seizure and Impoundment of Motor
Vehicles) of this Code, and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created under this Chapter and
Chapter 10 of Title 6 and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures
shall be a debt due and owing the Municipality and, as such, may be collected
in accordance with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty
resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute
a final disposition of that violation.



   In the event a fine or penalty is assessed pursuant to the provisions
of this Chapter, or assessed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10
of Title 6 of this Code, a default in the payment of such a fine or penalty
or any installment of such fine or penalty may be collected by any means
authorized for the collection of monetary judgments. The Village and the
Village attorney or the Finance Director or their designees may retain
attorneys and private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any
default in payment of any fine or penalty imposed by this Chapter or Chapter
10 of Title 6, or any installment of any fine or penalty. Any fees or costs
incurred by the Village with respect to attorneys or private collection
agents retained by the Village shall be charged to the debtor.



(Amd. Ord. 5050, 12-21-15; Amd. Ord. 5374, 1-21-19)



9-15-14:  JUDGMENT:



9-15-14-1:  OBTAINING:



   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall, following the expiration of
the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for a
final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s), execute all
required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate to obtain a Judgment against and collect moneys from the
person(s) who have been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and
have become a debt due and owing the Municipality in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 by:



   A)   Filing a Complaint in the Circuit Court praying for the entry
of a Judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been made.



   B)   The Complaint filed by the Traffic Compliance Administrator or
individual or agency on behalf of the Municipality seeking entry of a
Judgment against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to
a final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) shall have appended:



      1)   A certified copy of the final determination of the
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s)



      2)   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show
that the final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) was issued in accordance with this Ordinance and 625 ILCS
5/11-208.3.



   C)   Nothing shall prevent the Municipality from consolidating
multiple final determinations of standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability in an action in the Circuit Court against an
individual.



   D)   Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect
money Judgments.



9-15-14-2:  SERVICE OF SUMMONS:



   Service of Summons and a copy of the Complaint may be served upon the
person against whom a Judgment is sought under the provisions of this
Ordinance by any method provided under 735 ILCS 5/2-203, incorporated by
reference, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided the total
amount of fines and penalties for final determination of standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed $2,500.00.  (Ord. 2723
4-5-95)



CHAPTER 16
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION



SECTION:



9-16-1:   Authorization



9-16-2:   Definitions



9-16-3:   System Established



9-16-4:   Office of Administrator Established



9-16-5:   Determination Required



9-16-6:   Violation Notice



9-16-7:   Opportunity for Hearing



9-16-8:   Final Determination



9-16-9:   Determination Notice



9-16-10:   Petition to Set Aside



9-16-11:   Suspension Notice



9-16-12:   Challenge to Certified Report



9-16-13:   Non-resident of Village



9-16-14:   Penalty



9-16-1:  AUTHORIZATION:



   Establishing automated traffic law enforcement systems at specified
intersections in the Village of Orland Park at which traffic is controlled by
signals exhibiting different colored lights or color lighted arrows will
benefit the public health, safety and welfare by deterring drivers from
entering those intersections in violation of red light signals, thereby
decreasing the potential for personal injury and property damage due to
vehicle collisions caused by red light violations; and



   The Village is authorized to enter into agreements, with Gatso USA,
Inc. for the design and implementation of System(s) of automated traffic law
enforcement and for services related to the  System(s). The Village
President is hereby authorized and directed to execute the Agreements, once
finalized, thereby binding the Village to their terms. The Village Clerk is
authorized and directed to attest to the Village President's signature, as
necessary.



(Amd. Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



9-16-2:  DEFINITIONS:



   As used in this Ordinance, words or terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning
is intended:



   (a)    ADMINISTRATOR means the Village's Traffic Control
Administrator.



   (b)    AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION means a violation described
in Section 11-208.6 of the Code.



   (c)    AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM means a device with
one (1) or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light
signal to produce Recorded Images of motor vehicles entering an intersection
against a red light signal in violation of Section 11-306 of the Code or a
similar provision of a Village ordinance.



   (d)   CERTIFIED REPORT means a report concerning five (5) or more
unpaid fines or penalties for Automated Traffic Law Violations made by the
Village to the Secretary in accordance with Section 6-306.5 of the Code.



   (e)   VILLAGE means the Village of Orland Park, Cook and Will
Counties, Illinois. 



   (f)    CODE means the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100, et
seq.



   (g)   DETERMINATION NOTICE means a notice of final determination of
Automated Traffic Law Violation liability issued pursuant to Section 11-208.3
of the Code and pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.



   (h)   RECORDED IMAGES means images showing the time, date and
location of an Automated Traffic Law Violation recorded by an Automated
Traffic Law Enforcement System on: (i) two (2) or more photographs, (ii) two
(2) or more microphotographs, (iii) two (2) or more electronic images or (iv)
a video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one (1) image or
portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number
of the motor vehicle.



   (i)   SECRETARY means the Illinois Secretary of State.



   (j)   SUSPENSION NOTICE means a notice of impending driver's license
suspension issued pursuant to Section 11-208.3 of the Code and pursuant to
the provisions of this Ordinance.



   (k)   SYSTEM means, individually, an Automated Traffic Law
Enforcement System or, collectively, Automated Traffic Law Enforcement
Systems established in the Village pursuant to Ordinance 4351 and this chaper.



   (l)   VIOLATION NOTICE means an Automated Traffic Law Violation
notice issued pursuant to Sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the Code and
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.



9-16-3:  SYSTEMS ESTABLISHED:



   The Village hereby establishes Systems at all intersections within the
corporate limits that are regulated by authorized traffic control signals, on
a schedule devised by Village staff.



9-16-4:  OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATOR ESTABLISHED:



   There is hereby established the office of Administrator, which shall be
filled by appointment of the Village President.  The Administrator or his
designee shall be authorized to adopt, distribute and process Violation
Notices and other notices required by Section 11-208.3 of the Code, collect
money paid as fines and penalties for Automated Traffic Law Violations and
operate an administrative adjudication system for Automated Traffic Law
Violations.  The Administrator is also authorized to make a Certified Report
to the Secretary pursuant to Section 6-306.5 of the Code, and any such
Certified Report shall contain the information required under Section
6-306.5(c) of the Code.



9-16-5:  DETERMINATION REQUIRED:



   Before a citation may be issued for any Automated Traffic Law
Violation, a determination must be made by a technician employed or
contracted by the Village that, based on inspection of Recorded Images
generated by the System, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of
Section 11-208.6 of the Code or an ordinance of the Village.  If the
technician determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a
funeral procession or in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency
vehicle, a citation shall not be issued.



9-16-6:  VIOLATION NOTICE:



   A Violation Notice, shall be served by mail to the address of the
registered owner of a vehicle cited for an Automated Traffic Law Violation as
recorded with the Secretary within thirty (30) days after the Secretary
notifies the Village of the identity of the owner of the vehicle, but in no
event later than ninety (90) days after the violation.  Service of a
Violation Notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the
United States mail.  The original or a facsimile of a Violation Notice or,
in the case of a Violation Notice produced by a computerized device, a
printed record generated by the device showing the facts entered on the
Violation Notice, shall be retained by the Administrator, and shall be a
record kept in the ordinary course of business.  A Violation Notice issued,
signed and served in accordance with this Ordinance and Section 11-208.3 of
the Code, a copy of the Violation Notice or the computer generated record
shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the Violation Notice.  The Violation
Notice, copy or computer generated record shall be admissible in any
subsequent administrative or legal proceedings.



9-16-7:  OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING:



   The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a Violation Notice shall
have the opportunity for a hearing in which said owner may contest the merits
of the alleged violation.  The lessee of a vehicle cited in a Violation
Notice likewise shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing of the same
kind afforded the registered owner.  The formal or technical rules of
evidence shall not apply at any such hearing.  Such hearings shall be
recorded, and the person conducting the hearing on behalf of the
Administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by
subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
relevant books and papers.  Persons appearing at such a hearing may be
represented by counsel at their own expense. 



9-16-8:  FINAL DETERMINATION:



   A final determination of Automated Traffic Law Violation liability
shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a hearing
officer's determination of violation liability.  Where a person fails to
appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner
specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of
violation liability shall become final: (a) upon denial of a timely petition
to set aside that determination, or (b) upon expiration of the period for
filing such a petition without a filing having been made.



9-16-9:  DETERMINATION NOTICE:



   A Determination Notice, shall be sent following a final determination
of Automated Traffic Law Violation liability and the conclusion of judicial
review procedures taken under Section 11-208.3 of the Code.  A Determination
Notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to
the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with the
Secretary or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to
the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved
database or, under Section 11-1306 of the Code, to the lessee of the cited
vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of the lease or, if any notice to that address is returned as
undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post
Office database.  Service of the Determination Notice shall be deemed
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States Mail.



9-16-10:  PETITION TO SET ASIDE:



   A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for Automated Traffic Law
Violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a final determination of
such liability within ten (10) days after service by the Village of a
Determination Notice.  Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same,
together with any documentation in support thereof, to the Administrator by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the
Administrator.  The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to: (a) the
person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date
the Violation Notice was issued, (b) the person having already paid the fine
or penalty for the violation in question, and (c) excusable failure to appear
at or request a new date for a hearing.  A hearing on such a petition shall
be held within thirty (30) days after the filing of same.  In the event that
such a petition is granted upon a showing of just cause, and the subject
determination of Automated Traffic Law Violation liability is thereby set
aside, the registered owner shall be provided with a hearing on the merits
for that violation.



9-16-11:  SUSPENSION NOTICE:



   A Suspension Notice, shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more unpaid Automated
Traffic Law Violations.  The Suspension Notice shall be sent by first class
United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
Secretary or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to
the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved
database.  Service of a Suspension Notice shall be deemed complete as of the
date of deposit in the United States mail.



9-16-12:  CHALLENGE TO CERTIFIED REPORT:



   If the Administrator provides a Suspension Notice to a vehicle owner
and subsequently makes a Certified Report to the Secretary, the subject
vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the Certified Report in
writing.  To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a
written statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation,
establishing one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the
Certified Report: (1) that the person was not the owner or lessee of the
subject vehicle or vehicles receiving five (5) or more Automated Traffic Law
Violations on the date or dates such Violation Notices were issued, or (2)
that the person already paid the fines or penalties for the five (5) or more
Automated Traffic Law Violations indicated on the Certified Report.  Such
statement and supporting documentation must be sent to the Administrator by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand-delivered to the
Administrator within five (5) days after the person receives notice from the
Secretary that that the person's driver's license will be suspended at the
end of a specified period of time unless the Secretary is presented with a
notice from the Village certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing
have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's name on the Certified
Report was in error.



9-16-13:  NON-RESIDENT OF VILLAGE:



   Non-residents of the Village who receive Violation Notices may contest
the merits of the alleged Automated Traffic Law Violation without attending a
hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any
supporting documentation, to the Administrator via certified mail, return
receipt requested, within ten (10) days after service of the Violation
Notice.  Such a statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of
liability should not be entered.  The Administrator shall rule on such a
statement within ten (10) days after receipt of same, and shall inform the
non-resident of his decision within ten (10) days thereafter. 



9-16-14:  PENALTY:



   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an Automated Traffic
Law Violation received a Uniform Traffic Citation from a police officer at
the time of the violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is subject to a
penalty according to the fine schedule located in Appendix B for each offense
of which such person shall be convicted. 



(Ord. 4351, 4-18-08; Amd. Ord. 5051, 12-21-15; Amd. Ord. 5063, 2-1-16; Amd.
Ord. 5224, 10-2-17)



APPENDIX B: FINE SCHEDULE



 

Title and chapter
 
Ordinances
 
Fine ranges




Title 1 Chapter 4-General Penalty
 
2989/4-1-1
 
Whenever in any section of this Code other than Title 8, Chapter 6,
"Offenses," the doing of any act or the omission to do any act or duty is
declared to be a violation thereof, and there shall be no fine or penalty
declared for such violation, any person convicted of any such violation shall
be fined not less than $75.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each such violation.


Title 4 Chapter 7-Discharges; Storm and Sanitary Sewers
 
2989/4-7-8
 
$250-$1,000


Title 4 Chapter 8-Water and Sewerage System General Provisions
 
2989/4-8-3
 
First offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Third offense*-Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth offense*-Minimum fine $600 and  Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 5 Chapter 1-Building Code
 
5398/5-1-4
 
First offense-$1,500


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$3,000


 
 
 
 
Third offense-$5,000


Title 5 Chapter 1-Building Code*
 
2989/5-1-15-4
 
$500-$1,000 for building or tenant spaces occupied without approval


Title 5 Chapter 1-Building Code*
 
2989/5-1-15-8
 
$250-$1,000


Title 5 Chapter 3-Electrical Code*
 
2989/5-3-9
 
$250-$1,000


Title 5 Chapter 5-Fire Prevention Code*
 
2989/5-5-4
 
$250-$1,000


Title 5 Chapter 5-Mechanical Code*
 
2989/5-6-3
 
$250-$1,000


Title 5 Chapter 7-Property Maintenance Code*
 
2989/1-106.2
 
$250-$1,000


Title 5 Chapter 7-Property Maintenance; Negligent Housing Management
 
2989/5-7-6
 
$500-$1,000


Title 5 Chapter 8-Rental Housing*
 
2989/5-8-1-8-4
 
$250-$1,000


Title 5 Chapter 8-Rental Housing*
 
2989/5-8-3-4-1
 
$250 for each day not in compliance


Title 5 Chapter 8-Rental Housing*
 
2989/5-8-3-4-2
 
First offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third offense-$1,000


Title 6 Chapter 1-Health Code*
 
2989/6-1-1-12
 
$250-$1,000


Title 6 Chapter 2-Nuisances: Dogs
 
2989/6-2-2-2-1 and 4
 
First offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Third offense*-$300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth offense*-$600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth offense*$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 6 Chapter 2 Nuisances (Dangerous, Fierce, Vicious Dogs)*
 
2989/6-2-2-12-8-1
 
First offense-$75-$100


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$100-$500


 
 
 
 
Third offense or greater-not to exceed $2,500 for each violation within one
year of prior violation 60 day suspension or revocation of license/permit and
a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 6 Chapter 2-Nuisances (Complaint; Failure to Obey)*
 
2989/6-2-4-4
 
$75-$1,000


 
 
 
 
Second offense or greater within a period of three years - not to exceed
$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 6 Chapter 7-Disruption of Utility Service
 
2989/6-7-3
 
First offense-$750


 
 
 
 
Second offense*or greater*- $1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 6 Chapter 8-Sanitary Facilities
 
2989/6-8-2
 
$75-$1,000


Title 6 Chapter 9-Emergency Energy Plan
 
2989/6-9-5
 
$2,500-$10,000


Title 7 Chapter 1-Business License Administration
 
2989/7-1-22
 
$75-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 3-Regulations for Specified Businesses
 
2989/7-3-9-10
 
$75-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 3-Regulations for Specified Businesses
 
2989/7-3-10-7
 
$75-$1,000; in addition, the general business license revocation provisions
of the village shall be applicable to teenage cabaret/juice bar licensees


Title 7 Chapter 3-Regulations for Specified Businesses
 
2989/7-3-11-8
 
$72-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 3-Regulations for Specified Businesses
 
2989/7-3-12-8
 
First offense-not to exceed $1,000, Second offense- $1,500


Title 7 Chapter 4-Retail Liquor Establishments (Conduct of Licensee)*
 
2989/7-4-23
 
$250-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 4-Retail Liquor Establishments (Prohibited Sale)
 
2989/7-4-24
 
First offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third offense*-Minimum fine $750 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth offense*-$1,000 and  Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 7 Chapter 4-Parental Responsibility (Underage Possession and
Consumption of Alcohol)
 
2989/7-4-24-1
 
First offense-$100


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Third offense*-Minimum fine $500 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 7 Chapter 5-Solicitors
 
2989/7-5-12
 
First offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Third offense*-Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth offense*-$600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 7 Chapter 6-Amusement Devices
 
2989/7-6-10
 
$75-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 7-Municipal Occupation Taxes
 
2989/7-7-7-10
 
First offense-$75-$300


 
 
 
 
$200.00- $500.00 for the second and each subsequent offense in any 360-day
period, provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines
only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of
the Illinois Civil Practice Act. (735 ILCS 1-101 et seq.).


Title 7 Chapter 10-Trade Practice; Consumer Protection
 
2989/7-10-6
 
$75-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 11-Fair Housing Practices
 
2989/7-11-13
 
$1,000-$5,000


Title 7 Chapter 12 Fraudulent Sales

 
 
2989/7-12-10
 
$500-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 13-Peddlers and Transient Merchants
 
2989/7-13-4
 
$75-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 14-Massage Establishments (Unlawful Acts under 2989 /
7-14-17)*
 
2989/7-14-21
 
$500-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 15-Tobacco Products (in lieu of revocation)
 
2989/7-15-13
 
Village Manager levied fine of at least $500 for each violation


Title 7 Chapter 15-Tobacco Products (Sale)*
 
2989/7-15-15
 
$250-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 15-Tobacco Products (Possession)
 
2989/7-15-16
 
First Offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$150

 


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*- Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-Minimum fine $600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 7 Chapter 16-Raffles*
 
2989/7-16-8
 
$75-$1,000


Title 7 Chapter 17-Pawnbrokers*
 
2989/7-17-3
 
$75-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems
 
2989/8-3-10
 
After six alarms in a calendar year- $100-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems (7-9 False Alarms)
 
2989/8-3-10
 
$100 for each false alarm


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems (10-12 False Alarms)*
 
2989/8-3-10
 
Minimum fine-$250 for each false alarm and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems (13-15 False Alarms)*
 
2989/8-3-10
 
Minimum fine-$500 for each false alarm and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems (16-19 False Alarms)*
 
2989/8-3-10
 
Minimum fine-$750 for each false alarm and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems (20 and above False Alarms)*
 
2989/8-3-10
 
$1,000 for each false alarm and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems
 
2989/8-3-10
 
A false burglar alarm at an open business will be treated as a false
panic/holdup alarm and will be assessed a fine of $75.


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems
 
2989/8-3-10
 
If the response time is greater than 30 minutes, the alarm user will be
assessed a $75 fine.


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems (all other violations)
 
2989/8-3-12-2
 
First Offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing

 


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-Minimum fine $600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing

 


Title 8 Chapter 3-Alarm Systems
 
2989/8-3-12-3
 
Reinstatement  Fee-$75


Title 8 Chapter 4-Animals
 
2989/8-4-21
 
First Offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*- Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-Minimum fine $600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 5-Minors (Curfew)
 
2989/8-5-3-5
 
First Offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second Offense*-Minimum fine $150 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*- Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-Minimum fine $600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Disorderly Conduct*
 
2989/8-6-1-1
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Assault and Battery*
 
2989/8-6-1-2
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Fighting: Immoral Exhibitions*
 
2989/8-6-1-3
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6- Offenses; Disturbing Religious Worship
 
2989/8-6-1-4
 
First Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $750 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Disturbing Schools*
 
2989/8-6-1-5
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses-Misrepresentation of Age
 
2989/8-6-1-6
 
First Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $750 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Reckless Conduct*
 
2989/8-6-1-7
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8, Chapter 6-Offenses; Unauthorized Presence in Schools
 
5331/8-6-1-11
 
$500-$1,000


Title 8, Chapter 6 Minors; Electronic Dissemination of Visual Depictions
(Sexting)
 
2989/8-6-2-3
 
$250-$1,000 and ordered to obtain counseling or other supportive services to
address the acts


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Discharge of Firearms*
 
2989/8-6-4-1
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Discharge of Air Rifles
 
2989/8-6-4-2
 
First Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $750 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Retail Theft
 
2989/8-6-5-17
 
First Offense-$250 if theft is less than $300


 
 
 
 
Second Offense*-Criminal Complaint unless authorized by a supervisor for a
theft less than $300 then minimum fine of $500 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6- Theft of Property (Less than $500)
 
2989/8-6-5-18
 
First Offense-$250 if theft is less than $500


 
 
 
 
Second Offense*-Criminal Complaint unless authorized by a supervisor for a
theft less than $300 then minimum fine of $500 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Drug Paraphernalia (Possession)
 
2989/8-6-7-2-1
 
First Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $750 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Drug Paraphernalia (Sale)*
 
2989/8-6-7-2-2
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Drug Paraphernalia (Sale or Display-Business)*
 
2989/8-6-7-2-3
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Cannabis Possession
 
2989/8-6-9
 
First Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $750 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Fireworks*
 
2989/8-6-10a-11
 
First Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$500


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $750 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Replica Firearms*
 
2989/8-6-11-4
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Marijuana Flavored Candy (Sale)*
 
2989/8-6-12-3
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses; Swimming in Lake Sedgewick
 
2989/8-6-13-6
 
First Offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-Minimum fine $600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 6-Social Hosting
 
5423/8-6-15
 
First Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$500*


 
 
 
 
Third Offense-$1,000*


Title 8 Chapter 6-Offenses;  No Specific Fine Provided or Listed*
 
2989/8-6-99
 
$250-$1,000


Title 8 Chapter 8-Violations Citations- Improper Parking
 
2989/ 8-8-3
 
General Violation Amount Step #1- At or before the Requested First Hearing
Date- $75


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #2- If Paid after the First Hearing Date but
before the Second Hearing Date-$125


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #3- If Paid after the Second Hearing Date but
before the Third Hearing Date-$175


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #4- Paid after the Third Hearing Date but
before the Final Determination Hearing Date-$225


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #5- If the fine is not paid at the Final
Determination Hearing Date, the Debt Collection Stage amount will be-$250. 
If not paid at Debt Collection Stage, the citation will be transferred to the
Collection Agency at $250


Title 8 Chapter 8-Violations Citations- Overtime Parking
 
2989/8-8-3
 
General Violation Amount Step #1- At or before the Requested First Hearing
Date- $75


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #2- If Paid after the First Hearing Date but
before the Second Hearing Date-$125


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #3-If Paid after the Second Hearing Date but
before the Third Hearing Date-$175


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #4- Paid after the Third Hearing Date but
before the Final Determination Hearing Date-$225


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #5- If the fine is not paid at the Final
Determination Hearing Date, the Debt Collection Stage amount will be-$250. 
If not paid at Debt Collection Stage, the citation will be transferred to the
Collection Agency at $250 and additional collection fees will be added.


Title 8 Chapter 8-Violations Citations- No Vehicle Sticker
 
2989/8-8-3
 
General Violation Amount Step #1- At or before the Requested First Hearing
Date- $75


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #2- If Paid after the First Hearing Date but
before the Second Hearing Date-$125


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #3- If Paid after the Second Hearing Date but
before the Third Hearing Date-$175


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #4- If Paid after the Third Hearing Date but
before the Final Determination Hearing Date-$225


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #5- If the fine is not paid at the Final
Determination Hearing Date, the Debt Collection Stage amount will be-$250. 
If not paid at the Debt Collection Stage, the citation will be transferred to
the Collection Agency at $250 and additional collection fees will be added.


Title 8 Chapter 8-Violations Citations- No Muzzle or Leash on Dog
 
2989/8-8-3
 
First Offense-$75


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $300 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-Minimum fine $600 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fifth Offense*-$1,000 and a Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 8 Chapter 8-Violations Citations- No Business License
 
2989/8-8-3
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 3-Drivers; Seat Safety and Child Restraint
 
2989/9-3-5-N
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 6-General Rules of the Road (Negligent Driving)
 
2989/9-6-5-A
 
First Offense-$150


 
 
 
 
Second Offense-$250


 
 
 
 
Third Offense*-Minimum fine $500 and Must Appear at MV Hearing


 
 
 
 
Fourth Offense*-Minimum fine $750 and Must Appear at MV Hearing


Title 9 Chapter 6-General Rules of the Road
 
2989/9-7-7-8(a)
 
$350


Title 9 Chapter 7-Parking Regulations; Misuse of Placard
 
2989/9-7-7-8(b)
 
First Offense - $500


 
 
 
 
Second Offense - $750**


 
 
 
 
Third or Subsequent Offense- $1,000**


 
 
 
 
**Note that for a second offense of violation of 9-7-7-8(b), the Secretary of
State is to be notified.  The Secretary of State may revoke or suspend
driving privileges for a second offense and may revoke or suspend the
disability license plate or placard for a third or subsequent offense.


Title 9 Chapter 7-Parking for Trucks Carrying Hazardous Materials
 
2989/9-7-9-3
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 7-Stopping, Standing and Parking Regulations
 
2989/9-7-10-7
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 7-Parking Areas of Schools
 
2989/9-7-11-11
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 9-Traffic Schedules
 
2989/ 9-9-3
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 9-Traffic Schedules
 
2989/9-9-8
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 9-Traffic Schedules- Commuter Parking Lots
 
2989/9-9-11-3-17
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 9-Traffic Schedules-Orland Park Place Shopping Center
 
2989/9-9-12
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 11-Abandoned, Wrecked Vehicles
 
2989/9-11-8-9
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 11-Seizure of Vehicle -Suspended D.L.
 
2989/9-11-10-1
 
$500 (Impound)


Title 9 Chapter 11-Seizure of Vehicle-D.U.I.
 
2989/9-11-10-2
 
$500 (Impound)


Title 9 Chapter 11-Seizure of Vehicle-Active Warrant
 
2989/ 9-11-10-3
 
$500 (Impound)


Title 9 Chapter 11-Seizure of Vehicle-Violation of the Controlled Substances
Act or the Cannabis Control Act
 
2989/ 9-11-10-4
 
$500 (Impound)


Title 9 Chapter 11-Seizure of Vehicle-Deadly Weapon
 
2989/ 9-11-10-5
 
$500 (Impound)


Title 9 Chapter 11-Seizure of Vehicle-Prostitution
 
2989/9-11-10-6
 
$500 (Impound)


Title 9 Chapter 11-Seizure of Vehicle-No Valid D.L.
 
2989/9-11-10-7
 
$500 (Impound)


Title 9 Chapter 12-Operation of Motor Driven Cycles Prohibited
 
2989/9-12-3
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 12-Snowmobiles, Motor Driven Cycles
 
2989/9-12-4
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 14-Illinois Vehicle Code Violations, Citations, and Settlement
 
2989/9-14-6
 
$75-$1,000


Title 9 Chapter 15- Administration Adjudication of Vehicular Standing,
Parking and Compliance Violations
 
2989/9-15-9-1
 
General Violation Amount Step #1- At or before the Requested First Hearing
Date- $75


 
 
 
 
Traffic Compliance Fine Amount Step #1- At or before the Requested First
Hearing Date- $75


 
 
 
 
No Placard Handicapped Fine Amount Step #1- At or before the Requested First
Hearing Date- $250


 
 
 
 
Misuse of Placard Fine Amount Step #1- At or before the Requested First
Hearing Date- First $500,  Second Offense* $750 and a Must Appear at a MV
Hearing ***, Third Offense or Subsequent* $1,000 at a MV Hearing***


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #2- If Paid after the First Hearing Date But
before the Second Hearing Date-$125


 
 
 
 
Traffic Compliance Fine Amount Step #2- If Paid after the First Hearing Date
but before the Second Hearing Date-$125


 
 
 
 
No Placard Handicapped Fine Amount Step #2- If Paid after the First Hearing
Date, on the Second Hearing Date or before the Third Hearing Date-$300


 
 
 
 
Misuse of Placard Handicapped Fine Amount Step #2- If Paid after the First
Hearing Date, on the Second Hearing Date or before the Third Hearing Date-
First $550.00, Second Offense $800*, Third Offense or Subsequent $1,050*


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #3- Paid after the Second Hearing Date -$150
but before the Third Hearing Date-$175


 
 
 
 
Traffic Compliance Fine Amount Step #3- Paid after the Second Hearing Date
but before the Third Hearing Date-$175


 
 
 
 
No Placard Handicapped Fine Amount Step #3- Paid after the Third Hearing
Date, Upon a Finding of Liability or Failing to Appear at the Third Hearing
Date-$350


 
 
 
 
Misuse of Placard Handicapped Fine Amount Step #3- Paid after the Third
Hearing Date, Upon a Finding of Liability or Failing to Appear at the Third
Hearing Date- First Offense $600, Second Offense* $850***, Third Offense* or
Subsequent $1,100***


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #4- Paid after the Third Hearing Date but
before the Final Determination Hearing -$225


 
 
 
 
Traffic Compliance Fine Amount Step #4 - Paid after the Third Hearing Date
but before the Final Determination Hearing-$225


 
 
 
 
General Violation Amount Step #5- If the fine is not paid at the Final
Determination Hearing Date, the Debt Collection Stage amount will be $250. 
If not paid at the Debt Collection Stage, the citation will be transferred to
the Collection Agency and additional collection fees will be added.


 
 
 
 
Traffic Compliance Fine Amount Step #5- If the fine is not paid at the Final
Determination Hearing Date, the Debt Collection Stage amount will be $250. If
not paid at the Debt Collection Stage, the citation will be transferred to
the Collection Agency and additional collection fees will be added.


 
 
 
 
*** Note that for a second offense of violation of 9-7-7-8(b), the Secretary
of State is to be notified.  The Secretary of State may revoke or suspend
driving privileges for a second offense and may revoke or suspend the
disability license plate or placard for a third or subsequent offense.


Title 9 Chapter 16- Automated Traffic Law Enforcement and Administrative
Adjudication
 
2989/9-16-14
 
$100 If paid within 30 days, if not $200


 
 
 
 
 




 



* Denotes a Mandatory MV Hearing appearance unless otherwise noted



(Ord. 5224, 10-2-17; Amd. Ord. 5288, 4-16-18; Amd. Ord. 5301, 5-21-18; Amd.
Ord. 5377, 1-21-19; Amd. Ord. 5392, 3-18-19; Amd. Ord. 5398, 4-15-19; Amd.
Ord. 5423, 8-19-19; Amd. Ord. 5437, 10-21-19; Amd. Ord. 5438, 10-21-19; Amd.
Ord. 5444, 10-21-19)



Orland Park, IL Land Development Code


VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE



Ordinance 2084 as Amended
Updated: September, 2018
Ordinance 5336



ARTICLE 1:
GENERAL PROVISIONS



SECTION 1-101.   TITLE.



   This ordinance shall be known as and referred to as the Land
Development Code of the Village of Orland Park.



SECTION 1-102.   PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   It is the purpose of the Land Development Code for the Village of
Orland Park to establish standards and regulations for review and approval of
all proposed development of property in the Village, and to provide a
development review process that will be comprehensive, consistent, and
efficient in the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan and other goals,
policies and standards of the Village.



   In order to foster and preserve the public health, safety, comfort and
welfare, and to aid in the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development
of the Village, it is the intent of the Board of Trustees that the
development process in the Village be efficient, in terms of time and
expense, effective, in terms of addressing the natural resource and public
facility implications of proposed development, and equitable, in terms of
consistency with established regulations and procedures, respect for the
rights of property owners, and consideration of the interest of the citizens
of the Village.



   It is the specific intent of the Village to work cooperatively with all
interested branches of government, including, but not limited to, the
Illinois Department of Transportation, the Illinois Department of Water
Resources, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and any local health
departments to aid in the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of
the Village.  It is also the intent of the Village to work cooperatively
with its neighboring county and township governments so as to foster the
integrated, comprehensive and equitable development of the Village and its
environs.



   These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the
Village by Ill. Const. Art. VII, ?6 (1970) and Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24,
?11-13-1 et seq. (1989) in order to carry out the purposes stated therein. 
Section 5-112, Subdivision Review Procedures, is adopted pursuant to the
authority granted to the Village by Ill. Const. Art. VII, sec. 6 (1970) and
Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, par. 11-12-5 et seq. (1989).



SECTION 1-103.   JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY.



   A.   General.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the
regulations in this Ordinance shall govern the development and use of land
and structures, including all lots of record, subdivisions and resubdivisions
of land and planned developments within the corporate limits of the Village
and to the extent permitted by law, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the Village.  Except as otherwise provided by these regulations, no
building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and no building,
structure, or land shall be developed unless in conformity with all the
provisions of these regulations for the zoning district in which it is
located and all other applicable regulations.



   B.   Transition Period.  Where a complete application for
development approval (including building permit, special use approval, site
plan approval, variance approval, final plan or record plat approval) is
pending on the effective date of this Ordinance, the provisions of the
regulations in effect when the application was filed shall govern the review
and approval of the application for development approval.  If such
application is approved within six (6) months of the date of adoption of this
Ordinance, then the applicant shall be entitled to complete the development,
provided that construction begins within six (6) months of the issuance of
such approval and is diligently pursued to completion.



   C.   Existing Unlawful Uses and Structures.   A structure or use
not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations is
hereby deemed lawful as of the effective date of this Ordinance, provided
that it conforms with all of the requirements of these regulations. 
However, if such structure or use does not conform with all of the
requirements of these regulations, then such structure or use remains
unlawful hereunder.



   D.   Existing Permitted Uses.  When a lot is used lawfully on the
effective date of this Ordinance and Article 6 of these regulations
classifies such use as a "permitted use" in the zoning district in which it
is located, such use is hereby deemed to be a lawful permitted use for the
purposes of these regulations.



   E.   Existing Special Uses.  When a lot is used lawfully on the
effective date of this Ordinance and Article 6 of these regulations
classifies such use as a "special use" in the zoning district in which it is
located, such use is hereby deemed to be a lawful special use for the
purposes of these regulations.  If the use was approved as a special use
prior to the effective date of these regulations, and if the approval of such
special use was subject to one or more conditions, those conditions shall
continue in full force and effect unless a new special use approval is
obtained in accordance with Section 5-105 of these regulations.



   F.   Addition to, Expansion of, or Change of Use in Existing Special
Uses.   Any addition to or expansion of a lawful special use, as defined in
Subsection (E), above, shall require new special use approval in accordance
with the procedures and standards set forth in Section 5-105 of these
regulations for new special uses.  Any change in a lawful special use to a
new use shall be permitted only if these regulations classify the new use as
a permitted use or a special use in the zoning district in which it is
located, and only in accordance with the approval procedures set forth in
these regulations for such use.



   G.   Previously Granted Variances.  All variations granted prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance, and any conditions attached thereto,
shall remain in full force and effect, and the recipient of the variance may
proceed to develop the property in accordance with the plans previously
approved.  However, if the recipient of the variance has failed to act on
the variance before the variance expires, the provisions of these regulations
shall govern.



   H.   Prior Zoning Districts.  Upon the adoption of these
regulations, land which is presently zoned within an existing zoning
classification shall be classified within one of the zoning classifications
set forth in Article 6 of these regulations, as follows:



   Prior Zoning District      New Zoning District



   E-1            E-1   Estate Residential District



   R-1            R-1   Residential District



   R-2            R-2   Residential District



   R-3            R-3   Residential District



   R-4            R-4   Residential District



   R-5            R-4   Residential District



   R-6            RSB   Resid/Supporting Business



   B-1            RSB   Resid/Supporting Business



   B-2            BIZ   General Business District



   B-3            BIZ   General Business District



   B-4            COR   Mixed Use Core District



   M-1            MFG   Manufacturing District



   M-2            MFG   Manufacturing District



   P-C            COR   Mixed Use Core District



   P-O            COR   Mixed Use Core District



   P-I            ORI   Office/Research/Industrial



   Old Orland         OOH   Old Orland Historic Dist.



SECTION 1-104.   REVIEW FEES.



   All applications for development approval submitted to the Village
under these regulations shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as
determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time to defray the costs
incurred by the Village in reviewing the application.  In addition to the
fees set by the Board, all applicants for development approval shall
reimburse the Village for reasonable costs incurred as a result of the
application's review by a legal, engineering, landscape or other special
consultant, provided that the applicant is notified of the need to retain
such special consultant and agrees to such retention.  Payment of these fees
shall be paid in full by the Petitioner prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy, unless otherwise noted.  Payment of these fees shall still be
required to be paid in full by the Petitioner if or when a project is
withdrawn, denied or terminated, and shall be paid immediately upon the
Village notification to the Petitioner that said fees are due.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



ARTICLE 2:
DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION



SECTION 2-101. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   For the purposes of these regulations, the following rules of
construction shall apply:



   A.   These regulations shall be construed to achieve the purposes
for which they are adopted.



   B.   In the event of a conflict between the text of these
regulations and any caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text of
these regulations shall control.



   C.   In the event of any conflict in limitations, restrictions, or
standards applying to an individual use or structure, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.



   D.   The words "shall," "must," and "will," are mandatory in nature,
implying an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision.



   E.   The word "may" is permissive in nature.



   F.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.



   G.   Words used in the singular number include the plural number and
the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the
particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.



   H.   Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender.



   I.   Any act authorized by these regulations to be carried out by a
specific official or agency of the Village is impliedly authorized to be
carried out by a designee of such official or agency.



   J.   The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.



SECTION 2-102. DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purposes of these regulations, certain words and terms are
defined within this Code.  Any word not defined within this Section or not
defined within another Section of the Land Development Code shall be
construed in their generally accepted meanings as defined in the most recent
publication of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary:  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   A.A.S.H.T.O. means the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.



   Abutting means having property boundaries or lot lines in common with,
but not being separated by a street or alley.



   Accessory means a use, building or structure, or part of a building or
structure which:



      1.   Is subordinate to and serves the principal building or
structure or principal use;



      2.   Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the
principal building or structure or principal use served;



      3.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of
occupants of the principal building or principal use;



      4.   Is located on the same lot as the principal building or
structure or principal use served, with the exception of such accessory
off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on
the same lot as the building or use served;



      5.   Is not a home occupation or storage for a business.



   Adaptive Reuse means the process of adapting a building to a use other
than that for which it was originally designed, such as a residence converted
into offices.  This may involve restoration and/or rehabilitation, and may
be accomplished with varying changes to the appearance of the structure from
minimal to major.  (Ord. 4143 – 6/5/06)



   Adjacent, Adjoining means abutting or being directly across a street or
alley from.



   Adult Arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin operated, slug-operated, or for any form of
consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled
still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or
other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". (Ord. 4926 -
9/15/14)



   Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store means any
commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration,
of any one or more of the following:



      1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction of description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".



      2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed
for use or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.



      3.   An establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of
materials depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified
materials which depict or describe "specified anatomical areas" or "specified
sexual activities". (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



   Adult Cabaret means a restaurant or similar commercial establishment,
which regularly features: a) persons who appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nude; or b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or c)
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". (Ord. 4926 -
9/15/14)



   Adult Day Care Center also classified as day care centers, means an
individual, agency or organization which regularly provides adult or senior
companion services and care on a regular basis for less than twenty-four (24)
hours per day for one (1) or more seniors. Services may include, but are not
limited to providing companionship in social interactions, peer counseling,
fostering client contact with family and friends, assisting clients in
applying for public services, addressing unmet needs with community leaders,
healthcare professionals and other care providers, health monitoring,
medication supervision, personal care and
recreational/educational/therapeutic activities.  Adult Day Care Centers
must comply with all applicable state and federal laws, and be registered, if
required, with the Illinois Department of Aging or other applicable State
agency. (Ord.  4880 - 2/3/14)



   Adult Motion Picture Theatre means any commercial establishment used
regularly and routinely for presenting films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions having as a dominant
theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. (Ord. 4926 -
9/15/14)



   Adult Uses means any private or public establishment or business that
regularly offers on its premises entertainment, which is characterized by the
depiction or description of nudity, "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activities" and that derives a significant or substantial
portion of its revenues from said entertainment.  Adult uses shall include
adult arcade, adult bookstores, adult novelty store or adult video store,
adult motion picture theatres, adult cabarets and commercial establishments
where the adult use retail area exceeds 15% of the gross retail floor area.
(Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



   Adult Use Retail Area means an area of a commercial retail
establishment dedicated to the sale of adult use retail items. Adult use
retail areas cannot exceed 15% of the gross retail floor area and must be
segregated from the retail floor space by walls and doors to prevent access,
visibility and sales to minors. If the adult use retail area exceeds 15% of
the gross retail floor area, the commercial retail establishment will be
considered an adult use. (Ord. 4647 – 5/16/11)



   Advanced Manufacturing and Assembly means any manufacturing and
assembly housed entirely within a building, including Business Incubator
Facilities, relating to the use or application of advanced manufacturing
technologies, precision tooling (including 3-D Printing), equipment and
process technologies, environmental and energy technologies and information
technology. It often requires a high level of unique skill training that is
specific to each company.  (Ord. 5168 – 2/20/17)



   Aggrieved Party or Person means a person whose legal right has been
invaded or infringed, or whose pecuniary interest is directly affected, by a
government act complained of.



   Alley means a private or public right-of-way which affords secondary
means of vehicular access to abutting properties, but which does not include
a street, utility easement or railroad right-of-way. 



   Alteration means any act or process which changes the "exterior
architectural appearance" of an improvement or modifies a site designed for
preservation as an historic landmark or within a historic preservation
district.



   Animal Hospitals, Boarding or Shelters – see animal services. (Ord.
4434 – 12/1/08)



   Animal Services - Animal Services means any business or establishment
providing services to animals for a time period of more than four hours. 
Examples include:



      1.   Any premises where more than three domestic animals over
one year of age are kept.



      2.   Any premises where one or more domestic animals are
maintained, boarded, bred or cared for in return for remuneration, or are
kept for the purpose of sale.



      3.   Animal Hospitals and Veterinarian Clinics.



      4.   Kennels provided they are located a minimum of 300 feet
from any residential zoning district, measured from the closest run or kennel
to the nearest residential property line.



      5.   Animal Shelters provided they are located a minimum of
300 feet from any residential zoning district, measured from the closest run
or kennel to the nearest residential property line.



      6.   Pet Shops.



      7.   Animal Boarding.



   Any premises five (5) acres or more in area used for a single family
detached dwelling, agricultural, institutional, or recreational use where
more than three (3) such domestic animals owned by the occupant of the
principal use are kept, bred and offered for sale shall not be considered an
animal hospital, kennel, boarding or shelter.



   For animal services less than four hours, see the Personal Service
Establishment definition.



(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08; Amd. Ord. 4664, 8-1-11)



   Animal Run means a completely enclosed fenced area for the exercising
and/or containment of a domestic animal.



   Antenna means any structure or device used to collect or radiate
electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as
whips.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Applicant means a person who has filed an application for development
approval under the provisions of these regulations.  See also petitioner. 
(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Application For Development Approval means any application for approval
of development under the provisions of these regulations.



   Approach - See apron.



   Apron means that portion of a privately maintained driveway lying
within the dedicated street right-of-way or private street right-of way.



   Arbor means an open landscaping structure that may serve as a passage
which is designed and intended to support vegetation and which may include
lattice work.  (Ord. 5167 –  2/20/17)



   Archaeological Significance means importance as an area, site, place or
landscape that has yielded or is likely to yield information concerning past
patterns of human settlement, or artifacts or information concerning previous
cultures in Orland Park or previous periods of the present culture.  Area,
sites or landscapes of archaeological significance may include, but are not
limited to, campsites, burial grounds, historic or prehistoric ruins,
foundations, or other locations.



   Architectural Feature, Exterior means the general arrangement and
components of all of the outer surfaces of a building, structure, or object,
including, but not limited to the color and texture of the building material
and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other
fixtures appurtenant to a building or structure. (Ord. 4143 – 6/5/06)



   Architectural Significance means a historic building, structure or
object that:



(Ord. 4143 – 6/5/06)



      1.   Is associated with a noted architect, builder or
architectural firm whose individual work has influenced the development of
the area; or



      2.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in
local, state or national past; or



      3.   Is one of the few remaining examples of a particular
architectural style, period, or method of construction that was once
prevalent and that reinforces the architectural significance of the area.



   Array means a set of antennas for one service or service provider that
is placed on a structure at a given height above ground, and spaced so as to
avoid interval interference.  An array is often  sectored into three
directions and separated vertically from another service or another service
provider's array when co-located on the same structure.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Assisted Living Residence - see congregate elderly housing.  (Ord.
4434 – 12/1/08)



   Attention-Getting Device means a flag, propeller, spinner, streamer,
search light or similar device or ornamentation which is designed or used for
the purpose of promoting, advertising, or attracting attention for commercial
purposes.



   Automated Teller Machine (ATM) means an unmanned accessory device which
dispenses cash. 



   Automobile means a two-axle motor vehicle, including a pick-up truck or
van, designed and used primarily for the conveyance of not more than nine (9)
persons.



   Automobile Service Station - see motor vehicle services. (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Auto-Row Landscape Corridor means any parcel occupied by a
Village-licensed auto- dealership with frontage along an arterial roadway.
(Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



   Balcony means a platform which projects from the exterior wall of a
building above the ground floor of the building, is exposed to the open air,
has direct access to the interior of the building, and is not supported by
posts or columns extending to the ground.



   Berm means a man-made hill or contour of land that acts as a
landscaping or grading feature or that is intended as a visual and/or sound
barrier between a lot and adjacent properties, alleys or streets.  (Ord.
3837 – 12/1/03)



   Best Management Practice means an effective integration of stormwater
management systems, with appropriate combinations of landscape conservation,
enhancement, structural controls, impervious cover, schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices that provide an optimum way to convey, store, and release run-off,
in order to reduce peak discharge, remove pollutants, and enhance the
environment.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Bicycle Lane means a portion of a roadway which has been designated by
striping or signing and pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive
use of bicyclists for recreational purposes.



   Bicycle Path means a bikeway physically separated from motorized
vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway
right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way.



   Bicycle Route means any road, path, or way which in some manner is
specifically designated with appropriate directional and informational
markers, with or without specific bicycle route number.



   Billboard means an off-premises free-standing identification sign.



   Bioswale means a gently sloped landscaped swale generally designed to
retain and temporarily store specific quantities of stormwater runoff, which
typically are planted with native vegetation to enhance infiltration,
filtration, and pollutant removal from surface runoff water.  (Ord. 5061 –
1/18/16)



   Board of Trustees means the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Orland Park.



   Body Piercing (per Illinois State Statute 410 ILCS 54/1) means
penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar that is generally
permanent in nature. "Body piercing" does not include practices that are
considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the outer perimeter or
lobe of the ear using a pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear
piercing system.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Buffer means a combination of vegetation, fencing and open space which
is used to separate land uses.



   Bufferyard means the required installation of landscaping and screening
materials between zoning districts and certain land uses.  (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Buildable Area - see Net Buildable Area  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Building means a temporary or permanent structure that has a roof
supported by walls and which can be used to shelter, house, or enclose
persons, animals or goods. 



   Building Facia or Wall means all window and wall area of a building in
one plane.



   Building Footprint means the horizontal area measured within the
outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of the main building. 
(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Building Height means the vertical distance from grade plane to the
average height of the highest roof surface.  Chimneys, towers, spires,
elevator penthouses, cooling towers and similar customary accessory
structures and equipment, other than signs, shall not be including in
calculating building height.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Building Mounted/ Co-Location.  A system or device that is located on
an existing structure including buildings, monopoles, lattice towers, light
poles etc. (Ord. 4594 – 10/18/10)



   Business Incubator Facilitiesmeans a facility and/or program, managed
by public and/or private agencies, used for the start-up and growth of one
ore more small businesses, typically providing rental space with common areas
and shared resources (e.g., clerical staff, office equipment, etc.).  (Ord.
5168 – 2/20/17)



   Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, or other lines
of demarcation. 



   Bulk means the term used to indicate the size and setback of buildings
or structures, and the location of buildings or structures with respect to
one another, and includes the following: (a) size and height of buildings;
(b) location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets, or to other buildings; (c) floor area ratio; (d) all open space
allocated to buildings; and (e) amount of lot area and lot width provided per
dwelling unit.



   Bulletin Board means a freestanding sign which displays public messages.



   Business means an occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies
time, attention, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is sold or where
services are offered.



   Candlepower means the amount of light that will illuminate a surface
one (1) foot distant from a light source to an intensity of one (1)
footcandle.  The maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount of
candlepower emitted by a lamp, light source or luminaire.



   Canopy or Awning means a permanent roof-like shelter which may be
freestanding or extending from part or all of a building face and is
constructed of some durable material such as metal, glass or plastic.



   Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) means the plan for construction of
public improvements adopted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
provisions of Section 4-102 of these regulations.



   Car Wash - see motor vehicle services.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Certificate of Appropriateness means a certificate from the Board of
Trustees authorizing plans for alterations, construction, removal or
demolition of an improvement(s) within its jurisdiction as defined by these
regulations.



   Clinic - see medical office. (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Club or Lodge means a private, not-for-profit association, corporation,
or other entity consisting of persons who are bona fide paying members and
which owns, leases or uses a building or portion thereof, the use of such
premises being restricted primarily to members and their guests.



   Co-location means the placement of wireless communication equipment
from more than one service or service provider on a single site.  (Ord. 3168
- 9/8/98)



   Collection Boxes mean a metal container, receptacle, or similar object
that is located on any parcel or lot of record within the Village that is
used for the collecting of clothing, household items or other personal
property. This term applies to all such containers regardless of ownership or
intent. This term does not include recycle bins for the collection of
recyclable material, any rubbish or garbage receptacle or any collection box
located within an enclosed building.  (Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



   College means an institution providing full-time or part-time education
beyond the high school level, including any dormitories, lodging rooms or
other housing for students or faculty.



   Commencement of Construction means the first placement of permanent
evidence of a structure on a site pursuant to a duly issued building permit,
such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation, including the relocation of a structure.  "Commencement of
construction" does not include the installation of streets or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as
dwelling units or not a part of the main structure.



   Commercial Living Unit means a building that includes commercial uses
on the first floor and residential dwelling units above the first floor
intended to be lived in by the owner of the commercial use.  Sometimes
referred to as a ‘live work' unit.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Commercial Retail Establishment means a building, property, or activity
the principal use or purpose of which is the sale of goods, products, or
materials directly to the consumer.  This includes, but is not limited to,
clothing stores, appliance stores, bakeries, food stores, grocers, caterers,
pharmacies, book stores, florists, furniture stores, hardware stores, pet
stores, toy stores, and variety stores but does not include restaurants or
personal service establishments.



   Commercial Vehicle or Truck means a motor vehicle which has a gross
weight in pounds, including vehicle and maximum load, in excess of 8,000
pounds and which is not primarily designed for carrying passengers.



   Commission means the Plan Commission of the Village as established and
described in Section 3-102 of these regulations.



   Common Area means an area within a development conveniently accessible
to all residents or occupants of the development, designed as a significant
focus, centrally located, not including required setbacks, private open
space, or impervious surface, designed to accommodate some group social
functions.



   Community Center means a building for social, educational and
recreational activities of a neighborhood or community, including a social
hall or lodge, not operated primarily for commercial purposes.



   Comprehensive Plan means the plan adopted by the Board of Trustees
pursuant to the provisions of Section 4-101 of these regulations.



   Congregate Elderly Housing means a building or use housing more than
one family, with or without separate dwelling units for each family, the
occupancy of which is limited to persons who are at least 55 years of age
(or, if two or more persons occupy a unit, at least one shall be 55 years of
age or more), and which provide coordinated social and support services to
residents, such as meals, housekeeping, laundry, recreation, education and
transportation.  This shall include a range of care levels from independent
to assisted to skilled care. (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Conservation Easement means a recorded legal agreement between a
landowner and a qualified conservation agency that transfers development
rights from the owner to the agency to protect natural or historic features
and includes a right to ensure the preservation of: (a) the significant
physical character and visual characteristics of structures having
architectural, historical, or cultural significance, together with any
associated real property, whether or not improved; (b) land or water areas
predominantly in their natural scenic, open or wooded condition, or as
suitable habitat for fish, plants or wildlife; or (c) the integrity of
archaeological sites and the artifacts or information which they may contain
pending properly supervised excavation and investigation. The instrument
conveying or reserving a conservation right may require, prohibit, condition,
limit or control any or all of the following:    (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



      1.   Access or public visitation;



      2.   Affirmative acts of alteration, restoration,
rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, investigation, documentation, payment of
taxes, or compliance with public law and regulations;



      3.   Conditions of operation, use, restoration, alteration,
repair or maintenance;



      4.   Acts detrimental to the preservation of a place;



      5.   The alteration or removal of roads, signs, billboards or
other advertising, utilities or other structures on or above the ground;



      6.   The excavation, dredging or removal of loam, peat,
gravel, soil, rock or other material substance in such manner as to affect
the surface or to otherwise alter the topography of the area;



      7.   The removal or destruction of trees, shrubs, or other
vegetation;



      8.   Surface use inconsistent with preservation of water or
land areas, or the improvement or appurtenance thereto;



      9.   Activities affecting drainage, flood control, water
conservation, erosion control or soil conservation, or fish and wildlife
habitat preservation; or



      10.   Any other acts or uses having relation to the
preservation of structures, sites and water or land areas or the improvements
or appurtenances thereto.



   Construction means the act of adding to a building or structure that
requires a building permit or the act of building a new improvement on a
vacant parcel or site, including the building of an accessory structure.



   Contiguous means abutting or adjoining.



   Convenience Store means a retail store with a floor area of less than
5,000 square feet, which sells groceries and is open 15 to 24 hours a day,
but not including an automobile service station. (Ord. 4880-2/3/14)



   Cooperative Housing means a multiple-family dwelling where the housing
units and common areas are collectively owned and maintained by the
residents.  This differs from a condominium dwelling where individual units
are under separate individual ownership.  (Ord. 4044 – 7/5/05)



   Copy Area means the area in square feet of the smallest geometric
figure which describes the area enclosed by the actual copy of a sign.  For
facia signs the copy area limits refer to the message, not to the illuminated
background.



   Crematorium means a place, at a funeral parlor or cemetery, at which
cremation of bodies is done. A crematory or crematorium is permitted as an
accessory use to funeral parlors and cemeteries only.  (Ord. 4647 –
5/16/11)



   Critical and Sensitive Areas means those areas as defined and
designated in the Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Orland Park.



   Cultural Center means an indoor or outdoor building or structure
designed, intended or used primarily for musical, dance, dramatic or other
performances, or a gallery operated primarily for the display, rather than
the sale, of works of art.



   Cultural Significance means the improvement or site is associated with
and effectively illustrates broad patterns of cultural history characteristic
of the nation, state or community.  Cultural history is reflected in the
following themes: education, arts and letters; science and engineering; law
and medicine; philosophy; economics, humanitarian and social programs;
recreational pursuits; business and industry; and ethnic settlement.



   Culvert means a structure designed to carry drainage water or small
streams below barriers such as roads or railway embankments.



   Cutoff means a point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light
source or luminaire are completely eliminated at a specific angle above the
ground.



   Cutoff, Angle means the angle formed by a line drawn from the direction
of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from
the light source, above which no light is emitted.



   Cutoff-Type Luminaire means a luminaire with elements such as shields,
reflectors or refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees.



   Day Care Center means an individual, agency or organization which
regularly provides pre-school through kindergarten instruction or supervision
and care on a regular basis for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day for
one (1) or more children in a facility other than a detached dwelling, who
are not related by blood or marriage to, and who are not the legal wards or
foster children of, the supervising adult. The use must be licensed by or
registered with the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services in
accordance with the Child Care Act of 1969 (225 ILCS 10/1 et. seq.) or the
appropriate State agency.  (Ord. 4880 – 2/3/14; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   Day Care Home means any detached dwelling which receives more than four
(4) but no more than eight (8) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours
per day.  The maximum of eight (8) children received shall be reduced in
number by the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons
under the age of fourteen (14) residing in the home.  This does not include
an operation which receives only children from a single family.  The use
must be licensed by or registered with the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services in accordance with the Child Care Act of 1969 (225 ILCS
10/1 et.seq.).  (Ord.2860 - 3/18/96)



   Dead Plant means vegetation lacking green leaves during the growing
season, which cannot be rejuvenated by proper pruning practices.  (Ord. 3281
- 8/16/99)



   Deck means an open, outdoor flooring area for sitting and gathering,
usually constructed of wood above the ground surface.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



   Demolition means any act or process which destroys in part or in whole
an improvement.



   Density is defined as the number of dwelling units per Net Buildable
Acres on the site.  (Ord. 4096  – 12/5/05)



   Detached Parking Lot Island means a parking lot island not physically
connected in any way to the perimeter of a parking lot.  (Ord. 5061 
1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   Detention means the temporary impoundment or holding of stormwater
runoff.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



   Detention Basin/Dry Bottom Pond means a stormwater management facility
which temporarily impounds runoff and discharges it through a hydraulic
outlet structure to a downstream conveyance system.  Since an extended
detention basin impounds runoff only temporarily, it is normally dry during
non-rainfall periods.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



   Detention/Retention Facility means a facility which could be wet or
dry, respectively and which provides for storage of storm water runoff and
controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.



   Developer means any person seeking approval under these regulations for
any form of development.



   Development means the carrying out of any building activity, the making
of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, or
the subdividing of land into two or more parcels.



      1.   Except as provided in subsection (3) hereof, for the
purposes of these regulations, the following activities or uses shall be
considered to involve "development:"



         a.   A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or
material change in the external appearance of a structure on land or water.



         b.   A change in the intensity of use of land, such as
an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land or a
material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments,
offices, or dwelling units in a structure or on land.



         c.   Alteration of the shore or bank of a pond, lake,
river, or other waterway.



         d.   Commencement of drilling (except to obtain soil
samples), mining, or excavation on a parcel of land.



         e.   Demolition of a structure which is designated on
Exhibit 1 as an architecturally significant or historic structure.



         f.   Clearing of land, including clearing or removal of
vegetation and any significant disturbance of vegetation or soil
manipulation, but not including farming.



         g.   Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill
on a parcel of land.



      2.   "Development" includes all other activity customarily
associated with it.  When appropriate to the context, "development" refers
to the act of developing or to the result of development of land within the
Village and within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles beyond the corporate limits
of the Village.  Reference to particular operations is not intended to limit
the generality of this definition.



      3.   For the purpose of these regulations the following
operations or uses shall not be taken to involve "development:"



         a.   Except as provided in Section 5-111 of these
regulations, work involving the maintenance, renewal, improvement, or
alteration of any structure, if the work affects only the color or decoration
of the exterior of the structure or interior alterations that do not change
the use for which the structure was constructed.



         b.   Work involving the maintenance of existing
landscaped areas and existing rights-of-way such as yards and other
non-natural planting areas.



         c.   Work involving the maintenance of areas of native
vegetation through prescribed burns, selective removal of alien plant species
or similar activities intended to upgrade the quality of areas of native
vegetation.



         d.   Work involving the installation of landscaping of a
single family dwelling.



         e.   A change in use of land or structure from a use
within a specified category of use to another use in the same category unless
the change involves a change from a use permitted as of right to one
permitted as a special use.  (Am. Ord. 5167 –  2/20/17)



         f.   A change in the ownership or form of ownership of
any parcel or structure.



         g.   The creation or termination of rights of access,
riparian rights, easements, covenants concerning development of land, or
other rights in land unless otherwise specifically required by law.



         h.   Demolition of buildings not listed on Exhibit 1
which shows historic and architecturally significant structures.



   Distillery means a processing facility for the production and packaging
of less than 5,000 gallons of alcoholic beverages or spirits per year through
fermentation and usually concentrating on exotic or specialty spirits.
Distilleries may include a production facility where fruits are crushed,
fermented or pressed, where bulk still/spirits are stored in tanks or
barrels, or where distillery operations such as racking, filtering, blending
or bottling of spirits are carried out. The facility may also bottle,
warehouse and distribute spirits. The facility may contain an onsite retail
area where taste testing and sales directly to a consumer are allowed as
ancillary uses to the main operation through a liquor license but such onsite
retail area cannot generate more than 50% of total sales annually.  (Ord.
4792, 2/4/13; Amd. Ord. 4839, 9/16/13)



   Domestic Pet Services means any business or establishment providing
services to animals for a time period not to exceed four hours.  Services
may include grooming, training and short term veterinarian care. See Personal
Service Establishments. 



(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08; Amd. Ord. 4664, 8/1/11)



   Dormitory means a building containing kitchen and bathroom facilities
available for common use by the residents of the building, which is occupied
or intended to be occupied as the dwelling for more than six (6) persons who
are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption but who are affiliated with
or employed by the same educational, religious, or health institution, and
which is not located on the principal lot occupied by that institution. 
"Dormitory" shall not include an overnight accommodation, residential-care
home, or health institution.



   Dripline means the outer perimeter of the largest branches or limbs of
a tree or bush as measured on the ground around the base of the tree or bush.



   Drive-In Service or Drive Through Service Window means a facility which
is accessory to a commercial retail establishment, personal service
establishment, office, financial institution, or fast-food restaurant and is
designed or intended to enable a customer, without exiting a motor vehicle
parked on or moving through the premises, to transact business with a person
outside the motor vehicle.



   Drive-Through Accessories are Menu Boards, Drive-Through Structure,
Preview Board and Order Confirmation Points.



   Drive-Through Structure means any accessory structure that exists in a
drive-through area. (Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



   Driveway means a privately maintained access roadway serving a limited
number of residential, commercial or industrial structures, buildings, or
parking areas and providing access to a dedicated or private street.



   Driveway Apron means that portion of the driveway located between the
sidewalk and the street.



   Driveway, Residential means a privately maintained access roadway
serving no more than three dwelling units and providing access to a dedicated
or private street.



   Dwelling means a building or portion of a building designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes, including single family and multiple
family dwellings, but not including mobile homes or other trailers and
lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses.



   Dwelling, Attached means a dwelling unit that shares common walls with
at least one (1) other dwelling unit, and includes multi-family dwelling
units and townhouses.



   Dwelling, Detached means a dwelling unit that is developed with open
yards on all sides, but not including recreational or motor vehicles.



   Dwelling, Multi-Family means four (4) or more dwelling units, including
modular homes, attached along and sharing one (1) or more common walls
between any two (2) units and/or stacked one above another.



   Dwelling, Townhouse means an attached group of up to eight (8) dwelling
units, including modular homes, which share one (1) or more common walls
between any two (2) units and in which each unit has living space on the
ground floor and in a separate entrance on the ground floor.



   Dwelling Unit means one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or
used as living quarters for one family only.  Individual bathrooms and
complete kitchen facilities that are permanently installed to serve the
entire family shall always be included within each dwelling unit.



   Easement means a designated parcel of land on, over or under which a
liberty, privilege or advantage of or use of land is recorded as distinct
from ownership of the land and granted either to the public, a particular
person or firm, or a combination of both.



   Engineer, Registered Professional means a professional engineer
registered under the provisions of "The Illinois Professional Engineering
Act" and any act amendatory thereof.



   Entryway Feature means a free-standing structure made of metal,
masonry, composition, wood, or a combination thereof, including gates,
resting on or partially buried in the ground, rising above ground level, and
used to identify a particular development or subdivision. (Ord. 3199 -
11/16/98)



   Environmental/Clean Technology (ECT).  The application of the
environmental sciences to conserve the natural environment and resources, and
to curb the negative impacts of human involvement and development; Includes
renewable energy (wind, solar, hydro, geo, and biomass), information
technology, sustainable transportation, electric motors, lighting and other
appliances and systems such as devices that are sustainable and part of or
accessory to a building or site as a feature, and/or a utility that serves
multiple economic and environmental purposes including, but not limited to,
green roofs, white roofs, green walls, above and below ground storm water
cisterns, ground source heat pumps, smart lighting systems, pervious surface
pavements, recyclable collection facilities, bio-swales, bioretention areas
etc.; Technology that helps make buildings energy efficient and
environmentally benign; A diverse range of products, services and processes
that harness renewable materials and energy sources, reduce the use of
natural resources and cut or eliminate emissions and wastes.  (Ord. 4594 –
10/18/10)



   Environmentally Sensitive Lands means lands that are primarily
characterized by the presence of wetlands, waterbodies, shorelines or slopes
of greater than fifteen (15) percent and that are designated as such on
Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map identified in the Village's Comprehensive
Plan.



   Erosion means the general process whereby soils are moved by flowing
surface or subsurface water.



   Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel,
rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.



   Exterior Architectural Appearance means the architectural character,
general composition and general arrangement of the exterior of an
improvement, including the kind and texture of the building material and the
type and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and
architectural details such as brackets, cornices, and moldings, and
appurtenant elements visible from publci streets and thoroughfares.



   Extraterritorial Jurisdiction means that land lying outside the
corporate boundaries of the Village over which the Village has jurisdiction
pursuant to Illinois law or boundary agreement with another municipality.



   Facing means that a building has a wall approximately parallel to a
public right-of-way line.



   Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a
group of not more than four persons not related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit.  (Ord. 3281 -
8/16/99)



   Fence means a structure made of metal, masonry, composition, or wood,
or a combination thereof, including gates, rising above ground level, and
used to delineate a boundary or as a barrier or means of protection,
confinement or screening.  The term "fence" does not include arbors,
trellises or non-permanent garden decorations lower than three feet (3'). 
(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Fence, Height means that height as measured from the existing grade
level of the property on which the fence is installed to the highest point
located on the fence.



   Fence, Open means a permanent fence of which open spaces afford direct
views through the fence that comprise at least fifty percent (50%) of each
one (1) foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the
fence, and includes gates.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Fence, Perimeter means a fence that follows the outward boundaries of
the property on which it is located.



   Fence, Perimeter of means that outer most point as measured by a
perpendicular line drawn along the edge of a fence facing outward and
perpendicular to the ground.



   Fence, Solid means a fence that conceals some view of adjacent
property, streets or alleys and any and all activities conducted behind it,
and includes gates.



   Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported
or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.



   Filter means divisions between adjacent land use areas that benefit
from separation because the two sides conflict, such as an industrial area
adjacent to residential homes.  (Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   Financial Institution means a bank, savings and loan association or
other similar entity or organization which provides retail/commercial
transactional banking or other similar financial assistance which operates or
has a place of business in the State of Illinois.  (Ord. 3130 - 5/18/98)



   Finished Grade means the vertical location of the ground or pavement
surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site
development plan.



   Flagpole means any freestanding flag pole or a joint use of another
structure upon which to hang a flag.



   Flood Plain means that land adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the 100-year frequency flood elevation.



   Floor Area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of each floor of
the principal building, measured from the exterior walls or from the center
line of party walls, including the floor area of accessory buildings and
structures.  The term does not include any area used exclusively for the
parking of motor vehicles.



   Floor Area Ratio (FAR) means the total floor area of the building or
buildings on a lot or parcel divided by the gross area of the lot or parcel.



   Food Concession means an accessory use to a principal use within an
existing building where prepackaged foods, foods not prepared on side, or
sandwiches made up on site from ingredients prepared off site are sold, where
no cooking takes place said foods being for consumption on or off the
premises.  This category includes, but is not limited to employee
cafeterias, theater concessions and recreational facility concession
stands.  Vending machine, alone, do not constitute a food concession. 
(Ord. 3354 – 4/17/00;  Amd. Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02)



   Food processing plant means a commercial operation that manufactures,
packages, labels or stores food for human consumption and does not provide
food directly to a consumer.  Food processing plants do not include wineries
or microbreweries.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Footcandle means a unit of illumination produced on a surface, all
points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source on one (1)
candle.



   Freestanding Wireless Communication Facility means a wireless
communication facility that consists of a stand-alone tower, antennas and
associated equipment.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Frontage means the length of the property line on any one premises
parallel to and along each public right-of-way it borders.



   Fronting means that the front or primary entrance to a building or unit
faces a public right-of-way line.



   Funeral Parlor means a building containing facilities for preparation
of bodies for burial, and/or for the hosting of ceremonies and rituals
related to burial.  (Ord. 4647 – 5/16/11)



   Garage means a building designed for the storage of motor-driven
vehicles, under the control of the owner or tenant of the premises and which
is not operated or leased for commercial gain.



   Glare means the brightness of a light source which causes eye
discomfort.



   Golf Course means a nine-hole or 18 hole course for playing golf,
including any accessory driving range, clubhouse, office, restaurant,
concession stand, picnic tables, pro shop, maintenance building, restroom
facility or similar accessory use or structure.  This term shall not include
miniature golf courses as a principal or accessory use, nor shall it include
driving ranges which are not accessory to a golf course.



   Governmental Use means a building, use or structure (including a
wireless communications antenna) owned or occupied by a federal, state, or
local government agency and serving as an agency office, police station, fire
station, library, post office, or similar facility, or an unoccupied facility
providing a government service.  But not including a vehicle storage yard,
jail, sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer or disposal facility,
wastewater treatment facility, hazardous waste treatment or storage facility,
food irradiation facility, educational or health institution, university,
military facility, residential care home, or housing for persons who are
participating in work release programs or who have previously served and
completed terms of imprisonment for violations of criminal laws.  (Ord. 4015
– 5/2/05)



   Grade Plane means a reference plane representing the average of
finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the 
finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference
plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the
building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet (1829
mm) from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet (1829 mm) from
the building.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Grading means excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall
include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.



   Green Space means ground soil planted with vegetative groundcovers,
excluding detention and retention basins below the point halfway between the
normal and high water lines.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Greenhouse means a permanent building with a foundation whose roof and
sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material
and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the
cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for
personal enjoyment.



   Guyed tower means a tower that is tied to the ground or other surface
by diagonal cables.



(Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Half-story means a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof,
the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than four and one-half feet above the finished floor of the story immediately
below.  Maximum area of half-story shall not exceed 40% of habitable space
of the floor/story below.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



   Health Club or Fitness Center means a privately-owned building, or
enclosed structure over 5,000 square feet,  containing recreational
facilities, such as athletic or physical conditioning equipment, racquet
courts, and/or a swimming pool, which is operated on a private membership
basis and restricted to use by members and their guests.  (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Hedge means a row of small shrubs or trees growing close together,
usually dividing one area or site from another.  (Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



   Heritage Tree means any healthy tree that is twenty-four inches (24")
in diameter, or greater, measured 4' from the ground, from any lot, developed
or undeveloped.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Historic District means a geographic area designated as a "historic
district" by ordinance of the Village Board and which contain within defined
boundaries a significant collection of individual resources having
historical, cultural and/or architectural significance at the national, state
and/or local level, and which may have within its boundaries other buildings
or structures, that, while not of such historical, cultural, or architectural
significance, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual setting or
characteristics of significant buildings located within the district.  (Ord.
4143 - 6/5/06)



   Historical Significance means:



      1.   The improvement has a strong association with the life or
activities of a person or persons who have contributed to or participated in
the historic events of the nation, state, or community.



      2.   The improvement is associated with an organization or
group (whether formal or informal) from which they have contributed to or
participated in the historic events of the nation, state, or community.



      3.   The improvement is associated with an antiquated use due
to technological or social changes in the nation, state or community, such as
but not limited to, a blacksmith shop, hitching post, brick street or wooden
sidewalk, etc.



      4.   The improvement is a monument to or a cemetery of an
historic person.



   Home Businesses means a business, profession, occupation, or trade
which is conducted within a residential portion of a building for the
economic gain or support of a resident of the dwelling, and which is
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the building.  (Ord. 3672
–8/5/02)   



   Hospital means a public or private institution, whether organized for
profit or not, which is devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of
facilities for the diagnosis and treatment or care of two (2) or more
unrelated persons, whose principal residence is located elsewhere, and who
are admitted for overnight stay or longer in order to obtain medical and/or
psychiatric treatment of illnesses, diseases, injuries and deformities.



   Hospital, Animal – see animal services.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Illumination, Maximum means the maximum illumination measured in
footcandles at the interior bufferyard line at ground level.



   Impervious Surface means a surface or ground cover that resists the
absorption of surface water into the soil.  Such surfaces include those
constructed of stone, brick, asphalt, concrete, tile, terrazzo, gravel
composite, or any other paving material, used for parking, driveways, patios,
terraces, walkways, and the like, as well as areas covered by buildings,
decks, porches, swimming pools, retention and detention basins (up to the
high water level), and tennis courts.  (Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 4434
– 12/1/08)



   Improvement means any building, structure, object, parking facility,
fence, gate, cemetery, wall, work of art or other object constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or part of such betterment.



   Independent Elderly Housing means a building housing more than one
family, the occupancy of which is limited to persons who are at least 55
years of age (or, if two or more persons occupy a unit, at least one shall be
55 year of age or more) and generally capable of living on their own, which
typically provide limited support services.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



   Indoor Recreation Area means a recreational facility conducted entirely
indoors for commercial purposes, with or without seating capacity for
spectators, and providing accommodations for a variety of individual,
organized or franchised sports, entertainment or recreational uses. Indoor
recreation area includes, but is not limited to, laser tag, miniature golf,
soccer fields, hockey rinks, staking rinks, bowling alleys, paintball,
go-carts, batting cages, racquetball courts, rock climbing walls, or other
courts, or sports training facilities. Dance, martial arts or yoga studios
greater than 5,000 square feet fall under the definition of Indoor Recreation
Area (for dance, martial arts or yoga studios less than 5,000 square feet
tall, see Personal Service Establishment definition). An indoor recreation
area may contain secondary uses such as snack bars and retail sales of
related merchandise.  (Ord. 3199 – 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4610 – 12/20/10;
Am. Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



   Industry, Light means the assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods
and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke,
fumes, odors, glare or health or safety hazards outside of the building or
lot where such assembly, fabrication, or processing takes place, where such
processes are housed entirely within a building, or where the area occupied
by outdoor storage of goods and materials used in the assembly, fabrication,
or processing does not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of all buildings
on the lot.  This includes research laboratories which are designed or
equipped for basic or applied research or experimental study, testing, or
analysis in the natural sciences or engineering, including any educational
activities associated with and accessory to such research.  This shall not
include uses that constitute "heavy manufacturing," resource, extraction, or
recycling and salvage operations.



   Infrastructure - Any physical system or facility that provides
essential services, such as transportation, utilities, energy,
telecommunications, waste disposal, drainage systems, sidewalks, roadways,
sewer systems, water systems and other physical systems or facilities as
generally described above that may not be specifically enumerated in this
definition.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Interference means disturbances in reception caused by intruding
signals or electrical equipment.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Interior Property Line means property lines other than those fronting
on street, roadway or highway.



   Kennel - see animal services. (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Lake or Pond means any inland waterbody fed by spring or stormwater
drainage.



   Land Improvement includes, but is not limited to: any sanitary sewage
system, water distribution systems, storm drainage systems, public utility
systems, sidewalk systems, street systems, street lighting systems,
pedestrian ways, no-access strips, off-street parking areas, and other
improvements.



   Landmark means any improvement or site which has special character or
special historical, cultural, archaeological, and/or architectural
significance as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics
of the Village of Orland Park, the State of Illinois or the nation which has
been designated as a "landmark" in compliance with the provisions of these
regulations.



   Landscape Area means a designed area in which required landscaping
shall be located.  (Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



   Landscape Corridor means the width of parcel frontage from property
line to property line and the length of a parcel from the parkway to the edge
of the foundation plantings along the facade of the principal structure. 
(Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



   Landscaping includes trees, shrubs, flowers, vines, potted plants,
ground cover, walkways, ponds, fountains, sculptures, earth berms, fences,
stone, bark, and other materials used to create an outdoor environment.



   Lattice Tower means a structure that is self-supporting with multiple
legs and cross-bracing of structural steel.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Light, Cutoff means an artificial outdoor light source designed to
ensure that no light is directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to
the ground.



   Light, Non-Cutoff means an artificial outdoor light source designed to
allow light to be directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the
ground.



   Lighting, Outdoor means any artificial light source that is installed
or mounted outside of a building, but not including street lights installed
or maintained by the Village along public streets.



   Live Groundcover means turf grass, low-growing ornamental grass, or a
spreading plant that grows densely near the ground.  (Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   Loading Space means a space with access to a street or alley for the
standing, loading, or unloading of motor vehicles delivering or picking up
goods and materials.



   Lot means a parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or
piece of land or lot of record under single unit control.



   Lot, Buildable means a lot of record which after improvement shall
conform with all the applicable District Regulations of the zoning district
in which he property is located and the Bulk Regulations as listed in Section
6-301.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



   Lot Coverage means a calculation, usually expressed as a percentage, of
the total impervious and pervious surface on a parcel.  (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Lot, Corner means a lot which occupies the interior angle at the
intersection of two street lines which make an angle of less than 135 degrees
with each other.



   Lot Line, Residential means a lot line bounding a lot that is located
in a residential zoning district and occupied by a dwelling or dwellings.



   Lot Lines means the property lines bounding the lot.



   Lot of Record means a single lot which is part of a subdivision plat
which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar
of Titles of Cook County or Will County, Illinois, prior to the effective
date of these regulations, or a single parcel of land, the deed of which has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles
of Cook County or Will County, Illinois, prior to the effective date of these
regulations, both of which have been approved by the Board of Trustees.



   Lot, Through or Double Frontage means a lot, other than a corner lot,
fronting on more than one street.



   Lot, Width means the distance between the side lot lines measured along
the front right-of-way, however, lots fronting cul-de-sac bulbs shall have a
minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet at the right-of-way line and meet zoning
district lot width at the front setback, or if no front setback is required,
the distance between the side lot lines measured along the street line. 
(Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02)



   Luminaire means a complete lighting unit consisting of a light source
and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.



   Manage means the planned and designed control, direction, and
maintenance of growth of naturalized vegetation and the detention and
infiltration of stormwater runoff  in a naturalized landscape area,
including restoration or preservation or a combination of the two (2) within
a naturalized landscape area.  (Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   Map, Official means a map of the Village and its one and one-half mile
jurisdiction drawn according to Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, par. 11-12-6 and
incorporated into Section 5-111 of these regulations by reference, on file
with the Village Clerk and available at all times during business hours for
public inspection.



   Marina, means a commercial or club type of establishment that is
designed and operated for profit, or operated by any club or organized group
where hull and engine repairs, boat and accessory sales, packaged food sales,
restaurants, personal services, fueling facilities, storage and overnight
guest facilities and mooring facilities or any combination of these
facilities is provided.



   Marina, Private Noncommercial means a marina designed and intended to
be used for mooring of boats by residents of the general neighborhood with
noncommercial facilities other than those necessary for minor servicing and
repairs.



   Marquee means a roof-like structure that projects over an entrance to a
building.



   Medical Office means any building or portion thereof, the principal use
of which is for offices of one or more licensed physicians, ophthalmologists,
dentists, psychologists, physical, occupation and recreational therapists or
the like for the examination and treatment of persons on an out-patient
basis. See Office definition.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08; Amd. Ord. 4664 -
8/1/11; Amd. Ord. 5336 - 9/17/18)



   Medical Rehabilitation Center - see medical office. (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Menu Board means any screen, panel, or surface that is adherent to a
drive through structure or preview board.  (Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



   Microbrewery means a brewery producing less than 15,000 barrels per
year and usually concentrating on exotic or high quality beer.  The facility
may also bottle, warehouse and distribute beer. The facility may contain an
onsite retail area where taste testing and sales directly to a consumer are
allowed as ancillary uses to the main operation through a liquor license but
such onsite retail area cannot generate more than 50% of total sales
annually.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08; Amd. Ord. 4839 - 9/16/13)



   Mitigation means a system by which a developer causing some adverse
agricultural, environmental, or fiscal impact is required to counterbalance
that impact by creating an equivalent benefit through dedication, payments,
offsets and alternative construction of self-imposed restrictions.  (Ord.
4434 – 12/1/08)



   Mixed Use Building means a building that contains two or more of the
following major use types: residential, office, or retail.  (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Mixed Use Development means a development that is comprised of a group
of two (2) or more types of development, such as multifamily, commercial and
retail, constructed on the same lot or parcel of land under single ownership,
and planned and developed with a unified design of buildings and coordinated
common open space and service areas in accordance with the zoning district in
which it is located.



   Mobile Home means a movable or transportable dwelling unit other than a
modular home or manufactured home, of at least 8 feet in width and at least
32 feet in length, constructed to be transported on its own chassis and
including one or more components that can be retracted for transporting the
unit.



   Monitoring and Management Plan means a near- and long-term plan which
details specific methodologies and performance standards related to how the
ecological viability of a specific site will be monitored and managed. 
(Ord. 5061  1/18/16)



   Monopole Tower means a type of self-supporting tower consisting of a
single pole constructed of steel, wood, concrete, or other suitable
structural material.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Motor Vehicle means an automobile, automobile truck, automobile wagon,
motorcycle, or any other self-propelled vehicle designed for running on
land.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Motor Vehicle Services means any building, structure, or lot used for
one (1) or more of the following:



      1.   Dispensing, selling or offering for retail sale,
gasoline, kerosene, lubricating oil, or grease for the operation and
maintenance of motor vehicles.



      2.   The business of maintaining motor vehicles including
lubrication, tire and battery installation.



      3.   The business of repairing motor vehicles including minor
and major repairs, auto body work, welding and painting.



      4.   Car washes, both automatic and self service.



      5.   Marine equipment sales, service or rental.



   Such establishment shall not include facilities only selling or
offering for retail sale, automotive parts or accessories provided that such
establishment does not provide any service repair or installation.  In
addition to meeting Village Code requirements including Title 6 Chapter 2
Nuisances and Title 6 Chapter 4 Noise Control, Motor Vehicle Services abide
by the following performance standards:



      1.   All work is conducted indoors.



      2.   Garage doors facing residential areas remain closed at
all times except for the exchange of vehicles.



      3.   Vehicles parked more than five (5) business days are
considered outdoor storage.



(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08; Amd. Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



   Motor Vehicle Sales or Rental means any building, structure or lot used
for the sales or rental of motor vehicles, either on site or through the
internet.  Includes any building or open area, other than a street or
required automobile parking space, used for the display, sale or rental of
new or used automobiles and where no repair work is done, except minor
incidental repair of automobiles displayed, sold or rented on the premises. 
(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Mulch means a permeable arrangement of organic materials that help to
retain soil moisture, suppress weeds, and allow free movement of oxygen into
and out of the soil.  (Ord. 5061  1/18/16)   



   Nameplate means a sign which displays only the name and/or street
address of the occupant.



   Native Vegetation means the growth of various grasses, sedges, rushes,
forbs (wildflowers), ferns, trees, shrubs, and vines identified as species
native to northern Illinois in commonly accepted publications, including
“Plants of the Chicago Region,” by Floyd Swink and Gerould Wilhelm
(1974); “Wildflowers of the Tallgrass Prairie, the Upper Midwest,” by
Sylvan T. Runkel and Dean M. Roosa (1989); “Field Guide to North American
Wildflowers, Eastern Region,” by the Audobon Society (1979); and “Native
Illinois Herbs and Forbs,” by the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources.  (Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   Natural Drainage means those channels formed by the existing surface
topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.



   Natural Watercourse means a channel formed in the existing topography
of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.  Should a question
arise as to whether a watercourse is natural, reference may be made to the
earliest known existing aerial photograph.



   Naturalized Landscape means ecologically sensitive landscaping that
uses regionally native vegetation to create, improve or restore specialized
and self-sustaining plant communities.  (Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   Naturalized Landscape Area means a designed area in which required
naturalized landscaping is located. These areas typically, although not
exclusively, surround a stormwater detention area, occupy a portion of a
residential side or rear yards or are located on a development site that
intends to preserve or restore a native landscape and/or ecology.  (Ord.
5061 - 1/18/16)



   Net Buildable Acres means lands within one (1) site that are contiguous
and accessible by the same local or internal road system.  Net Buildable
Acres shall be calculated by deducting the following from the Gross Acreage
of Land:  (Ord. 4096 – 12/5/05)



      1.   50% of Com Ed easement if owned by the petitioner and the
space serves as a public open space amenity;



      2.   50% of land required for a Park or School dedication;



      3.   Perimeter road right-of-way dedication;



      4.   Floodplain that must be conserved;



      5.   Detention and retention areas up to the high water level;
and  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



      6.   Wetlands that must be conserved either by Federal, State
or Local requirements.        (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Net Buildable Acreage can include:



      1.   Private and common open space;



      2.   Internal roads, bikepaths and dedicated transitways;



      3.   Environmental and historic areas conserved that would
otherwise be buildable; and



      4.   Underground utility easements that may be usable for yard
space.



   Nonconforming Building or Structure means any building or structure
lawfully existing on the effective date of these regulations, or any
amendment to it rendering such building or structure nonconforming, which
does not comply with all of the standards of these regulations or any
amendment thereto.



   Nonconforming Use means any use lawfully being made of any land,
building, or structure on the effective date of these regulations or any
amendment thereto rendering such use nonconforming, which does not comply
with all of these regulations or any amendment thereto.



   Nonconforming Vacant Lot means any lot of record which does not contain
a use or building and which does not meet the minimum area or width
requirements established in these regulations or any amendment thereto.



   Non-Village Communication Tower means any communication tower not under
direct ownership of the Village of Orland Park such as existing towers
operated by the Fire District or telecommunication companies.  (Ord. 3168 -
9/8/98)



   Nudity or State of Nudity means a)  the appearance of human bare
buttock, anus, male or female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female
breast; or b) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of
the female breast. (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



   Nursery means land or greenhouses to raise flowers, shrubs and plants
for sale.



   Nursing Home see congregate elderly housing. (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Object means a material thing of functional, architectural, cultural,
historical or archaeological significance that may be, by nature of design,
movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.



   Office means a use or building where business is conducted which does
not primarily involve the sale or transfer of goods by the business to the
customer at that location.  This includes, but is not limited to, general
business offices, government offices, insurance offices, medical offices,
mortgage offices, credit unions, law offices and real estate sales and
management offices.  (Ord. 3130 - 5/18/98; Amd. Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



   Open Space means any portion of a parcel or area of land or water which
is open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky including areas
maintained in a natural and undisturbed character.  The term "open space"
shall not include water below the mean high water line, or areas covered with
buildings, structures, sidewalks, patios, parking areas, except that fifty
(50) percent of any area paved with permeable materials shall be considered
"open space."



   Open Space, Common means a parcel(s) of land or an area of water or a
combination of both land and water located within a development site and
designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of the
development or for the general public, but not including streets or
off-street parking areas.



   Order Confirmation Point means an audio speaker, screen, or other
device that is used to convey information to a drive-through patron.  (Ord.
5221 – 9/18/17)



   Ordinary Repair and Maintenance means activities considered common for
maintaining a property in order to prevent deterioration, decay or damage to
a building or structure, and for retaining the building or structure in its
condition without such deterioration, decay or damage, using the same
materials or materials which are, in appearance, as close as possible to the
original.  (Ord. 4143 – 6/5/06)



   Ornamental Tree means a self-supporting woody plant having at least one
well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and spread
of less than thirty (30) feet.  (Ord. 5061  1/18/16)



   Outdoor Lighting means any light source that is installed or mounted
outside of an enclosed building, but not including street lights installed or
maintained along public streets by a government agency or public utility.



   Outlot means a site suitable for a freestanding building on the
periphery of a large complex.  (Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02)



   Outside, open market means the sale of any merchandise or goods from a
fixed location upon privately owned property not within any permanent
building or structure designed for the sale of such goods.  The term
"outside, open market" shall specifically include the sale of merchandise or
goods from stands, stalls, vehicles, tents and all other sales not within a
permanent structure.  The term "outside, open market", however, shall not
include activity of itinerant vendors who continuously move about from place
to place, and who do not occupy any particular parcel of private property as
a permanent or stationary place for the conduct of their business.



   Outside Storage means overnight (or longer) placement, not in a
building, of materials, equipment and/or vehicles other than employee and
visitor parking.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03) 



   Overland Flow means stormwater run-off that is not confined by any
natural or man-made channel, such as a creek, drainage ditch, or storm
sewer.  Involves the movement of run-off in a thin layer (usually less than
1 inch in depth) over a wide surface, which begins when the water ponded on
the surface of the land becomes deep enough to overcome surface retention
forces.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Overlay Plan means the plan containing development policies for a
discrete area of the Village adopted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
provisions of Section 4-103 of these regulations.



   Overnight Accommodation means a facility offering transient lodging
accommodations at a daily rate to the general public and which may also
provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms and
recreational facilities.



   Owner means a person or persons recorded as such on official records
and includes a duly authorized agency or notary, a trustee, a purchaser, or a
devisee; any person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in
question.



   Parcel means any quantity of land and water capable of being described
with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established as
distinct from other parcels which are designated by their owner or developer
as land to be used or developed as a unit, or which has been used or
developed as a unit.



   Park means a lot, or portion thereof, or aggregation of contiguous
lots, used by the public for outdoor recreational activities, including any
accessory office, picnic tables, maintenance building, restroom facility,
storage facility, or similar accessory use or structure.



   Parking Area means any area containing one or more parking spaces.



   Parking Deck means a structure or building in which automobiles are
parked on two or more levels or stories.  This shall not include any parking
area which is located within the same building as the use served by the
parking area.



   Parking Lot Island means a landscaped area surrounded by a parking lot
on three (3) or more sides.



   Parking Lot means a parking area that is open to the sky, but not
including the uppermost level of a parking deck.



   Parking Space means an area, enclosed or unenclosed, reserved for the
parking of one motor vehicle, and which is accessible to and from a street or
alley.



   Parkway means the area located within a public right-of-way between the
outer curb line and the adjacent property line.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Patio means an open, outdoor flooring area for sitting and gathering,
usually constructed of pavement on the ground surface. (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



   Pavement Width means the distance from the edge of pavement to the edge
of pavement, or where applicable, from the edge of curb to the edge of curb.



   Pawn Shop/ Pawnbroker (per Illinois State Statute 205 ILCS 510/1) means
every individual or business entity which lends money on the deposit or
pledge of physically delivered personal property, other than property the
ownership of which is subject to a legal dispute, securities, printed
evidence of indebtedness or printed evidence of ownership of the personal
property, or who deals in the purchase of such property on the condition of
selling the property back again at a stipulated price, shall be held and is
hereby declared and defined to be a pawnbroker. The business of a pawnbroker
does not include the lending of money on deposit or pledge of title to
property.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Pergola means a landscaping structure with overhead coverage that
frames a space and which may be designed to support vegetation.  (Ord. 5167
– 2/20/17)



   Person means an individual, corporation, governmental agency, business,
trust estate, partnership, two or more persons having joint or common
interest, or any other legal entity.



   Personal Service Establishment means an establishment primarily engaged
in providing services involving the care or betterment of a person or the
repair, care, cleaning, or maintenance of a person's apparel. This includes
but is not limited to laundry cleaning and garment services, carpet and
upholstery cleaning, photographic studios, beauty shops, tanning salons,
barber shops, shoe repairs, day spas, funeral services (except funeral
parlors), reducing salons, travel agencies, postal agencies, domestic pet
services, and clothing rental. Dance, martial arts or yoga studios less than
5,000 square feet fall under the definition of Personal Service Establishment
(for dance, martial arts or yoga studios greater than 5,000 square feet, see
definition for Indoor Recreation Area). Personal service establishments are
required to have appropriate licensure as regulated by the State of
Illinois.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08; Amd. Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11; Amd. Ord. 5061
– 1/18/16)



   Pervious Pavement means a pavement system with traditional strength
characteristics but which allows rainfall to percolate through it rather than
running off.  A pervious pavement system may include use of a porous
asphalt, pervious concrete, or porous paver block system. (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Petitioner means a person who has filed an application for development
approval under the provisions of these regulations.  See also applicant. 
(Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Place of Worship means a church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other
place of religious worship, including any accessory use or structure, such as
a school, day care center or dwelling that is located on the same lot.



   Planting Bed means a space within a landscape area that is typically
defined by an edged boundary which includes, although not limited to, trees,
shrubs, perennials, ornamental grasses and ground covers.  (Ord. 5061 
1/18/16)



   Plan, Final means that document consistent with the approved
preliminary plan of subdivision, which also includes easement provisions,
other specialized provisions and signature lines for applicable parties,
which is approved in accordance with Section 5-112(E) of these regulations.



   Plan, Preliminary means the drawings and documents required by the
Village and approved in accordance with Section 5-112(D) of these regulations.



   Planned Development means a parcel or tract of land initially under
unified ownership or control, and which is or is intended to be the site for
two or more principal buildings for one or more principal uses, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.  The term “planned
development” includes all County planned developments or planned unit
developments and all planned developments, whether residential, commercial or
otherwise in nature, regardless of whether an actual division of property is
required or not, and regardless of whether it is specifically labeled a
planned development or not, it being the intent of this Land Development Code
to apply to all types of development, including planned developments, both
within the Village of Orland Park and where applicable, to areas lying within
one and one-half (1 1/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village of
Orland Park.  A special use permit is required for all planned developments.
(Ord. 3130  5/18/98; Amd. Ord. 5336 - 9/17/18)



   Planned Development, Large Scale:  means a parcel or tract or parcels
or tracts of land of at least a combined total of 1,000 acres initially under
unified ownership and control and which is or is intended to be the site for
two or more principal buildings. (Ord. 2514 - 1/17/94)



   Plat, Record means an approved final plan that has been recorded in
accordance with the provisions of Section 5-112(F) of these regulations.



   Playground means a park which contains playground equipment.



   Porch means a roofed over, unheated, flooring area for sitting and
gathering, usually attached to a home and considered part of the home with
respect to setbacks.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



   Premises means a lot and all the structures or uses thereon.



   Preservation Commission means the Historic Preservation Commission
established in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-103 of these
regulations.



   Preview Board means any subordinate structure that contains a smaller
secondary menu board and exists in a drive through area.  (Ord. 5221 –
9/18/17)



   Principal Building or Structure means a building or structure
containing the principal use of the lot.



   Principal Use means the primary purpose or function that a lot serves
or is proposed to serve.



   Project Area means any area of land, regardless of the number of
individual parcels contained therein on which development is proposed under
these regulations.



   Public Right-of-Way Width means a perpendicular distance across a
public street, measured from property line to property line.  For the
purpose of these regulations, the property line shall be the right-of-way as
established by the Transportation Map of the Village's Comprehensive Plan.



   Public Transportation Facilities means passenger terminals, stations,
shelters and related facilities primarily intended for the transportation of
commuters.



   Public Utility Structure means an electricity or gas substation, water
or wastewater pumping station, telephone repeater station or similar
structure used as an intermediary switching, boosting, distribution or
transfer station for electricity, cable television, or telephone services
between the point of generation and the end user, or a private wastewater
treatment plant, but not including satellite dish antennas, facilities for
the handling of solid waste, or radio, television, or microwave transmission
or relay towers.



   Rain Garden means a shallow depression typically planted with native
perennial plants and strategically located to collect, infiltrate and filter
smaller scale quantities of runoff water than bioswales.  (Ord. 5061 -
1/18/16)



   Recreation Area means a building, open or enclosed structure, outdoor
field or playground containing recreational facilities, such as a tennis
court, swimming pool and/or gymnasium, and operated by a government agency or
as a business.  Recreation area includes outdoor amphitheaters, playing
fields, tennis courts and swimming pools.



   Recreational Vehicle means any vehicle or boat designed for temporary
living quarters/ human habitation or recreation and not used as a commercial
vehicle, including, but not limited to, the following:  boat/watercraft,
camper trailer, conversion van, motorized trailer/ home, off-the-road
vehicle, racing car or cycle, snowmobile, specially constructed vehicle,
travel trailer, and truck camper.  Mobile homes, as defined in these
definitions are not included in the definition of recreational vehicle.



      1.   Boat/Watercraft:  A vehicle for traveling in or on
water, including all types of personal watercraft whether impelled by wind,
oars, or mechanical devices.  For the purpose of this ordinance,
boats/watercraft mounted on a trailer shall be considered one vehicle.



      2.   Camper Trailer:  A folding or collapsible vehicle
without its own motorized power designed and constructed as temporary living
quarters for travel, camping, recreation or vacation use.



      3.   Conversion Van:  A conventional van having its cargo
area equipped with living facilities, extra windows, and often increased
headroom.



      4.   Motor Home:  A temporary dwelling designed and
constructed for travel, camping, recreational or vacation uses as an integral
part of a self-propelled vehicle.



      5.   Off-the-road vehicle:  A vehicle intended principally
for recreational use of off roads where state vehicle licenses are required,
such as a dune buggy, go-cart, and all-terrain vehicle.



      6.   Racing car or cycle:  A vehicle intended to be used in
racing competition, such as a race car, stock car, or racing cycle.



      7.   Snowmobile:  A self-propelled vehicle designed for
travel on snow or ice, generally steered by skis or runners.  For the
purpose of this ordinance, snowmobiles mounted on a trailer shall be
considered one vehicle.



      8.   Specially constructed vehicle: Any vehicle which was not
originally constructed under a distinctive name, make, model or type, or
which, if originally constructed has been materially altered by the removal
of essential parts, or by the addition or substitution of essential parts,
new or used, derived from other vehicles or makes of vehicles and used for
temporary living quarters or recreation.



      9.   Travel trailer:  A rigid vehicular structure, without
its own motorized power, designed as a temporary living quarters for travel
camping, recreation or vacation use, and is required to be licensed or
registered and insured for highway use.



      10.   Truck camper/Slide in pick-up camper:  A structure
designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and designed to
be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation or vacation
use.  When mounted on a truck, such structure and the truck shall together
be considered one vehicle.



(Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Recycling Center means an operation designed or intended for the
collection and processing of clean, source-separated, and recyclable papers,
glass, metals, or plastics, including the sorting, compacting, and shipping
of recyclable materials collected from recycling drop-off stations located in
the Village.  This shall not include a facility which handles, collects, or
otherwise stores or processes automobile bodies or parts, toxic or hazardous
materials, or recyclable materials mixed with other refuse.



   Rehabilitation means the act or process of returning a building,
object, site or structure to a state of utility through repair, remodeling or
alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while
preserving portions or features of the property that are historically,
architecturally, or culturally significant. (Ord. 4143 – 6/5/06)



   Removal means any relocation of an improvement on its site or to
another site.



   Renewable Energy.  Refers to energy derived from existing flows of
energy generated by on-going natural processes, including, but not limited
to, energy generated from the sun, flowing water, wind flows, and geothermal
heat flows. The term shall not include energy generated from fossil fuels,
nuclear fission, or any derivative of those energy sources.  (Ord. 4594 –
10/18/10)



   Renewable Energy Conversion System (RECS).  Any device associated with
the conversion of solar, wind or geothermal and non-fossil fuel energy, such
as, but not limited to, a wind charger, windmill, wind turbine, solar panel,
solar array, geothermal cables etc., into electrical or other form of usable
kinetic energy.  (Ord. 4594 – 10/18/10)



   Residential Planned Development means a development comprised of
attached and/or detached dwelling units that has coordinated common open
space and service areas and is built in accordance with densities specified
in the zoning district in which it is located.



   Residential Use means any detached, duplex, townhouse, or multifamily
dwelling, manufactured home, mobile home, residential-care home, boarding
house, or dormitory.



   Residential-Care Home means a dwelling in which staff persons provide
care, education, and participation in community activities for a group of
unrelated individuals who have long-term mental, intellectual, developmental
or physical disabilities, and who are unable to live independently but are
capable of community living if provided with an appropriate level of
supervision, assistance and support services, but who do not require on-site
medical or nursing facilities, with the primary goal of developing or
exercising basic skills for daily living.  This does not include dwellings
for persons whose primary reason for placement in the dwelling is the abuse
of alcohol or controlled substances, or the need for continuous nursing or
medical care, or treatment for a communicable disease, or for persons who
have recently been released from incarceration, or dwellings which serve as
an alternative to incarceration for persons convicted of criminal offenses or
declared criminally insane or dangerous.



   Restaurant means an establishment, including banquet halls, that is
open to the public where food and/or beverages are regularly prepared,
consumed and sold. This could include:



   1.   At a table or counter within the premises;



   2.   For consumption at a table or counter outdoors, but located on
the premises;



   3.   For consumption in automobiles or other motor vehicles located
in parking areas on the premises; and



   4.   For consumption off the premises.



   Restaurants include sit down and take out establishments. They do not
include caterers, wholesale bakeries, packaged tea and coffee shops,
butcheries, or grocers.  (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



   Food establishments that brew beer (also known as brewpubs) or distill
wine for consumption primarily on the premises are considered restaurants
provided that revenue from food sales shall constitute at least fifty percent
(50%) of the total business revenues.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Restoration means the act or process of accurately recovering the form
and details of a building, object, site or structure and its setting as it
appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work
or by the repair or replacement of missing earlier work.  (Ord. 4143 –
6/5/06)



   Retail Establishments means the sale of goods and services in small
quantities to the public.      (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



   Retention means the permanent storage of stormwater.  (Ord. 3837 –
12/1/03)



   Retention Basin/Wet Pond means a stormwater management facility which
includes a permanent impoundment, or normal pool of water, for the purpose of
enhancing water quality  and, therefore, is normally wet, even during
non-rainfall periods.  Storm runoff inflows may be temporarily stored above
this permanent impoundment for the purpose of reducing flooding, or stream
channel erosion.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



   Retention/Detention Facility means a facility which could be wet or
dry, respectively (see definitions for descriptions), and which provides for
storage of storm water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during
and after a flood or storm.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Right-of-Way is a general term denoting a public way, usually in a
strip, acquired for or devoted to access, utility or transportation purposes.



   Right-of-Way, Official means the right-of-way as established by the
Transportation Map of the Village's Comprehensive Plan.



   Roadway means the portion of the highway or street, including
shoulders, for vehicular use and bicycle use.



   Rough Grade means the vertical location of the ground after the initial
excavation or filling is completed prior to the commencement of construction.



   Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land that is not
absorbed by the soil or plant material and which reaches the drainage system.



   Satellite Dish means a signal-receiving device, the purpose of which is
to reserve communication or other signals from satellites in earth, orbit and
other extraterrestrial sources.  The term includes earth stations, ground
stations, disk antennas and antenna structures, as well as low-noise
amplifiers which magnify, store, transfer and/or transmit electronic or light
signals, and coaxial cables which carry or transmit signals to a television
set or radio receiver.



   School means a privately-owned or publicly-owned elementary school,
middle school, junior high school, or high school which does not provide
lodging for students.



   School, Arts means a secondary or higher education facility primarily
teaching skills in crafts and the fine arts and does not provide lodging or
dwelling units for students or faculty.



   School, Boarding means a privately-owned or publicly-owned elementary
school, middle school, junior high school, or high school which provides
lodging or dwelling units for students on the same property.



   School, Vocational means a secondary or higher education facility
primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade or
business and does not provide lodging or dwelling units for students or
faculty.  The term "vocational schools" does not include schools that teach
repair skills for automobiles or other types of heavy machinery that require
garage and/or outdoor work space.



   Screening means structures, solid fences, or evergreen vegetation
maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the area or objects behind
such structures, solid fences or vegetation.



   Seams means divisions between land use areas that benefit from
unification of two adjacent sites.  (Ord. 5061  1/18/16)



   Self-Service Storage Facility means a building consisting of
individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the
storage of business and household goods.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



   Setback means the horizontal distance between any portion of a
structure or any development activity and the bank of a perennial stream, the
centerline of an intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a lake
or pond, and the edge of a wetland, measured at the structure's or
development's closest point to the bank, centerline, ordinary high water
mark, easement, property line, or other point on or near the site.



   Setback, Corner Side means an open space between the side of a building
or structure and a side lot line abutting a street. (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97)



   Setback, Front means an open space between a building or structure and
the street line of the lot on which the building or structure is located,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except by fences or as
otherwise provided in these regulations.  The front setback on a corner lot
shall be that area with the narrowest street frontage.  If neither frontage
is narrower, the front shall be designated in the application, and shall
usually be the less busy street.  In measuring a front setback, the
horizontal distance between the streetline and the closest projection of the
building shall be used.  Every required front setback shall be measured at
right angles (90 degrees) from the street line.



   Setback, Rear means an open space between the rear of a building or
structure and the lot line farthest from the street fronting the lot,
projected to the side lines of the lot on which the building or structure is
located.



   Setback, Side means an open space between the side of a building or
structure and a side lot line which does not abut a street, projected to the
front setback and rear setback of the lot on which the building or structure
is located. (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97)



   Shade Tree means a self-supporting woody plant having at least one
well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and spread
of at least thirty (30) feet. Also referred to as canopy tree or overstory
tree.  (Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   Shrub means a woody plant that produces branches or shoots from near
its base.  (Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   Sight Triangle means the area of the corner lot closest to the
intersection which is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of
both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



   Sign means any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
which is used primarily to advertise, identify, display or direct or attract
attention to an object, person, establishment, product, service, event or
location by any means including, without limitation, words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images,
visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which they are situated
or visible from any public thoroughfare or right of way.  This includes, but
is not limited to, wall signs, freestanding signs, ground signs, window
signs, awning or canopy signs, marquees, changeable copy signs, message
boards, illuminated signs, moving signs, temporary signs, portable signs,
pennants, banners, streamers or any other attention-getting device, flag, or
other display, whether affixed to a building or erected elsewhere on the
premises.  The term "sign" excludes those features of a building which are
an integral part of the building's design and structure.



   Sign, Animated means any sign which includes action or motion.



   Sign, Banner means a temporary non-rigid sign composed of lightweight
material on the wall of the building's tenant space, mounted in the ground,
or securely attached to the existing ground sign.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10;
Amd. Ord. 4610 – 12/20/10)



   Sign, Canopy or Awning means any sign which is affixed to, painted on
or suspended from a roof-like shelter, either permanent, retractable, or
removable, which is self-supporting and provides protection from sun, rain,
snow and other elements.



   Sign, Copy, Changeable or Message Board means a time and temperature
sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lampbank, or any sign whose
copy is changed manually in the field in or upon the surface area of the
sign. (Ord. 2746 - 6/5/95)



   Sign, Directional means a sign which directs or guides persons to an
establishment or to facilities intended to serve the public, including
entrances, exits, restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking areas,
full-service and self service gasoline pumps, and similar facilities, but
which does not identify the establishment itself or other goods or services
available at the establishment and does not contain other advertising
messages.



   Sign, Flashing means any sign which contains an intermittent or
flashing light source, or which produces the illusion of intermittent or
flashing light.



   Sign, Freestanding means a sign which is completely or principally
supported by one (1) or more post or other support of which 30% is visually
or physically attached to the ground, which is not attached to the principal
building on the property, and is anchored in or upon the ground.  This shall
include, but not be limited to, signs attached to poles or supports for
lights, canopies, and other items or structures.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)   
     



   Sign, Height means the vertical distance measured from the natural
grade at the base of the sign support to the highest point of the sign.



   Sign, Hologram means a three-dimensional picture that is made on a
photographic film or plate without the use of a camera, that consists of a
pattern of interference produced by a split coherent beam of light and which
for viewing is illuminated with a coherent light from behind.



   Sign, Identification means a sign which states the name of the business
or establishment, including either the national company or local proprietor,
and/or the address of a building.



   Sign, Illuminated means any sign which emanates light either by means
of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface or by means of illumination
transmitted through the sign lettering only. (Ord.2959 - 11/18/96)



   Sign, Indirectly Illuminated means any sign which reflects light from a
source intentionally directed upon it, for example by means of a flood light.



   Sign, Nonconforming means any sign which was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the adoption and effective date of these regulations and
any amendments hereto, which fails to conform to all applicable regulations
and restrictions of this Code, or a sign previously deemed to be
nonconforming for which a special permit has been issued.



   Sign, Off-Premises (Off-Site Sign) means any sign that identifies a
business, person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities or that
directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located.



   Sign, On-Premises (On-Site Sign) means any sign that identifies a
business, person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities that is
located on the same premises as the sign itself.



   Sign, Portable means any sign that is not permanently attached to the
ground, a structure, or a building and which is designed to be transported to
another location.



   Sign, Projecting means any sign that is attached to a wall in a
perpendicular manner.



   Sign, Public means a sign of a non-commercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance
of a public duty, such as official signs and notices of any public or
governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of a court or public
officer, including official traffic signs authorized by the Illinois Revised
Statutes or the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   Sign, Temporary means a sign which contains information which is not of
a permanent character.  Such signs include, but are not limited to,
political signs, garage sale signs and real estate signs.



   Sign, Wall or Facia means any sign attached to or erected against a
wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in plane
approximately parallel to the plane of the wall.



   Sign, Window means a sign that is installed inside, painted upon or
placed against a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises,
not including merchandise located in a window display.



   Sign Area means the entire area of all sign faces, cumulatively,
including sign faces on which no copy is currently displayed.



   Sign Face means that part of the sign which is or can be used to
identify, to advertise, to communicate information, or for visual
representation which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. 
This shall include any background material, panel, trim, color, and direct or
self-illumination that differentiates the sign from the building, structure,
backdrop surface, or object upon or against which it is placed.  This shall
not include any portion of the support structure for the sign, provided that
no message, symbol, or any of the aforementioned sign face criteria is placed
on or designed as part of the support structure.



   Site Grading or Stripping means any activity which removes or covers
the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing, filling or
removal of topsoil.



   Soil Erosion Control Plan means a plan submitted by a person requesting
issuance of a site development permit from the Village for the construction
or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of
erosion, runoff and grading.



   Solid Screen means either an earth berm, hill, solid wood fence, wall
or a densely planted row of shrubs that cannot be seen through in any season.



   Specified Anatomical Areas include a) the human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or b) less
than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. (Ord.
4926 - 9/15/14)



   Specified Sexual Activities includes the fondling or other erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; and excretory functions in
connection with sexual activity. (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



   Stadium means a structure or facility designed, intended, or used
primarily for athletic events and containing seating for spectators of those
events, but not including a raceway or dragstrip.



   Stormwater Management means the reduction of the quantity or rate of
runoff, which affects flooding, or the reduction of pollutants generated at a
development site and carried in stormwater. (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



   Story means that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it, except
that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.  The
floor of a story may have split levels provided that there is not more than a
four foot difference in elevation between the different levels of the
floor.  A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers more
than one-third the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical
distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet
or more.  "Story" shall not include any such area having part of its ceiling
height below grade.



   Stream means an open body of running water flowing continuously or
intermittently.  Perennial and intermittent streams are designated in
accordance with 7.5 minute topographic maps of the U.S. Geological Survey.



   Street means that portion of a public right-of-way, easement, or
private easement which is improved to provide for the movement of motor
vehicles.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



   Street, Arterial, Major means a street or roadway classification which
has as its primary function intercommunity and intrametro area traffic
movement.  The secondary function of this roadway is to provide access to
land.  Major arterials include, but are not limited to, LaGrange Road,
Harlem Avenue, Wolf Road (south of 159th Street), 159th Street and 183rd
Street.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Street, Arterial, Minor means a street or roadway classification which
has as its primary function intercommunity traffic movement.  The secondary
function of this roadway is to provide access to land.  Minor arterials
include, but are not limited to,  135th Street, 143rd Street, 151st Street
(east of LaGrange Road and west of Harlem Avenue), 151st Street (between Wolf
Road and Will-Cook Road), 153rd Street (between Wolf Road and LaGrange Road),
167th Street, 179th Street, 80th Avenue (south of 151st Street), 82nd Avenue
(135th Street to 151st Street), Wolf Road (north of 159th Street), Will-Cook
Road, and Southwest Highway.  (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00; Amd. Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Street, Collector, Major means a street or roadway classification,
which has as its primary function to collect and distribute traffic between
local streets and the arterial system.  The secondary function of this
roadway is to provide access to land.  The tertiary function of this roadway
is to provide traffic movement between neighborhoods.  Major collectors
include, but are not limited to, 94th Avenue, 104th Avenue, 108th Avenue,
Ravinia Avenue, West Avenue and John Humphrey Drive.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02;
Amd. Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Street, Collector, Minor means a street or roadway classification which
has as its primary function to collect and distribute traffic between
neighborhoods.  The secondary function of this roadway is to provide access
to lands.  Minor collectors include Wheeler Drive, Orlan Brook Drive and
151st Street.



   Street, Cul-De-Sac means a local street that has only one open end.



   Street, Frontage means all of the property fronting on one side of a
street between two intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street,
all of the property along one side of the street between an intersecting
street and the end of such dead-end street.



   Street Line means the outer boundary of a street right-of-way.



   Street, Local means a street intended and designed to provide access to
abutting properties.



   Street Right-of-Way means the shortest distance between the
right-of-way lines of a given street.



   Street Width means the shortest distance between backs of curbs. 



   Structural Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such
repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building. 
The addition or installation of siding or a masonry veneer to a building, the
enclosure of the open area below a roof projection, the enclosure of a
doorway, the enclosure of an open stairway, the enclosure of a roofed patio
or roofed carport, shall not be considered structural alterations.



   Structure means anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use
of which requires a location on a parcel of land.  This includes a fixed or
movable building which can be used for housing, business, commercial,
agricultural, or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. 
"Structure" also includes, but is not limited to, parking lots, walkways,
paths, swimming pools, tennis courts, poles, pipelines, transmission lines,
tracks, signs, cisterns, sewage treatment plants, sheds, docks, mooring
areas, and other accessory construction.



   Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more
lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development; provided that a division of land which may be ordered or
approved by a court or affected by testamentary or intestate provisions,
shall not be deemed a subdivision.  The term includes resubdivision and
consolidation, and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdividing the land subdivided.  The term shall also apply to
any other development, whether an actual division of property is required or
not, and regardless of whether the same is labeled a subdivision or not,
including planned development, it being the intent of this code to apply to
all types of development, both within the Village of Orland Park and to areas
lying within one and one-half (1 1/2) miles of the corporate limits  of the
Village of Orland Park. 



   Substantial Improvement means any repair, reconstruction, expansion, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the assessed value of a structure as determined either before the expansion
or improvement begins or before the damage occurred giving rise to the repair
or reconstruction.  "Substantial improvement" shall not include, however,
any repair or improvement required to bring the structure into compliance
with existing state or county or Village health, sanitary, safety, or
building code specifications necessary to ensure safe habitation of the
structure.



   Sustainable Development means construction that can be maintained over
time without damaging the environment. Development that meets the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet
future needs.  (Ord. 4594 – 10/18/10; Amd. Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



   Swimming Pool means a man-made rigid or semi-rigid receptacle for
water, whether intended for indoor or outdoor use, having a depth at any
point greater than twenty-four (24) inches and with a capacity of more than
1,000 gallons or with a water surface area exceeding 250 square feet, which
is used or intended to be used for swimming, wading, bathing, immersion, or
partial immersion of human beings, and which is constructed, installed and
maintained in or above ground.



   Tattooing (per Illinois State Statute 410 ILCS 54/1) means to make
permanent marks on the skin of a live human being by puncturing the skin and
inserting indelible colors [often to produce an indelible mark resulting in a
design, picture, or words visible through the skin]. Tattooing includes
imparting permanent makeup on the skin, such as permanent lip coloring and
permanent eyeliner. Tattooing does not include any of the following:



      1.   The practice of electrology as defined in the Electrology
Licensing Act;



      2.   The practice of acupuncture as defined in the Acupuncture
Licensing Act;



   The use, by a physician licensed to practice medicine in all its
branches, of colors, dyes, or pigments for the purpose of obscuring scar
tissue or imparting color to the skin for cosmetic, medical or figurative
purposes.



(Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Tattoo/ Body Piercing Establishment means a business establishment
where tattooing or body piercing is performed. A special use permit is
required for tattoo establishments when the tattoo activity constitutes the
principal activity of that business at a given location. The intent of
providing permanent make-up services and other cosmetically related uses of
tattoo technology at a location is to do so as one of several services
offered at a beauty salon, and not as a principal use. If other services like
cutting hair, manicures, waxing are offered, permanent make-up does not
require a special use permit.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10; Amd. Ord. 5221 –
9/18/17)



   Temporary Use means a use that is established for a fixed period of
time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such
time, and does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
structure.



   Tensile Canopy means a membrane that is attached to three or more
independent anchor points to create rigidity, and is used as protection from
weather elements.  (Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   Tensile Canopy Structure is a freestanding structure that the membrane
of a Tensile Canopy is independently anchored to.  (Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   Terrace means an open, outdoor flooring area for sitting and gathering,
usually constructed of pavement on the ground surface.  (Ord. 3199 -
11/16/98)



   Topsoil.  The uppermost layer of the ground that is usually the most
fertile, being dark in color and crumbly.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including lattice towers,
guyed towers, and monopole towers.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Trellis means a vertical landscaping structure or wall section which is
designed and intended to support vegetation and which may include lattice
work.  (Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   Use means the purpose or activity for which the land, or any structure
thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained.



   Use, Permitted means any use which is or may be lawfully established in
a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all
requirements of these regulations for the district in which such use is
located.



   Use, Special means a use (to be defined in the zoning districts) that
has operational, physical and other characteristics that may be different
from those of the predominant permitted uses in a zoning district, but which
is a use that complements or is otherwise compatible with the intended
over-all development within a district, provided that specified standards are
met.  (Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   Utility or Haul Trailer means a vehicle, enclosed or non-enclosed,
without its own motorized power that is designed and constructed to transport
another vehicle, such as a car, boat, motorcycle or snowmobile, or to
transport equipment and/or tools, such as lawn mowers, bobcats, etc., and
that is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for highway use. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, a utility or haul trailer with vehicles
mounted on it shall be considered one vehicle.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   Utility Substation means water storage tanks, radio, television and
microwave transmission or relay towers and antennae, and electric or gas
substations, water or wastewater pumping stations, reservoirs, filtration
plants and storage towers, telephone repeater stations, or similar structures
used as an intermediary switching, boosting, distribution, or transfer
station of electricity, natural gas, water, wastewater, cable television, or
telephone services between the point of generation or treatment and the end
user, but not including broadcasting studios or satellite dish antennas.



   Vegetation means all plant growth.



   Vehicle Repair – see motor vehicle services.  (Ord. 4434 – 12/1/08)



   Vehicle Sales and Rental – see motor vehicle sales. (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08)



   Village means the Village of Orland Park, Illinois.



   Warehousing or Distribution Establishments mean a business or
government agency operation whose primary purpose is: (1) the storage of
goods or materials, or (2) the distribution of goods and materials to another
location for the purposes of resale or use at the placed distributed to, so
long as no more than thirty (30) percent of the square footage of the
interior of the building may be devoted to retail or showroom facilities, but
not including the storage of vehicles, trailers or boats, or heavy
manufacturing, resource extraction, scrap operations or salvage operations,
or mini-storage warehouses.



   Watercourse means any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or
artificial depression, slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, circuit, conduit,
culvert, swale, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway,
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which stormwater
runoff and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently.



   Wetland means an area that is permanently or periodically inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater or otherwise has hydric soil
conditions at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, or that under
normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.  The term "wetland" includes
all wetlands that are defined as such by federal and/or state statutes and
regulations for the purposes of regulating development or other activities
within wetlands.



   Wholesale Establishments means the sale of goods and materials in large
quantity primarily for resale to other sellers or contractors, but not
including heavy manufacturing, resource extraction, scrape operations, or
salvage operations.



   Window Display means one (1) or more objects set inside a building in a
display case or on a window ledge which displays merchandise or relates to
services offered but which is not affixed to any window.



   Winery means an agricultural processing facility producing wine from
fruit or fruit juices through fermentation or the refermenting of still wine
into sparkling wine. Wineries may include a production facility where grapes
are crushed, fermented or pressed, where bulk wine is stored in tanks or
barrels, or where winery operations such as racking, filtering, blending or
bottling of wines are carried out.,  The facility may also bottle, warehouse
and distribute wine. The facility may contain an onsite retail area where
taste testing and sales directly to a consumer are allowed as ancillary uses
to the main operation through a liquor license but such onsite retail area
cannot generate more than 50% of total sales annually. (Ord. 4434 –
12/1/08; Amd. Ord. 4839 - 9/1613)



   Wireless Communication means digital wireless technology such as
portable phones, pagers, faxes, and computers.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Wireless Communication Facility means a parcel of land that contains
wireless communication infrastructure such as antennas, support structures,
equipment, accessory buildings, parking, and other uses associated with and
ancillary to wireless communication transmission.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Wireless Service Provider means a company that provides wireless
service.  (Ord. 3168 - 9/8/98)



   Yard, Front means an area extending the full width of a lot between the
front lot line and the nearest principal structure.  (Ord. 4647 – 5/16/11)



   Yard, Rear means an area extending the full width of a lot between the
rear lot line and the nearest principal structure.  (Ord. 4647 – 5/16/11)



   Yard, Side means an area extending the depth of a lot from the front
yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest principal
structure.  (Ord. 4647 – 5/16/11)



   Zoning Districts means the districts into which the Village of Orland
Park, Illinois has been divided as set forth on the Zoning District Map.



ARTICLE 3:
DECISIONMAKING AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES



SECTION 3-101.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   In addition to any authority granted the President and Board of
Trustees by state law or other ordinances of the Village, the President and
Board of Trustees shall have the following powers and duties:



   A.   To adopt, review and amend the Comprehensive Plan for the
Village, the Capital Improvements Plan and such overlay plans as they may
deem necessary and appropriate;



   B.   To review by Committee all applications for special use
permits, map and text amendments and preliminary plans prior to public
hearing by the Plan Commission in accordance with the provisions of Sections
5-105(I), 5-108 and 5-112(D).



   C.   To hear, review, approve or disapprove special use permits
after recommendation by the Plan Commission in accordance with the provisions
of Section 5-105(I);



   D.   To hear, review and approve appeals from special use permits in
accordance with the provisions of Section 5-105(H);



   E.   To initiate, hear, review and adopt amendments to the Zoning
District Map after recommendation by the Plan Commission in accordance with
the provisions of Section 5-108;



   F.   To initiate, hear, review and adopt amendments to the text of
these regulations after recommendation by the Plan Commission in accordance
with the provisions of Section 5-108;



   G.   To hear, review and approve or disapprove all applications for
approval of plats of subdivision in accordance with the provisions of Section
5-112; and



   H.   To take such other action not delegated to the Plan Commission
as the Board of Trustees may deem desirable and necessary to implement the
provisions of these regulations and the Comprehensive Plan.



(Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



SECTION 3-102.   PLAN COMMISSION.



   A.   Creation.  There is hereby established a Plan Commission.



   B.   Powers and Duties.   The Plan Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:



      1.   If requested by the Board of Trustees:



         a.   To prepare or cause to be prepared a Comprehensive
Plan, a Capital Improvements Plan and overlay plans; to submit such plans to
the Board of Trustees for review and approval and to submit to the Board of
Trustees an annual report recommending amendments to such plans;



         b.   To hear, review and make recommendations to the
Board of Trustees in regard to amendment of the Zoning District Map;



         c.   To hear, review and recommend to the Board of
Trustees approval or disapproval of applications for special use permits;



         d.   To initiate, hear, review and make recommendations
to the Board of Trustees on applications for amendments to the text of these
regulations;



         e.   To review site plans for multi-family and
non-residential development, landscaping plans, and other appearance related
matters;



         f.   To hear, review, and recommend approval or
disapproval of all applications for approval of plats of subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of Section 5-112; and



         g.   To hear, review and decide appeals from
administrative decisions.



      2.   To make its special knowledge and expertise available
upon reasonable written request and authorization of the Board of Trustees to
any official, department, board, commission or agency of the County, State or
Federal governments;



      3.   To adopt such rules, as are approved by the Board of
Trustees, to govern the Commission's proceedings as are necessary for the
administration of its responsibilities, not inconsistent with these
regulations;



      4.   To hold public hearings and make recommendations to the
Board of Trustees on applications for designation of historic landmarks in
Orland Park as are referred to it by the Board;



      5.   To review demolition and building permit applications and
issue or deny Certificates of Appropriateness for property within historic
districts or designated as a historic landmark;



      6.   To advise owners on correct techniques for altering
historic landmarks and property within historic districts;



      7.   To hold public hearings and make recommendations to the
Board of Trustees on all matters relating to construction and alteration of
historic landmarks or property within historic districts;



      8.   To adopt criteria for the review of applications for
Certificates of Appropriateness and other applications for development
approval affecting historic districts or landmarks;



      9.   To submit an annual report of its activities and other
reports as necessary;



      10.   To maintain a register of designated districts and
landmarks and work to educate the residents of the Village about its heritage;



      11.   To examine and evaluate all methods of financial
assistance for historic preservation;



      12.   Develop appearance, architectural and beautification
plans for a historic district, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the
Village and with existing ordinances. Elements and factors to be used in
these plans shall include but not be restricted to improved and unimproved
land, open spaces, streets and parkways, gardens, malls, setbacks and
rights-of-way, external architectural features of buildings and structures of
all types, existing and future, landscaping, land topography, plant life,
walks, drives, parking area, plazas, exterior furniture, hardware, signs,
markers, posts, fences, barriers, light and lighting, and supplementary
structures and appurtenances;



      13.   Consult with the Development Services Department, the
Parking and Traffic Advisory Board, other Village departments and any other
governmental bodies, property owners, or homeowners groups or business groups
which represent the historic district area or express interest in
participating;



      14.   Study exterior design drawings, landscape and site plans
and materials for any proposed public improvements within a historic
district; and



      15.   To perform such other duties as are assigned by the
Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   C.   Qualifications for Membership.   Members of the Plan
Commission shall be residents of the Village.  In the event that any member
is no longer such a resident or is convicted of a felony or an offense
involving moral turpitude while in office, the Board of Trustees shall
terminate the appointment of such person as a member of the Commission. 
Special consideration shall be given to individuals who have a background in
real estate, architecture, landscape architecture, planning or historic
preservation.  (Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   D.   Membership, Appointment, Removal, Terms and Vacancies.   There
shall be a total of seven members.  Membership, Appointment, Removal, Terms
and Vacancies shall be as provided by the Village Board of Trustees by
Ordinance.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



   E.   Recording Secretary.   The Director of the Development
Services Department shall appoint a Recording Secretary to serve the Plan
Commission.  The Secretary shall keep minutes of all proceedings of the
Commission, which minutes shall be a summary of all proceedings before the
Commission, attested to by the Secretary, and which shall include the vote of
each member upon every question.  The minutes shall be approved by a
majority of the members of the Commission voting.  In addition, the
Secretary shall maintain all records of Commission meetings, hearings and
proceedings, the correspondence of the Commission, and a mailing list of
persons wishing to receive notice of meetings, agendas or minutes and who
have paid an annual fee set by the Board of Trustees to cover copying and
mailing costs.  (Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   F.   Staff.   TheDevelopment Services Department shall be the
professional staff of the Plan Commission.  (Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   G.   Quorum and Necessary Vote.   No meeting of the Plan Commission
may be called to order, nor may any business be transacted by the Commission,
without a quorum consisting of at least four (4) members of the Commission
being present.  The Chairman shall be considered and counted as a member. 
The concurring vote of at least four (4) members shall be necessary for the
Commission to take action on special use applications, final subdivision plat
approvals, or amendments to the text of these regulations, the Comprehensive
Plan, or to the Zoning District Map.  All other actions shall require the
concurring vote of a simple majority of the members of the Commission then
present and voting.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   H.   Meetings, Hearings and Procedure.



      1.   Regular meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held
twice a month.  Special meetings may be called by the President of the Board
of Trustees, the Chairman of the Plan Commission, a majority of the members
of the Plan Commission, or a majority of the Board of Trustees.



      2.   If a matter is postponed due to lack of a quorum, the
Chairman of the Plan Commission shall continue the meeting as a special
meeting to be held at the same location as soon thereafter as practical.  In
case of delays caused by other reasons, any hearing should be rescheduled to
the next Commission meeting.  The Secretary shall notify all members of the
date of the continued meeting and also shall notify all parties.



      3.   All meetings and hearings of the Commission shall be open
to the public.



      4.   Public hearings shall be set for a time certain.



      5.   No fewer than two (2) members shall attend at least one
informational or educational meeting per year; as approved by the State
Historic Preservation Officer, pertaining to the work and functions of the
Commission or to historic preservation.



      6.   The Plan Commission shall transmit an annual report of
its activities per year, as approved by the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Such reports shall include, at a minimum, the number of cases
reviewed, new designations made, progress on survey activities, resumes for
new Commission members, attendance records, and documentation for the
educational and information meetings referenced in the paragraph above.
Reports shall be submitted within sixty (60) days after the end of the fiscal
year for the Village.



      7.   The Plan Commission shall monitor and notify the State
Historic Preservation Officer of an actual or proposed demolition or actual
or proposed major alteration affecting any property in its jurisdiction
listed in the Illinois Register of Historic Places. The State Historic
Preservation Officer shall provide updated listings of both Registers to the
Commission and the President of the Board of Trustees.



      8.   The responsibilities of the Plan Commission shall be
complementary to and carried out in coordination with the responsibilities of
the State Historic Preservation Officer pursuant to state and federal laws
and regulations as they relate to historic preservation, landmarks, and
historic districts.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



SECTION 3-103.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION REVIEW COMMISSION.



Title Change (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02); Entire Section Repealed by Ord. 4940 -
11/3/14



SECTION 3-104.   HEARING OFFICERS.



   A.   Creation.  There is hereby established the position of Hearing
Officer(s).



   B.   Powers and Duties.   The Hearing Officer(s) shall have the
following powers and duties:



      1.   To hold hearings and make decisions in regard to
applications for variances and appeals under the provisions of Sections 5-107
and 5-109;



      2.   To adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of hearings;



      3.   To take testimony under oath and compel the attendance of
witnesses; and



      4.   To issue orders regarding matters within their
jurisdiction.



   C.   Qualifications.  Hearing Officers shall be trained and
qualified to conduct hearings, make recommendations or findings of fact and
conclusions on the matters heard.



   D.   Membership, Appointment, Removal, Terms and Vacancies.
Membership, Appointment, Removal, Terms and Vacancies shall be as provided by
the Village Board of Trustees by Ordinance. (Ord. 2768 - 8/7/95)



   E.   Recording Secretary.  The Director of the Building Department
shall appoint a Recording Secretary to serve the Hearing Officers.  The
Secretary shall keep minutes of all proceedings of the Officers, which
minutes shall be a summary of all proceedings before the Board, attested to
by the presiding Officer.  In addition, the Secretary shall maintain all
records of the hearings, proceedings and correspondence of the Officers.



   F.   Staff.  The Building Department shall be the professional
staff of the Hearing Officers.



   G.   Meetings, Hearings and Procedure.



      1.   Hearings shall be called by a Hearing Officer as are
necessary to perform the duties prescribed in this Section.



      2.   All hearings shall be set for a time certain and be open
to the public.



      3.   Every order, requirement, decision or determination of a
Hearing Officer shall immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
and be of public record.  A report on all such decisions shall also be filed
on a monthly basis with the Board of Trustees in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 5-107 and 5-109.



SECTION 3-105.   DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES.



   A.   General.  The Department of Development Services shall perform
the planning functions for the Village, provide technical support and
guidance for action on applications for development approval and perform such
other functions as may be requested by the Board of Trustees, the Plan
Commission, or the Village Manager.  The Department of Development Services
shall coordinate the review of all applications for development approval by
the Department of Development Services and other Village departments.



   B.   Director of Development Services.



      1.   Creation and Appointment.  The Director of Development
Services shall be the department head of the Department of Development
Services and shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Village
Manager.



      2.   Jurisdiction, Authority and Duties.  In addition to the
jurisdiction, authority and duties which may be conferred upon the Director
of Development Services by other ordinances, the Director of Development
Services shall have the following jurisdiction, authority and duties:



         a.   To serve as staff to the Plan Commission and to
inform such body of all facts and information at his disposal with respect to
applications for development approval or any other matters brought before it;



         b.   To serve as chairman of the Development Review
Committee;



         c.   To assist the Plan Commission in the review and
preparation of the Comprehensive Plan, any special area plans, the Capital
Improvements Program, these regulations and proposed amendments thereto;



         d.   To maintain the Zoning District Map and to make an
annual presentation of the Map to the Board of Trustees for certification;



         e.   To maintain development review files and other
public records related to the Department's affairs;



         f.   To review and approve or disapprove applications
for special use permits;



         g.   To review, or cause to be reviewed, all
applications for special use permits and plat approval;



         h.   To render interpretations of the Comprehensive
Plan, these regulations or the boundaries of the Zoning District Map;



         i.   To evaluate and act upon claims of non-conforming
uses and structures in conjunction with Building Department and make
recommendations;



         j.   To coordinate all local, regional, state and
federal environmental and other land development permitting processes
affecting development in the Village;



         k.   To plan for and evaluate all transportation
improvements for the Village, and coordinate such activities with the
Department of Transportation of the State of Illinois;



         l.   To issue development compliance certificates and
sign pre-application conference letters of understanding in accordance with
these regulations;



         m.   To determine whether an application for development
approval is materially different from a previously denied application in
accordance with the provisions of Section 5-101(H);



         n.   To establish such rules of procedure as are
necessary for the administration of his responsibilities under these
regulations; and



         o.   Whenever requested to do so by the Board of
Trustees with the assistance of other Village departments, to conduct or
cause to be conducted surveys, investigations and studies, and to prepare or
cause to be prepared such reports, maps, photographs, charts and exhibits as
may be requested.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



SECTION 3-106. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   A.   Creation and Composition.  The Development Review Committee
shall be composed of the Director of Development Services, the directors of
the Village's Public Services Department, Recreation and Parks Department,
the Building Department, the Finance Department, the Police Department, the
Village Engineer, the Village Attorney,  any other Village employee or
official designated by the Board of Trustees or Village Manager, and at their
option, representatives of the fire and school districts.



   B.   Duties.   The Development Review Committee shall meet at least
weekly to consider such matters as are prescribed by these regulations,
including:



      1.   Meeting with any developer at a preapplication conference
when requested or required;



      2.   Reviewing all applications for development approval,
submitting comments on such applications to the Director of Development
Services who shall consolidate such applications for submission to the Plan
Commission; and



      3.   Reviewing all applications for amendments to these
regulations.  (Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



SECTION 3-107. BUILDING DEPARTMENT.



   A.   General.  The Building Department shall perform the duties
required under the provisions of these regulations and such other functions
as may be requested by the Board of Trustees, the Plan Commission, or the
Village Manager.



   B.   Director of Building Department.



      1.   Creation and Appointment.   The Director of the Building
Department shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Village
Manager.



      2.   Jurisdiction, Authority and Duties.   In addition to the
jurisdiction, authority and duties which may be granted the Director of the
Building Department by other ordinances, the Director shall have the
following jurisdiction, authority and duties:



         a.   To issue and revoke building permits in accordance
with the procedures of these regulations;



         b.   To issue and revoke certificates of occupancy in
accordance with these regulations;



         c.   To serve as the Building Official under the
provisions of the Village's Building Code;



         d.   To serve on the Development Review Committee;



         e.   To conduct such inspections and investigations as
are necessary to enforce the provisions of these zoning regulations;



         f.   To determine the extent of damage or destruction of
non-conforming uses and structures, in cooperation with the Director of
Development Services;



         g.   To verify and record the actual land use of
property subject to these regulations;



         h.   To verify and enforce the conditions required by
special use permits;



         i.   To enforce the provisions of these regulations; and



         j.   To provide the Board of Trustees and the Plan
Commission and Hearing Officer with reports and recommendations with respect
to matters before such bodies, as directed by the Board of Trustees or the
Director of Development Services or Director of the Building Department. 
(Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



ARTICLE 4:
PLANNING DOCUMENTS



SECTION 4-101.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   A.   Authority.  The Department of Development Services has the
authority, as authorized by the Board of Trustees, to formulate and recommend
a Comprehensive Plan or elements thereof, and amendments thereto, from time
to time, for review by the Plan Commission and adoption by the Board of
Trustees.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   B.   General Purpose.  Upon adoption, the Comprehensive Plan shall
be considered an official statement of the policy of the Village with respect
to the existing and developing character of various areas of the Village; the
proper objectives, standards and directions for future maintenance, growth
and development of the Village; the means to be employed to protect the
existing character of development and to encourage future development that
will be in the best interests of the Village; and the actions and programs to
be undertaken by the Village with respect to its future maintenance and
development.



   C.   Elements.  The Comprehensive Plan for the Village may be
composed of such elements covering such subjects as may be deemed appropriate
by the Board of Trustees, including but not limited to, natural resources,
transportation, economic development, and annexation.



   D.   Effect.  No development regulation, Zoning District Map,
Capital Improvements Program, or Overlay Plan relating to the physical
maintenance or development of the Village or any land within it shall be
enacted, established, amended or varied and no public building, public
improvement, public site or right-of-way or other public structure or use of
land shall be authorized, established, developed, redeveloped or modified in
location or extent, whether by a public agency or a private developer, other
than in accordance with the policies, goals, objectives, principles and
standards of the adopted Comprehensive Plan or relevant element thereof. 



   E.   Plan Development.  The Director of Development Services, with
the assistance of other Village departments and agencies, shall develop and
revise a Comprehensive Plan for the Village of Orland Park.  The process of
plan development is necessarily an informal one, not readily adaptable to
rigid procedures, but the Director shall, in developing a plan, make all
reasonable efforts to obtain the views, comments and criticisms of interested
departments, divisions, agencies, organizations, groups, firms and residents
of the Village.  All administrative departments of the Village government,
as well as all agencies, boards and commissions shall provide to the
Director, upon his/her request, such available records or information as may
be required to support and assist in the preparation of the Plan.  (Amd.
Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13)



   F.   Adoption of Plan.



      1.   Upon completion of the Plan, or any element thereof, the
Development Services Department shall conduct sufficient public meetings in
the Village to provide adequate opportunities for all citizens to present
their views.



      2.   Upon completion of the meetings required in Subsection
(1) above, the Development Services Department may present the Plan or any
element thereof to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation to the
Board of Trustees.  The Plan Commission shall set, advertise and conduct a
public hearing on the Plan, any element of the Plan or any amendment to the
Plan in accordance with the public hearing notice procedures in Section 5-101
General Procedures, Requirements and Regulations.  The Plan Commission shall
recommend to the Board of Trustees that the Plan or any element or amendment
be approved, modified or rejected.



      3.   The Board of Trustees may adopt, reject, or modify such
Plan or any element thereof, or refer the Plan to the Plan Commission or
Development Services Department for further study.  (Amd. Ord. 4839 –
9/16/13)



   G.   Amendment of Plan.  The Comprehensive Plan or any element
thereof may be amended in the same manner as it is adopted.



   H.   Re-examination of the Plan.  In addition to ongoing review to
conduct studies and compile statistics, at least once every six (6) years the
Development Services Department shall re-examine the Comprehensive Plan,
these regulations and all other development regulations adopted by the
Village to implement said Plan.  The Development Services Department shall
prepare a written report setting forth the findings of such re-examination,
and shall transmit a copy thereof to the Plan Commission, the Board of
Trustees and the Village Manager.  These findings shall include:



      1.   The major problems and objectives relating to land
development confronting the Village at the time of the adoption, or last
revision or re-examination, of the Comprehensive Plan.



      2.   The extent to which such problems and objectives have
been reduced or have increased subsequent to such date.



      3.   The extent to which there have been significant changes
in the assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis for such Plan
or regulations as last revised, with particular regard to the density and
distribution of population and land uses, housing conditions, circulation,
conservation of natural resources and change in State, County and Village
policies and objectives.



      4.   The specific changes recommended for such Plan or
regulations, if any, including underlying objectives, policies and standards,
or whether a new Plan or regulation should be prepared.  (Amd. Ord. 4839 -
9/16/13)



SECTION 4-102.   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.



   A.   Authority.  The Village Manager shall prepare and the Board of
Trustees by ordinance may adopt or amend a Capital Improvements Program (CIP)
for the Village of Orland Park pursuant to the standards and procedures set
forth in this Section in conjunction with the development and adoption of a
Comprehensive Plan as provided in Section 4-101.



   B.   Definition and Contents.



      1.   General Definition.  The CIP shall be consistent with
and shall implement the Comprehensive Plan.  The CIP shall be a program of
municipal capital improvement projects, with their estimated costs, projected
over a period of at least five (5) years.  The CIP shall include major
projects  currently being undertaken, or to be undertaken, with Federal,
State, County and other public funds or under Federal, State or County
supervision.  Such projects may include any major nonrecurring expenditure
or any expenditure for physical facilities of government, such as costs for
acquisition of land or interests in land; construction of buildings or other
structures, including additions or major alterations; construction of streets
and utility lines; improvements; acquisition of fixed equipment; installation
of landscaping; and similar expenditures.



      2.   Specific Contents.



         a.   A classification of the recommended projects based
on their urgency and need for realization.



         b.   A recommendation of a time sequence to be followed
in implementing the recommended projects.



         c.   The estimated cost and revenues, if any, of each
project, including estimates of probable operating and maintenance costs.



         d.   A tabulation of existing sources of funds, listing
the source and amount for each project, and where such sources are
insufficient, the need for additional sources of funds for the implementation
and operation of each project.



         e.   An estimate of the number of persons and
establishments which will be displaced by each recommended project.



         f.   Such other elements as the Board of Trustees,
Village Manager or the Plan Commission may find useful or appropriate.



   C.   Purpose and Effect.



      1.   General Purpose.  The CIP shall serve as a means for
systematically reviewing proposed projects to ensure coordination of
expenditures and development with the Comprehensive Plan.  The CIP shall
link the timing, location and financing of proposed projects, shall encourage
the development of projects in scheduled stages, and shall provide developers
with an advance picture of future needs and development activities to be
undertaken by the Village.  The first year of the CIP shall, upon adoption
by the Board of Trustees, constitute the Capital Budget of the Village.



      2.   Effect.  Upon adoption, the CIP shall serve as notice of
the Village's capital needs and intentions for the five (5) year period.  No
other capital improvement shall be authorized except by prior amendment to
the CIP.



   D.   Procedures for Adoption and Amendment.



      1.   Program Development.  The Village Manager shall prepare
a proposed CIP and amendments thereto.



      2.   Adoption and Amendment.  Adoption and amendments to the
CIP shall require a public hearing before the Village Board of Trustees. 
The Village Board shall set, advertise and conduct a public hearing on the
plan, any element of the plan or any amendment to the plan in accordance with
the procedures in Section 5-101 (E); provided however, that the Board of
Trustees may add a public improvement to such CIP at any time if there is a
demonstrable need for such improvement and the funding for such improvement
is immediately available.



SECTION 4-103.   OVERLAY PLANS.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of an overlay plan is to set forth
development policies for discrete areas with special needs to guide Village
decisionmakers with respect to appropriate land use, subdivision, capital
improvement, service delivery and other public sector programming within the
geographical boundaries of the area encompassed by such plan.  Such plans
will permit the assembly of information at a more discrete level than is
possible in the Comprehensive Plan and will thereby provide decisionmakers
with more detailed information.



   B.   Scope of Plan.   An overlay plan may include the following
components:



      1.   geographical area of the neighborhood to be included in
the plan;



      2.   data on population, neighborhood attitudes, environmental
issues, zoning, type of land use and the location, traffic patterns, quality
and capacity of public facilities in the area;



      3.   existing, emerging and anticipated trends, problems, and
resources in the area relating to land use development and other activities
in the neighborhood;



      4.   a statement of the policies and objectives of the
community with respect to land use, quality of life and environment;



      5.   proposed development, land use and other changes
neighborhood residents wish to see implemented; and



      6.   the relationship between the CIP, Comprehensive Plan, and
other Village policies and the particular neighborhood.



   C.   Effect.  When an overlay plan has been approved by the Plan
Commission and adopted by the Board of Trustees, it shall be known as "The
Overlay Plan for                            ," and shall be an
element of the Comprehensive Plan and shall have the same effect as the
Comprehensive Plan as set forth in Section 4-101.



   D.   Adoption and Amendment.   Overlay plans shall be adopted and
amended in the same manner as provided for the Comprehensive Plan in Section
4-101.



ARTICLE 5:
DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES, REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS



SECTION 5-101.   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   A.   Due Process



      1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to define and
outline the development review procedures that petitioners, government
agents, and elected and appointed officials follow for transparent review for
development and redevelopment in the Village of Orland Park.



      2.   Organization. The organization of this section is laid
out in a manner that reflects the process of development review beginning
with the determination of the type of review required, the review sequences,
the review procedures, and finally the role of the Development Services
Department. This section informs the public, the petitioner, the government
agent, and the elected and appointed officials of the procedures of the
Village of Orland Park for development review. It also simultaneously guides
them through the decision-making process and acts as a map for development
review in the Village of Orland Park.



      3.   General Process. The general direction for moving through
the decision-making process for development is shown below. For a flow chart
of the decision-making process see Chart 5-101.A(A) at the end of this
section.



         a.   Pre-application Conference Departmental Review Plan
Commission Development Services and Planning Committee of Trustees Board of
Trustees; OR



         b.   Departmental Review Board of Trustees; OR



         c.   Departmental Review Hearing Officer(s) Board of
Trustees (if needed).



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   B.   Petitions, Applicability, and Plan Review



      1.   Petitions. All development and redevelopment in the
Village of Orland Park requires the submittal of a petition or application to
the Development Services Department for the purpose of establishing a public
record and beginning the process for the Departmental Review. Petition/
Application forms are obtained from the Development Services Department in
Village Hall. For more information on the role of the Development Services
Department see Section 5-101.K. In the instance that this Code requires
certain distances within a regulation, the measurements shall be made to the
property line, unless the measurement is defined otherwise within such
regulation or unless interpreted differently by Staff based on the intent of
the regulation.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      2.   Applicability. There are two public review processes in
the Village of Orland Park for petitions: a public meeting with a public
hearing and a public meeting without a public hearing. The following
subsections outline which petitions go to public hearings and which go to
public meetings respectively for each body. Petitions listed under Plan
Commission, for example, begin at Plan Commission and move through the
general process. Petitions listed under Board of Trustees begin and end at
the Board of Trustees and so on. In all cases, petitions are reviewed and
processed by the Development Services Department. The administrative decision
petitions are also outlined below.



         a.   Public Hearing. Public hearings require a published
public notice and are held at public meetings. At a public hearing, the
public can attend to provide testimony and view details regarding development
review before the appropriate official body.



            1.   A public hearing at Plan Commission shall be
required for applications regarding:



                  - Special Uses;



                  - Special Use Amendments;



                  - Variances (except as in 5 below);



                  - Rezoning/ Map Amendments;



                  - Subdivision Review (with the exception
of non-residential lot consolidations);



                  - Designation of Historic and/or
Architectural Landmarks;



                  - Amending the Local Register of
Significant Places (LRSP) and the Natural Heritage Sites (NHS) lists in
Section 5-110;



                  - Certificates of Appropriateness with
major changes to any structures in the Old Orland Historic District per
Section 6-209 or for historic/ architectural landmarks per Section 5-110; and



                  - Certificates of Appropriateness for
Demolition for contributing structures of the Old Orland Historic District
per Section 6-209 or for historic/ architectural landmarks per Section 5-110.



            2.   A public hearing at Plan Commission is
required when the Development Services Department or any other Village agency
or department, developer or resident petitions for:



                  - Comprehensive Plan Amendments; and



                  - Land Development Code Text Amendments.



            3.    A public hearing before the Board of
Trustees is required for:



                  - Annexation Agreements. 



            4.   All public hearings pertaining to land
development take place before the Plan Commission with the exception of
annexation agreements, variances affecting one (1) single family residential
dwelling, and variances affecting multi-family residential dwellings of fewer
than six (6) units.



            5.   A public hearing before the Hearing
Officer(s) is required for:



                  - Variance petitions affecting one (1)
single family residential dwelling;



                  - Variance petitions affecting
multi-family residential dwellings of fewer than six (6) units.



         b.   Public Meeting. A published public notice is not
required in order to hold a public meeting, although the requirements of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act must be met. Public meetings are held at Plan
Commission, at the Development Services and Planning Committee of Trustees,
and at the Board of Trustees. The public can attend public meetings but are
not guaranteed the opportunity to provide testimony regarding development
review.



            1.   A public meeting at Plan Commission is
required for applications regarding:



                  - Site Plan Review;



                  - Building Elevations; and



                  - Appeals of Administrative Decisions.



            2.   A public meeting by the Board of Trustees is
required for:



                  - Plats of Subdivision (including
consolidations);



                  - Development Agreements; and



                  - Related Ordinances.  (Amd. Ord. 5221
– 9/18/17)



            3.   All meetings of the Development Services and
Planning Committee of Trustees and the Board of Trustees are public meetings.
For annexation agreements at the Board of Trustees, a public meeting with a
public hearing is required.



         c.   Administrative Decisions. Administrative decisions
are a third review process. Administrative decisions are made internally by
the Development Services Department.



            1.   Administrative decisions within the
Development Services Department are required for applications pursuant to
Section 5-106 regarding:



               - Minor exterior changes to sites and
buildings; and



               - Restaurants that do not require preliminary
plan review or special use permits.



            2.   Administrative decisions within the
Development Services Department are required for applications pursuant to
Sections 5-110 and 6-209 regarding:



               - Routine maintenance to contributing
structures in the Old Orland Historic District;



               - Routine maintenance to historic/
architectural landmarks; and



               - Minor changes or routine maintenance to
non-contributing structures in the Old Orland Historic District.



         d.   Commissions. For cases where petitions are handled
at a commission other than Plan Commission, the rules, procedures and
standards outlined in the following subsections apply to the commission in
question per the commission’s particular petitions as outlined above.



      3.   Plans for Review Process. A preliminary plan shall be
submitted for review to the Development Services Department as part of the
application for development. The Plan Commission shall review the preliminary
plan and make its recommendations pursuant to the below sections of these
regulations. The Development Services and Planning Committee of Trustees
shall then follow with similar review. The Board of Trustees shall act upon
the preliminary plan as a final plan and grant, grant with conditions or deny
the petition/ application. Upon granting of approval with or without
conditions, the Board of Trustees shall recognize it to be a final plan
pursuant to the same sections of these regulations.



         a.   Plans with Plats of Subdivision. At a minimum,
plats of subdivision must be accompanied by a preliminary plan for each
subdivided lot and a conceptual plan of the surrounding area as required by
the Development Services Department. Applicants for plat approval may be
required to submit additional information or studies, such as building
envelopes and conceptual plans for the surrounding area, which the
Development Services Department, the Plan Commission and/or the Board of
Trustees may deem necessary to review at a later time. For more information
on plats see Section 5-112.



         b.   Conditions. The Plan Commission, the Development
Services and Planning Committee of Trustees, and/or the Board of Trustees may
attach to their recommendations to and/or approvals of a preliminary plan, a
final plan, or a plat reasonable conditions not otherwise addressed by these
regulations as are necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations,
the Comprehensive Plan, cause incremental improvements, and to prevent or
minimize adverse effects upon other property, including, but not limited to:
limitations on size and location, requirements for landscaping, provision of
adequate ingress and egress and off site and project related improvements.
Other conditions such as the duration of the approval, hours of operation,
and mitigation of environmental impacts may also be attached.



         c.   Conditions on Record Plats of Subdivision. When
conditions pursuant to Section 5-101.B.3.b above are attached to a
subdivision plat, or a record plat of survey or other type of plat, review of
said plat shall be continued until the conditions are deemed met by the
Development Service Department or



            decision-making body which attached the conditions
and then the plat shall be approved by the Village Board of Trustees so that
the record plat of subdivision is accurate when issued to the County.



         d.   Notification. Notification of all Village Board
decisions shall be mailed to the petitioner/ applicant and the owner of
record if different from the applicant.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   C.   Public Meeting Sequence with a Public Hearing



      1.   Public Meeting at Plan Commission with a Public Hearing.



         a.   Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall hold a
public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-101.G below on
applications for special uses, special use amendments, variances (with
exception for Subsection 5-101.C.3.a below) text and map amendments
(rezoning) and subdivision review. It shall also hold a public hearing
following the same Section 5-101.G below for applications regarding historic/
architectural landmark designations, amending landmark lists such as the LRSP
and the NHS in Section 5-110, Certificates of Appropriateness for major
changes to structures in the Old Orland Historic District or to historic/
architectural landmarks, and Certificates of Appropriateness for Demolition
for contributing structures of the Old Orland Historic District or for
historic/ architectural landmarks. The Plan Commission shall review a
preliminary plan and/or the historical/ architectural significance of the
petition’s subject and the report and recommendation of the Development
Services Department and testimony given at the public hearing and either
recommend approval, with or without conditions, or disapproval to the Board
of Trustees, or not make a recommendation but forward to the Board of
Trustees.



         b.   Committee of Trustees. The Development Services and
Planning Committee of Trustees shall review the preliminary plan, other
submitted documents, the Plan Commission recommendation and the Development
Services Department report and recommendation and shall recommend approval,
with or without conditions, or disapproval to the Board of Trustees.



         c.   Board Action. Upon receipt and review of the Plan
Commission’s and the Development Services and Planning Committee’s
recommendations, and the Development Services Department’s report and
recommendation, the Board of Trustees shall consider the special use, special
use amendment, variance, rezoning and/or subdivision along with the
petition’s final plans, elevations and preliminary landscape plan or the
landmark designation, the Certificate of Appropriateness for major changes to
contributing structures or landmarks, and/or Certificates of Appropriateness
for Demolition along with the petition’s final plan and/or the historic/
architectural significance of the petition’s subject  and shall grant,
grant with conditions, or deny the petition/ application. (Amd. Ord. 5221 –
9/18/17)



      2.   Public Meeting at Board of Trustees with a Public Hearing.



         a.   Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall hold
a public hearing for annexation agreements.



         b.   Board Action. Upon receipt and review of the report
and recommendation of the Development Services Department and the testimony
at the public hearing, the Board of Trustees shall consider the annexation
and shall approve, modify with conditions, or deny the annexation.



      3.   Public Meeting at the Hearing Officer(s) with a Public
Hearing.



         a.   Hearing Officer(s). The Hearing Officer(s) shall
hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-101.G of
these regulations for applications regarding variance petitions affecting one
(1) single family residential dwelling and variance petitions affecting 
multi-family residential dwellings of fewer than six (6) units. The Hearing
Officer(s) shall review a preliminary plan or related documentation, the
report and recommendation of the Development Services Department and
testimony given at the public hearing and if the application for a variance
is within one of those variances authorized in Section 5-109.E, grant the
variance with or without conditions or deny the variance. If the variance is
not within one of those variances authorized in Section 5-109.E, the Hearing
Officer(s) shall review a preliminary plan or related documentation, the
report and recommendation of the Development Services Department and
testimony given at the public hearing and either recommend approval, with or
without conditions, or disapproval to the Board of Trustees, or not make a
recommendation but forward to the Board of Trustees.



         b.   Board Action. Upon receipt and review of the
Hearing Officer(s) recommendations, and the Development Services
Department’s report and recommendation, the Board of Trustees shall
consider the variances requested not authorized in Section 5-109.E for the
Hearing Officer(s) to grant or deny and shall grant, with or without
conditions, or deny the petition/ application.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   D.   Public Meeting Sequence without a Public Hearing



      1.   Public Meeting at Plan Commission.



         a.   Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall hold a
public meeting whenever an applicant petitions for preliminary plan review,
elevations review and/or an appeal of an administrative decision that does
not include a special use, special use amendment, variance, text and map
amendment (rezoning) and/or subdivision review. It will also hold a public
meeting regarding minor changes to landmarks. The Plan Commission shall
review a preliminary plan and/or the historical/ architectural significance
of the petition’s subject and the report and recommendation of the
Development Services Department and either recommend approval, with or
without conditions, or disapproval to the Board of Trustees, or not make a
recommendation but forward to the Board of Trustees.



         b.   Committee of Trustees. The Development Services and
Planning Committee of Trustees shall review the preliminary plan, the Plan
Commission recommendation and the Development Services Department report and
recommendation and shall recommend approval, with or without conditions, or
disapproval to the Board of Trustees.



         c.   Board Action. Upon receipt and review of the Plan
Commission’s and the Development Services and Planning Committee’s
recommendations, and the Development Services Department’s report and
recommendation, the Board of Trustees shall consider the final plan,
elevations and preliminary landscape plan or the Certificate of
Appropriateness for minor changes to landmarks and shall grant, grant with
conditions, or deny the petition/ application. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



      2.   Public Meeting at Board of Trustees.



         a.   Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall
review, at a regular or special meeting, preliminary landscape plans, plats
of subdivision (including consolidations), development agreements, and other
related ordinances.



         b.   Board Action. Upon receipt and review of the report
and recommendation of the Development Services Department, the Board of
Trustees shall consider the preliminary landscape plan, plats of subdivision,
development agreement and/or other related ordinances and shall grant, grant
with conditions, or deny these items.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14; Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



   E.   Administrative Decisions Regarding Appearance and Site Plan
Review



      1.   Administrative Decisions at Development Services
Department .



         a.   Administrative Decision .  Section 5-106 of these
regulations regulates the administrative decision process with regard to
petitions/ applications that require appearance and related site plan review.
The Development Services Department may approve, with or without conditions,
or deny a petition for an administrative decision. Administrative decisions
do not go to Plan Commission unless an appeal is made by the petitioner/
applicant. The appeal to Plan Commission is heard at a public meeting.



         b.   Administrative Decision in the Old Orland Historic
District or on Landmarks . Section 6-209 of these regulations regulates the
administrative decision process with regard to petitions/ applications that
require Certificates of Appropriateness for routine maintenance on
contributing structures or landmarks, and minor changes or routine
maintenance on non-contributing structures. The Development Services
Department may approve, with or without conditions, or deny a petition for an
administrative decision. Administrative decisions do not go to Plan
Commission unless an appeal is made by the petitioner/ applicant. The appeal
to the Plan Commission is heard at a public meeting.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   F.   Timeline of Process, Jurisdictional Approval and Expiration



      1.   Six Month Rule . Any petition that has not proceeded
forward within six (6) months from petition date to the Plan Commission, or
within six (6) months from Plan Commission to the Committee of Trustees, or
within six (6) months from the Committee of Trustees to the Board of Trustees
due to inactivity may be terminated by the Development Services Department.
The Development Services Department must notify the petitioner prior to
termination of the petition. (Amd. Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13)



      2.   Jurisdictional Approval . If the final plan covers land
either wholly or partly outside the corporate limits of the Village, the
approval of the Board of Trustees shall not be final until the applicable
jurisdiction in which said development is located has approved it.



      3.   Expiration . If there is no activity after three (3)
years of approval by the Board of Trustees of a special use and/or final
plan, the special use and/or final plan shall expire unless an extension is
granted by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



   G.   Public Hearing Procedures



      1.   Purpose . The purpose of the following process is to
provide an opportunity for the public to be notified about, to be able to
view the details of, make a submission about, and/or voice their opinions on
a development application, proposal, or petition.



      2.   Notice of Public Hearing . The public shall be notified
about all public hearings.



         a.   Notification Details . All notices of public
hearings shall include:



            1.   The date, time and place of the public
hearing;



            2.   A summary of the proposal under consideration;



            3.   The address and legal description of the
specific property that is the subject of the public hearing for matters
regarding a rezoning, a special use permit, a variance, an annexation, a
subdivision, a landmark designation or a Certificate of Appropriateness.
(Ord. 3354 – 4/17/00)



            4.   That said meeting may be continued without
republication up to three (3) times.



         b.   Notification Requirements . All notices of public
hearings shall also meet the following requirements:



            1.   The Development Services Department shall
publish a copy of the notice in one (1) or more newspapers with general
circulation in the counties in which the Village of Orland Park and
contiguous unincorporated territory are located;



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



            2.   It is the petitioner's/ applicant's
responsibility to send a copy of the notice by certified mail with return
receipt requested to each of the owners of record of adjacent properties and
within 300 feet of any property upon which development is proposed. The
petitioner/ applicant must also retain the certified mail receipts for a
period of no less than seven (7) years from the final Village Board action on
the proposal.



            3.   It is the petitioner’s/ applicant’s
responsibility to post a weatherproof sign(s) at least three (3) feet by four
(4) feet (or 48 inches by 36 inches) in front surface area, the bottom of
which shall be mounted at least four (4) feet above the ground, and to have
at least one (1) sign in the most visible location to the general public such
as along a primary roadway. Such sign(s) shall be posted on private property
and shall remain until the conclusion of the public hearing. Failure to
comply with the provisions of this Subsection shall not render the public
hearing invalid, provided that a good faith effort was made to comply. The
petitioner must remove the public hearing notice sign(s) no later than thirty
(30) days after the Village Board action on the proposal. The sign must
display wording that at a minimum notifies the public about the public
hearing for the procedure which has triggered the public hearing. It must
include the date, time, place and the contact information of the Development
Services Department. Arial or Arial Narrow shall be the font in which the
public hearing signs are printed. The notice, date and time of the sign must
be no less than 3.5 inches in height and the remaining information on the
sign no less than 2.5 inches in height.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10; Amd. Ord.
5167 – 2/20/17)



            4.   All required notices shall be provided at
least fifteen (15) days, but no more than thirty (30) days in advance of the
published public hearing.



            5.   It is the petitioner's / applicant's
responsibility to submit a notarized affidavit to staff prior to or at the
Plan Commission meeting confirming that all requirements listed above have
been met.



         c.   Other Requirements.



            1.   For public hearings regarding Comprehensive
Plan Amendments and/ or Land Development Code Text Amendments, notices shall
be provided by the requirements outlined in Section 5-101.G.2.b.1 and
5-101.G.2.b.4 only.



            2.   For amendments to the Zoning Map, notices
shall be provided by the requirements outlined in Section 5-101.G.2.b.1,
Section 5-101.G.2.b.2 and Section 5-101.G.2.b.4 above. (Ord. 4161 – 8/7/06)



      3.   Conduct of the Hearing.



         a.   Submission of Testimony. Any person may appear at a
public hearing and give testimony or submit written materials, either
individually or as a representative of an organization. The decision-making
body may exclude information that it finds to be irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious.



         b.   Duty of the Development Services Department.



            1.   The Development Services Department shall
present information concerning pertinent application considerations and the
standards set out in these regulations and make recommendations.



            2.   Upon a showing by any person made at any time
during the public hearing, or on motion of the decision-making body, the
petitioner/ applicant or the Development Services Department may be required
to produce additional information with respect to the proposed petition/
application.



         c.   Continuance. The decision-making body may continue
a hearing to a specified date, time and place. Unless such continuance is
publicly announced at a properly noticed public hearing, the Development
Services Department shall cause notice to be given to all persons originally
entitled to notice of the date, time and place of such continued hearing in
the same manner as specified in Section 5-101.G.2 above.



   H.   Public Meeting Procedures



      1.   Purpose. The purpose of the following process is to
provide an opportunity for the decision-making body to review the development
application, proposal, or petition.



      2.   Notice of Public Meeting. A public notice other than that
required by the Illinois Open Meetings Act is not required for a public
meeting.



      3.   Conduct of the Meeting.



         a.   Submission of Testimony. Decision-making bodies
shall accept testimony or written materials from individuals or
representatives of an organization outside of the applicant at public
meetings. (Amd. Ord. 4996 – 6/15/15)



         b.   Duty of the Development Services Department.



            1.   The Development Services Department shall
present information concerning pertinent application considerations and the
standards set out in these regulations and make recommendations.



            2.   Upon a motion of the decision-making body,
the applicant or the Development Services Department may be required to
produce additional information with respect to the proposed petition/
application.



         c.   Continuance. The decision-making body may continue
a hearing to a specified date, time and place.



   I.   Record of Hearings



      1.   Recording Hearings. The Development Services Department
shall ensure that the proceedings are recorded by appropriate means.



      2.   Record. The record of proceedings shall consist of the
recording of testimony, all applications, exhibits, and papers submitted in
any proceeding with respect to the matter being considered, and the summary
and report or reports of the Development Services Department.



      3.   Open Record. All summaries and reports of the Development
Services Department shall be public records, open to inspection at a
reasonable time and upon reasonable notice.



      4.   Examination and Copying of Application. Any person may
examine any application for development approval and other material submitted
in regard to that application, and may obtain copies of the application and
other materials upon reasonable request and payment of a fee to cover the
actual cost of such copies.



   J.   Ethics Rules



      1.   Conflicts. Any member of a decision-making body having
any direct or indirect financial interest in property or who lives within
five hundred (500) feet of any property which is the subject of a public
hearing or public meeting or who might have interest in the outcome of the
petition shall disclose such fact at the hearing, prior to voting on the
matter.



      2.   Contacts Outside of the Hearing. If any member of a
decision-making body receives a substantive communication from any person
outside the hearing concerning a subject matter under consideration by that
body, the member shall make a statement at the hearing describing the
circumstances and substance of the communication.



      3.   Other Rules to Govern. Other matters pertaining to the
public hearing or public meeting shall be governed by other provisions of
these regulations applicable to the body conducting the hearing and its
adopted rules of procedure.



   K.   Role of the Development Services Department



      1.   Conference with the Development Services Department.



         a.   Pre-Application Conference.   A petitioner or an
applicant for development approval may request an informal conference with
the Development Services Department prior to filing a petition or
application. The pre-application conference shall be informal and its purpose
shall be to discuss the proposals, views and concerns of the applicant and
the Village, and to review for compliance with codes, plans and policies.



      2.   Application Submission Requirements. 



         a.   Application and Fee. When the petitioner or
applicant is ready following the pre-application conference, all applications
for development approval shall be submitted to the Development Services
Department accompanied by the payment of a fee as authorized in Section
1-104.  Applicants for development approval may be required to submit
additional information.



      3.   Complete Applications.



         a.   Determination of Completeness.  Within fifteen
(15) days after receipt of an application for development approval, the
Development Services Department shall determine whether the application is
complete.  If it is determined that the application is complete, the
applicant will be notified in writing that the application has been accepted
for filing.  If the application is not complete, the applicant shall be
notified, specifying the deficiencies of the application, including any
additional information which must be supplied.  A complete application shall
consist of a fully completed notarized petition form, a site plan,
elevations, required review fees as set by the Village Board of Trustees,
preliminary engineering plans and the following supporting documents when
applicable as determined by the Development Services Department. Additional
documents not listed here may be requested as needed by the Development
Services Department but shall not be used to determined completeness. A
complete petition does not mean automatic scheduling rights to public
meetings.



            (1)   Original, sealed Plat of Survey (ALTA or
otherwise), including legal description.



            (2)   Receipted copy of the most recent property
tax bill, or evidence of payment (copy of bill, canceled check, etc.).



            (3)   Responses to the Special Use Standards,
Variance Standards and/or Rezoning Factors as needed on a per project basis
(if applicable).



            (4)   Letter of authorization to petition from the
property owner, if the property is rented/leased by the Petitioner.



            (5)   Copy of the contract to purchase and a
letter of authorization to petition from the property owner, if the property
is undergoing due diligence for a contract sale.



            (6)   Certified copy of the trust agreement, a
list of beneficiaries, and a letter of authorization from the trust officer,
if the property is owned by a trust.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



         b.   Incomplete Application. As long as an application
remains incomplete, no further action shall be taken by the Village on the
application until the deficiencies are corrected.



         c.   Remedy of Deficiencies.   If the applicant fails
to correct the specified deficiencies within thirty (30) days of the
notification of deficiency, the application for development approval may be
terminated by the Village.



      4.   Review by Development Services Department.  



         a.   Application Review. The Development Services
Department shall review the complete application for development approval in
accordance with these regulations and particularly with Section 5-105, if the
development requires a special use permit, Section 5-108, if the development
requires an amendment to the text of these regulations or the Zoning District
Map, Section 5-109, if the development requires a variance, Section 5-112,
for development requirements and subdivision review, and/or Section 5-110 and
6-209, if the development requires a Certificate of Appropriateness. (Amd.
Ord. 4996 – 6/15/15)



         b.   Preliminary Plan Review Process. The Development
Services Department shall review the complete application for development and
its preliminary plan before proceeding to Plan Commission.



         c.   Preliminary Engineering Review Process. The
Development Services Department shall review the engineering plans associated
with the application for development and confirm preliminary engineering
acceptance prior to proceeding from Plan Commission to the Committee of
Trustees or hold the application from proceeding to Plan Commission until
outstanding preliminary engineering items are met.



         d.   Final Plan Review Process. The Development Services
Department may continue to review the complete application for development
and its preliminary plan throughout the decision-making process to make
corrections or amendments to plans pursuant to recommendations by the Plan
Commission and/or the Committee of Trustees and/or pursuant to conditions
issued on approval by the Board of Trustees to develop a final plan for
acceptance by the Board of Trustees.



         e.   Final Engineering Review Process. The Development
Services Department shall review the engineering plans associated with the
application for development after approval or approval with conditions has
been granted by the Board of Trustees for the purpose of determining final
engineering plans. Confirmation from the Development Services Department that
final engineering has been completed shall allow the issuance of the various
necessary Village permits and the plan to proceed toward implementation. 



            1.   If final engineering comments result in
substantial alterations to the Village Board approved final plan, the
petitioner/applicant shall return to the Plan Commission and restart the
development review process, republishing in the event of a petition requiring
a public hearing.



               a.   Substantial alterations to a final plan
shall include but not be limited to things such as:



                  - Enlargement of storm water facility
sizes;



                  - Reductions in setbacks;



                  - Construction of or alterations to
retaining walls;



                  - Changes in street layout/ land use;



                  - Increases over Village Board approved
lot coverage;



                  - Changes to Village Board approved
parking configurations;



                  - Changes that result in variances to
Village Board approved plans or modifications to Village Board approved
special use regulations; and



                  - Changes to the number of units,
building area, or building stories.



   L.   Timing of Applications



      1.   Waiver of Time Limits.



         a.   By Agreement. Any time limit imposed by these
regulations may be waived or extended by agreement among the Development
Services Department, the Board of Trustees, and the petitioner or applicant.



         b.   Automatic Waiver. Any applicant who requests a
continuance of a public meeting or a public hearing at which the applicant's
application is being considered, or who requests an extension of any time
limit imposed onto the applicant by statute or these regulations, shall be
deemed to have agreed to an extension of that time limit.



      2.   Successive Applications.



         a.   One Year Rule. Whenever any application for
development approval for a special use permit, variance, text and map
amendment to the Zoning Map (rezoning), subdivision, or preliminary plan is
denied, the petitioner will be notified that an application involving the
same property shall not be accepted for filing within one (1) year from the
date of denial.



         b.   Exception. An exception to the above rule is if the
subsequent application involves a development proposal which is materially
different from prior proposals, in the opinion of the Development Services
Department, or is responsive, in the opinion of the decision-making body, to
negative findings set forth in the denial of the prior application. (Ord.
2746 – 6/5/95)



(Entire Chapter Amended by Ord. 4411 – 9/2/08)



GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES







 



(Entire Chapter Amended by Ord. 4411 – 9/2/08)



SECTION 5-102 DEVELOPMENT COMPLIANCE APPROVAL



   A.   General Requirement.  A development compliance approval shall
be required prior to the issuance of any building permit for any single
family residential development of six (6) or more units and for any
non-residential development.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   B.   Purpose.  The purpose of issuing development compliance
approvals is to ensure that any proposed development or modification of
existing development within the Village complies with these regulations and
any special provisions affecting a specific zoning district or development
activity.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



   C.   Authority.  The Development Services Department is authorized
to certify that the proposed development of a single family home or the
construction of a fence or similar accessory structure complies with the
provisions of these regulations.  The Development Services Department is
authorized to certify that all other proposed development complies with the
provisions of these regulations.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08)



   D.   Application.  An application for a development compliance
approval shall be in the form specified by the Development Services
Department.  If such application involves a special use, evidence of
recording, as required under Section 5-105.H shall be provided.  (Ord. 3199
- 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   E.   Procedures.



      1.   An application for a development compliance approval
shall be submitted to the Development Services Department.  Upon receipt of
an application for a development of compliance approval, the Development
Services Department or its authorized representative shall examine the
application.  If for any reason an application is completed improperly or
insufficiently, the t application shall be rejected, accompanied by a
notification of deficiencies and the rejected application shall be returned
to the applicant.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98;  Amd. Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



      2.   If the Development Services Department determines that
the proposed development does not comply, the application shall be returned,
accompanied by a written statement setting forth the provisions of these
regulations with which the proposed development does not comply. (Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08)



   F.   Effect of Issuance.   A development compliance approval letter
from the Development Services Department constitutes a basis for issuance of
a building permit if no other development approval is required.  (Ord. 3199
- 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



SECTION 5-103.   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   A.   General Requirement.  No building or structure shall be
occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the
Development Services Department after a determination that the building has
been constructed in accordance with the provisions of any special use permit,
plat approval, or building permit.  A temporary certificate of occupancy may
be issued in accordance with the provisions of this section.  (Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08)



   B.   When Certificate Required.  A certificate of occupancy shall
be issued by the Development Services Department for any of the following
after compliance with all provisions of these regulations has been
determined:  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



      1.   Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected,
reconstructed, enlarged or moved.



      2.   Change in occupancy or use of an existing nonresidential
building.



      3.   Occupancy and use of vacant land.



      4.   Change in the use of land to a use of a different
classification.



      5.   Any change in the use of a non-conforming use.



   C.   Procedure.



      1.   Application.  An application for a certificate of
occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be filed in a form
prescribed by the Development Services Department.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



      2.   Action on application.   The Development Services
Department, or their authorized representatives, shall inspect the property
that is the subject of an application for a certificate of occupancy or a
temporary certificate of occupancy to determine whether the use of the
property and the structures comply in all respects with the provisions of
these regulations and the Village Code, including the provisions of any
special use permit and to determine whether all construction debris is
removed from the site.  The Development Services Department need not inspect
a single family dwelling prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.  If the use and structure do not comply with these regulations or
other provision of the Village Code or with any Standard Construction
Specifications approved by the Village, the Development Services Department
shall deny the application in writing, setting forth the provisions of these
regulations or the Village Code with which the structure or use does not
comply unless he determines that a temporary certificate is warranted. 
(Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



      3.   Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.   A temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Development Services Department
provided that: (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



         a.   the applicant for such a temporary certificate
demonstrates that the construction which remains to be completed relates
solely to the external conditions of the development, such as landscaping,
and is not directly related to the safety of the premises; and



         b.   the applicant demonstrates that such completion is
impractical at the time the  temporary certificate is sought due to weather
or other conditions acceptable to the Development Services Department; and/or
is not directly related to the safety of the premises; and  (Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08)



         c.   the applicant secures the completion of the
construction with a letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the Village
Manager and Village Attorney, and in an amount sufficient to complete the
construction, as determined by the Development Services Department.  (Ord.
4411 - 9/2/08)



         d.   The applicant is restoring an historic building or
is the occupant of the building and is doing the construction him or herself.



SECTION 5-104.   DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED AS OF RIGHT.



   A.   Purpose.  Development permitted as of right is that
development which is permitted in a zoning district provided developed in
conformity with these regulations.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   B.   Application.  An applicant for approval of development
permitted as of right shall submit an application for a building permit, and
an approved site plan if required by Sections 5-101 or  5-106, to the
Development Services Department.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   C.   Action on the Application.   If the Development Services
Department determines that the proposed development is in compliance with all
the requirements of these regulations, and the proposed development has
complied with all necessary and applicable review procedures of Section 5-101
and all other applicable regulations of the Village then a building permit
shall be issued with or without conditions. For applications regarding any
accessory structures, the Development Services Department must review the
permit application before the appropriate permit is issued.  (Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08)



SECTION 5-105.   SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of special use permits is to enable the
Village to approve those uses which are generally compatible with other land
uses permitted in a zoning district, but which require individual review of
their location, design and configuration and which may require the imposition
of conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a
particular location.  The special use for a planned development is designed
to encourage flexible application of zoning regulations in order to promote
creative or imaginative design. (Ord. 3281 – 8/16/99)



   B.   Authority.  The Plan Commission may in accordance with the
procedures and standards of this Section recommend approval of special use
permits to the Board of Trustees.  (Ord. 4411 – 9/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



   C.   Authorized Special Uses.  Only those uses which are authorized
in Article 6, or in the zoning districts currently in effect, or those
nonconforming uses which are damaged or destroyed and are permitted to be
re-established in Section 8-101, may be approved as special uses.  The
designation of a use in a zoning district does not constitute an
authorization or an assurance that such use will be approved; rather, each
proposed special use shall be evaluated by the Plan Commission and Board of
Trustees for compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this
Section and for each zoning district.  Wherever a use existing on the
effective date of these regulations is terminated or demolished, subsequent
use of the property upon which the use was located shall be permitted only as
a special use.  Whenever the property underlying a special use changes
ownership and the Development Services Department is notified of such change,
the Department shall determine whether the potential impacts of such new
ownership or other changed condition merit renewed special use review and
approval.  If the Development Services Department determines that the
impacts of the use will be significantly altered by virtue of the new
ownership, the Department shall notify the new owner that he or she must
initiate an application for a special use permit.  Conversely, if the
Development Services Department determines that the impacts of the land use
will not be significantly altered and that such other changed conditions will
not occur, no additional special use approval shall be required.  However,
such a determination shall not eliminate the need for the new owner to obtain
any other types of approvals or permits that may be required by these
regulations due to the change of ownership.  (Ord. 4411 – 9/2/08; Amd.
Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   D.   Initiation.  An application for a special use permit may be
submitted by the owner, an agent authorized in writing to act on the owner's
behalf, or other person having a written contractual interest in the parcel
of land proposed for development under a special use permit.



   E.   Standards Applicable to All Special Uses.   When considering
an application for a special use permit, the decision making body shall
consider the extent to which:



      1.   The special use will be consistent with the purposes,
goals, objectives and standards of the Comprehensive Plan, any adopted
overlay plan and these regula-tions;



      2.   The special use will be consistent with the community
character of the immediate vicinity of the parcel proposed for development;



      3.   The design of the proposed use will minimize adverse
effects, including visual impacts on adjacent properties;



      4.   The proposed use will have an adverse effect on the value
of adjacent property;



      5.   The applicant has demonstrated that public facilities and
services, including but not limited to roadways, park facilities, police and
fire protection, hospital and medical services, drainage systems, refuse
disposal, water and sewers, and schools will be capable of serving the
special use at an adequate level of service;



      6.   The applicant has made adequate legal provision to
guarantee the provision and development of any open space and other
improvements associated with the proposed development;



      7.   The development will adversely affect a known
archaeological, historical or cultural resource; and



      8.   The proposed use will comply with all additional
standards imposed on it by the particular provision of these regulations
authorizing such use and by all other applicable requirements of the
ordinances of the Village.



   F.   Special Use Permits and Bulk Regulations.   The Board of
Trustees may approve a special use permit that modifies or waives the minimum
development requirements set out in Article 6 of these regulations provided
that the Board expressly finds that the modification or waiver will enhance
the ability of the proposed special use to meet the general standards set out
in Section 5-105(E) for all special uses.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   G.   Special Uses.



      1.   Applications.  An application for a special use permit,
including applications for all planned developments, shall be submitted to
the Development Services Department in a form provided by the Development
Services Department.  Applicants for special use permits for development of
1,000 acres or more must also apply for rezoning to the Large Scale Planned
Development District.  Petitions or applications for special uses must move
through the public hearing process as outlined in Section 5-101 of these
regulations.  (Ord. 2514 – 1/17/94; Amd. Ord. 4411 – 9/2/08; Amd. Ord.
5167 – 2/20/17)



   H.   Effect of Issuance of a Special Use Permit.   Issuance of a
permit for a special use shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use
for which it is issued.  Such permit shall not automatically expire upon the
transfer of the property to a subsequent owner.  Procedures should be
followed in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-105 (C). (Ord. 2462 -
10/18/93)



   I.   Development Under an Approved Special Use Permit.



      1.   Development of the use shall not be carried out until the
applicant has secured and maintained active approvals of all other permits
and approvals required by these regulations, the Building Code,  the
Village, or regional, state and federal agencies and until the approved
special use is recorded in accordance with Section 5-105.H.  (Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   J.   Inspection During Development Under a Special Use Permit.



      1.   Following issuance of a special use permit, the
Development Services Department shall review on a quarterly basis until the
completion of the development, all permits issued and construction
undertaken, shall compare actual development with approved plans and permits
for development and the approved development schedule, if any, and shall
report his or her findings in writing to the Village Manager and the Plan
Commission.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



      2.   If at any time during the construction of the development
approved by the special use permit, the Development Services Department
determines that development is not proceeding in accordance with the special
use permit as approved, then the Department may issue a stop work order and
immediately notify the Village Manager.  Within thirty (30) days of the
issuance of the stop work order, if the violation is not corrected, the Board
of Trustees shall schedule a meeting to consider the violation, conduct a
full investigation into the facts and circumstances surrounding the alleged
violation, and either revoke the approved special use permit or amend the
special use permit in accordance with the provisions of Subsection  L or M
below.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   K.   Approval of Minor Deviations.  If the Development Services
Department finds that minor deviations from the approved plans and schedule
are necessary or desirable, the Department may approve the deviations and
amend the special use permit per the administrative Appearance Review process
(see Section 5-106).  Minor deviations shall be limited to the following: 
(Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      1.   Reduction of the total amount of open space by not more
than five percent (5%) or reduction of the setback area or open space
associated with any single structure by not more than five percent (5%),
provided that such reduction does not permit the required open space to be
less than that required by Section 6-302;



      2.   Alteration of the location, type or quality of required
landscaping elements of the special use permit as long as the alteration does
not change the overall effect of the landscaping; and



      3.   Minor alterations in building siting and parking. (Ord.
5126 - 9/19/16)



   L.   Other Amendments or Adjustments.   Any other adjustments or
changes not specified in subsection N above shall be considered amendments to
the special use permit and shall be granted only in accordance with
procedures for original approval of a special use permit, as set forth in
this Section.



   M.   Inspections After Development.



      1.   Inspections by the Development Services Department.  
Following completion of the development of a special use, the Development
Services Department shall review the development for compliance with the use
as approved.  If it is determined that the special use has been developed in
accordance with the approval, then a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued
in accordance with Section 5-103.  If the Development Services Department
finds that the development, as completed, fails in any respect to comply with
the use as approved, the Department shall immediately notify the applicant of
such fact.  The Development Services Department shall not issue a
Certificate of Occupancy pursuant to Section 5-103 until the Plan Commission
has acted on the Department's notification of non-compliance.  (Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   N.   Termination of Special Use Permits.   If construction of a
special use permit has not been completed in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection J above, or the Plan Commission has determined that
construction has not been completed in accordance with the provisions of the
approved permit, the Board of Trustees shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with the provisions of Section 5-101.  Upon the conclusion of the
public hearing, the Board of Trustees may terminate or modify the special use
permit.  In making such a decision, the Board shall consider whether there
are substantial and legitimate reasons why construction of the special use
was either not timely or in compliance with the original approval and whether
the termination of such permit will advance the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan and the standards applicable to the original approval.
Unless extended pursuant to Section 5-105.I, special use permits shall expire
three years after the date of approval by the Board of Trustees if the
applicant has not started the approved work. Special use permits shall also
expire if they are not utilized for three years unless an extension is
granted by the Board of Trustees.  (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00; Amd. Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



SECTION 5-106. APPEARANCE REVIEW.



   A.   Purpose.



      The Appearance Review process aims to maintain and enhance the
appearance of existing development throughout the Village, inclusive of
building and site changes, without necessitating the need for formal public
meetings. The general purpose of the Appearance Review process is to:



      1.   Authorize the Development Services Department to conduct
and approve minor site and exterior building changes;



      2.   Confirm conformance with requirements outlined in this
Code, in particular, but not limited to, Section 6-308 Design Standards;



      3.   Maintain harmony with the community character of the area
within which the development is located;



      4.   Discover improvements above and beyond minimum Code
requirements that will result in enhancements to the private and public
realms; and



      5.   Function as a backup documentation, if and as needed, for
the purpose of determining the distribution of any Village incentives, as
offered at the Village’s discretion, such as the Appearance Improvement
Grant (AIG). (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   B.   Authority.



      The Development Services Department is authorized to conduct and
approve Appearance Reviews. The administration actions and the appeals
process are set forth in Section 5-106.D.



   C.   Applicability.



      The Development Services Department shall determine if a petition
qualifies for an Appearance Review or if a petition must proceed to a full
site plan review, based upon the scope and type of work contemplated. The
Development Services Department reserves the right to convert an Appearance
Review to a full site plan review, therefore requiring public meetings, due
to changes in the scope of work, finding of unknown field conditions, or
discovery of new information.



      1.   Zoning Districts.



         The Appearance Review process applies to all zoning
districts in the Village, except for property in the OOH Zoning District. See
Section 6-209 for applicable regulations for the OOH zoning District.



      2.   Non-residential.



         a.   Applicability.



            i.   Commercial structures; and



            ii.   Mixed-use buildings of any size.



         b.   Not Required.



            i.   Routine property maintenance;



            ii.   Proposals that do not visibly change the
appearance of the property and its structures;



            iii.   Replacement of building materials with like
building materials of the same color and dimension;



            iv.   Replacement of landscape materials with like
landscape materials of the same species, quality and location; and



            v.   Restaurants, not requiring a special use,
occupying an existing or vacant former restaurant space and proposing no
exterior changes.



         c.   Required.



            i.   Alterations or expansions to the exterior of
a building;



            ii.   Changes in materials, either primary or
accent;



            iii.   Changes in colors, either primary or accent;



            iv.   Painting of existing brick. See standards in
Section 6-308;



            v.   Additions or modifications to building
appendages, such as awnings, rooftop screening, fencing and dumpster
enclosures;



            vi.   Modifications to the existing signage
format, such as moving the established sign band location or changing its
background color;



            vii.   Addition or modification of outdoor
congregation areas, including any ancillary improvements such as fencing,
barriers, lighting and overhead features either freestanding or attached to a
structure.



            viii.   Addition or modification to onsite
lighting, including freestanding, string (excluding holiday decorations) and
affixed to a structure;



            ix.   An increase in a parcel's lot coverage;



            x.   Any changes to a parking lot and its
associated landscape zones;



            xi.   Any modifications to a previously approved
landscape plan, including the relocation of existing landscape materials;



            xii.   Modifications to a previously approved
stormwater management area, provided that engineering approval is granted;



            xiii.   Addition or modification to off-site
improvements, such as sidewalks and multi-use paths, provided that
engineering approval is granted;



            xiv.   Restaurants, not requiring a special use,
occupying an existing or vacant former restaurant space and proposing
exterior changes;



            xv.   The expansion of lawfully existing
restaurants operating pursuant to a special use where the expansion will
occur in an adjoining space, regardless of its proximity to a residential
parcel, provided that the expansion does not exceed 100% of the area
initially approved for the special use for the restaurant; and



            xvi.   Addition or modification to drive-through
accessories. See standards in Section 6-302.K.  (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



      3.   Residential.



         a.   Applicability.



            i.   Multifamily structures comprised of six (6)
or more units; and



            ii.   Common areas, inclusive of building and site
changes, associated with a Home Owner's Association, or equivalent, with at
least four (4) principal structures.



         b.   Not Required.



            i.   Routine property maintenance;



            ii.   Proposals that do not visibly change the
appearance of the property and its structures;



            iii.   Replacement of building materials with like
building materials of the same color and dimension; and



            iv.   Replacement of landscape materials with like
landscape materials of the same species, quality and location.



         c.   Required.



            i.   Alterations or expansions to the exterior of
a building;



            ii.   Changes in materials, either primary and
accent;



            iii.   Changes in colors, either primary and
accent;



            iv.   Painting of existing brick. See standards in
Section 6-308;



            v.   Additions or modifications to building
appendages, such as awnings, rooftop screening, fencing and dumpster
enclosures;



            vi.   Addition or modification of outdoor
congregation areas, including any ancillary improvements such as fencing,
barriers, lighting and overhead features either freestanding or attached to a
structure.



            vii.   Addition or modification to onsite
lighting, including freestanding, string (excluding holiday decorations) and
affixed to a structure;



            viii.   An increase in a parcel's lot coverage;



            ix.   Any changes to a parking lot and its
associated landscape zones;



            x.   Any modifications to a previously approved
landscape plan, including the relocation of existing landscape materials;



            xi.   Modifications to a previously approved
stormwater management area, provided that engineering approval is granted; and



            xii.   Addition or modification to off-site
improvements, such as sidewalks and multi-use paths, provided that
engineering approval is granted.



   D.   Approval Process.



      The Development Services Department is authorized to conduct
Appearance Reviews. The available administration actions include:



      1.   Approval.



         The request is granted. Approval of an Appearance Review
does not grant authority for activity in violation of Ordinances.
Furthermore, separate review and approval is still required for building
permits, final engineering, legal determinations, and zoning certificates,
along with their respective direct and pass-through fees, as required.



      2.   Approval with Conditions.



         The request is granted with the same qualifiers stated in
Section 5-106.C.1 above, but the applicant must meet certain conditions of
approval to bring the proposal into compliance with Village Design Standards,
among other things, within an allotted amount of time as stipulated by the
Development Services Department.  (Ord. 4161 – 8/6/06; Amd. Ord. 4411 –
9/2/08) 



      3.   Denial.



         The proposal is denied. The applicant may appeal the
decision of the Development Services Department to the Plan Commission at one
of its next two (2) regularly scheduled meetings. The Plan Commission shall
review the application and the report and recommendation of the Development
Services Department and shall grant or deny the application by a majority
vote within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal.  (Ord. 4161 –
8/6/06; Amd. Ord. 4411 – 9/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   E.   Expiration of Appearance Approval. Appearance Review approval
of a proposal shall expire one year after the date of approval by the
Development Services Department or the Plan Commission unless extended
specifically by application to the Plan Commission. (Ord. 3354 – 4/17/00;
Amd. Ord. 4161 – 8/6/06; Amd. Ord. 4411 – 9/2/08)



SECTION 5-107.   APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.



   A.   Authority and Purpose.   The Plan Commission is hereby
authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of these regulations.  An appeal
may be initiated by any person aggrieved by any decision of any
administrative entity of the Village.



   B.   Application/Notice of Appeal.   An application/notice of
appeal authorized under the provisions of this Section shall be submitted to
the Village Manager and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 5-101.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   C.   Review.  Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of a complete
application, the Development Services Department shall complete the review of
the application within ten (10) days prior to the next scheduled meeting of
the Plan Commission send a written recommendation to the Plan Commission,
with a copy to the applicant, setting forth whether the appeal should be
granted or denied and the grounds for such recommendation.  (Ord. 4411 -
9/2/08)



   D.   Action by the Plan Commission.   The Plan Commission shall
review the application, the recommendation of the Development Services
Department, conduct a public meeting on the application in accordance with
the requirements of Section 5-101and grant the appeal, grant the appeal
subject to specified conditions or deny the appeal.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



SECTION 5-108.   TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.



   A.   Authority and Purpose.   The Board of Trustees is hereby
authorized to amend the text of these regulations or the Zoning District Map
in light of changing conditions and in light of changes to the Comprehensive
Plan.  The provisions of this Section are not intended to relieve particular
hardships nor to confer special privileges.



   B.   Initiation of Amendment.   Amendments to the text of these
regulations or the Zoning District Map may be initiated by the Board of
Trustees, the Plan Commission, the Village Manager, any resident of the
Village of Orland Park or any developer of any property located within the
Village of Orland Park or its planning jurisdiction.  Any amendment
initiated by a resident which involves a single parcel of land shall require
the submission of an application to the Development Services Department in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 5-101(B-D).  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   C.   Review.  After receipt of a complete application for an
amendment, the Development Services Department, shall complete the review of
the application and shall send a written recommendation to a Committee of the
Board of Trustees and to the Plan Commission, with a copy to the applicant,
if any, setting forth whether the amendment should be granted or denied,
setting forth a recommended zoning district classification, if any, and
stating the grounds for any such recommendations as they relate to the
standards and the purposes of the zoning district classifications of the
Village, the standards in Subsection A, above, and the Comprehensive Plan and
any adopted overlay plan.  Such recommendation shall be submitted to a
Committee of the Board of Trustees and to the Plan Commission at least five
(5) days prior to the required public hearing.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   D.   Review by Committee.   The Committee of the Board of Trustees
shall review the application for amendments prior to the public hearing by
the Plan Commission.  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   E.   Action by Plan Commission.



      1.   Public Hearing. The Plan Commission shall conduct a
public hearing to consider any amendment to the text of these regulations or
the Zoning District Map in accor-dance with the provisions of Section
5-101(E).  (Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



      2.   Text Amendment. The Plan Commission shall review  a
proposed text amendment, the recommendation of the Development Services
Department, and the testimony at the public hearing, and the Commission shall
recommend to the Board of Trustees approval or denial of the amendment. 
(Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



      3.   Map Amendment. The Plan Commission shall review a
proposed map amendment by considering the recommendation of the Development
Services Department and the following factors, and shall recommend to the
Village Board of Trustees approval or denial of the amendment. 



         a.   LaSalle Factors. When reviewing an application for
a map amendment (rezoning) the following factors apply for consideration. The
factors below come principally from the 1957 case LaSalle v. County of Cook.
The factors are known as the LaSalle Factors, which Illinois courts apply
over rezoning issues. 



            1.   The existing uses and zoning of nearby
property;



            2.   The extent to which property values are
diminished by a particular zoning classification or restriction;



            3.   The extent to which the destruction of
property value of a petitioning property owner promotes the health, safety,
morals, or general welfare of the public;



            4.   The relative gain to the public as opposed to
the hardship imposed on a petitioning property owner;



            5.   The suitability of the subject property for
its zoned purposes;



            6.   The length of time the property has been
vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area;



            7.   The Comprehensive Plan designation and the
current applicability of that designation; and



            8.   The evidence or lack of evidence, of
community need for the use proposed.



(Ord. 4411 - 9/2/08)



   F.   Action by Board of Trustees.   The Board of Trustees shall
review the proposed amendment, the recommendations of the Development
Services Department and the Plan Commission, and shall grant or deny the
amendment within thirty (30) days of receipt of the recommendation of the
Commission.



SECTION 5-109.   VARIANCES.



   A.   Authority and Purpose.   The Hearing Officer(s) and the Plan
Commission are hereby authorized to grant and/or recommend to the Board of
Trustees such variances from the literal terms of these regulations where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships that may result
from strict compliance with these regulations so that the spirit of these
regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.  The Hearing Officer(s) shall hear those
applications affecting one (1) single family residential dwelling and those
applications affecting multi-family dwellings of fewer than six (6) units. 
All other applications for a variance shall be heard by the Plan
Commission.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99; Amd. Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



   B.   Application.  An application for a variance authorized under
the provisions of this Section shall be submitted to the Development Services
Department and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Sections
5-101.  (Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



   C.   Timing. Variances shall only be granted at the final approval
stage.  If a final plan is not required, then variances shall be granted
prior to the issuance of a building permit.  (Ord. 3070-10/20/97)



   D.   Standards Applicable to all Variances.   The findings of the
Hearing Officer(s) or Plan Commission and the Board shall be based on data
submitted pertaining to each standard in this section as it relates to the
development.  A variance shall be granted only if the applicant
demonstrates:  (Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



      1.   That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable
return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the
regulations governing the district in which it is located;



      2.   That the plight of the owner is due to unique
circumstances;



      3.   That the variation, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality;



      4.   That because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations were carried out;



      5.   That the conditions upon which the petition for a
variation is are based are unique to the property for which the variance is
sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property;



      6.   That the alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by
these regulations and has not resulted from any act of the applicant or any
other person presently having an interest in the property subsequent to the
effective date hereof, whether or not in violation of any portion thereof;



      7.   That the granting of the variation will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located or
otherwise be  inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan, any adopted overlay
plan or these regulations;



      8.   That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate
supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the
congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger
the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within
the neighborhood;



      9.   That the variance granted is the minimum adjustment
necessary for the reasonable use of the land; and



      10.   That aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that
the strict application of the provisions of this Section would deprive the
applicant of any reasonable use of his or her land.  Mere loss in value
shall not justify a variance; there must be deprivation of all beneficial use
of land.



   E.   Limitations on Variances Granted by the Hearing Officer(s) or
the Plan Commission.   Variances may only be granted by the Hearing
Officer(s) or the Plan Commission in the below instances. The Village Board
of Trustees may also grant these and other variances to these regulations. 
(Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



      1.   To permit any setback less than the setback required by
the applicable regulations, but by not more than twenty-five (25%) percent.



      2.   To permit an increase in the height of detached garages
but by not more than twenty-five (25%) percent.  (Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



      3.   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise
prohibited solely because of insufficient area or width of the lot or lots
but in no event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be
less than ninety percent (90%) of the required area and width.  The
percentage set forth in this subparagraph is not to be reduced by any other
percentage for minimum lot width and area set forth in these regulations.



      4   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading
facilities required by not more than one (1) parking space or loading space,
or twenty percent (20%) of the applicable regulations, whichever number is
greater.



      5.   To increase by not more than ten percent (10%) the
maximum gross floor area of any use so limited by the applicable regulations.



      6.   To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under
this section, when a lot of record or a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on
the effective date of these regulations, is by reason of the exercise of the
right of eminent domain by any authorized governmental body or by reason of a
conveyance under threat of an eminent domain proceeding reduced in size so
that the remainder of said lot of record or zoning lot or structure on said
lot does not conform with one (1) or more of the regulations of the district
in which said lot of record or zoning lot or structure is located.



   F.   Review.  See Section 5-101 for public hearing procedures. 
(Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



   G.   Conditions.  Issuance of a variance may be made subject to
such conditions as are necessary to carry out the purposes of these
regulations and to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property in
the neighborhood, including, but not limited to, limitations on size and
location, hours of operation, requirements for landscaping, lighting, and
ingress and egress.  (Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



   H.   Action by the Hearing Officer or Plan Commission. See Section
5-101.C.1 and 5-101.C.4 for the respective procedures and actions of the Plan
Commission and the Hearing Officer(s) relating to public hearings. (Ord.4411
- 9/2/08)



   I.   Action by the Board of Trustees.   See Section 5-101 for the
procedures and actions of the Village Board of Trustees.  (Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



   J.   Special Use Procedures.  If an application cannot comply with
these variance regulations and the use would be otherwise permitted in the
zoning district in which the property is located, the applicant may elect to
follow the procedures for a special use permit set forth in Section 5-105 and
thereby obtain some modification of these regulations if the project is a
planned development with a special use.  (Ord.4411 - 9/2/08)



SECTION 5-110.   LANDMARKS DESIGNATION.



Entire Section Amended by Ord. 4375, 6/2/08



   A.   Purpose of Landmark Designation.



      1.   Purpose. The purpose of a landmark designation shall be
to preserve, rehabilitate and/ or restore a site, place, building, structure,
improvement, archaeological site, work of art, or other object within the
corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park which may have historic,
cultural, archaeological or architectural significance in accordance with
criteria set forth in this section. The preservation, rehabilitation and
restoration of historically and architecturally significant structures,
sites, etc. are important activities for the Village's cultural heritage and
character. In addition to the purpose here stated, the landmark designation
strives to promote and accomplish the following:



         a.   Promote Appropriate Infill Development. Reduce the
environmental impact of new construction through the reuse and rehabilitation
of existing historic buildings while revitalizing existing built areas for
long-term use;



         b.   Conserve Resources. Conserve the prior investment
of resources and energy of existing buildings or sites etc.; Conserve open
space, monuments, and the built and natural environments;



         c.   Promote Tourism. Promote tourism through the
preservation and advertisement of historically and architecturally
significant sites, places, buildings etc. that will attract commerce and
culture to the Village;



         d.   Stabilize or Increase Property Values. Stabilize
and increase property values through continued sustainable investment in
existing built environments;



         e.   Develop an Identity. Develop an identity for Orland
Park as a historically and architecturally significant place;



   B.   Landmark Designation Review Process. 



      1.   Initiation and Application. Any person, group of persons,
association or Village agency may request a landmark designation for any
site, place, building, structure, improvement, archaeological site, work of
art, or other object within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland
Park which may have historic, cultural, archaeological or architectural
significance in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 5-110.C. 
The Development Services Department shall supply, upon request, the
application forms to begin the review process for landmark designation. The
application shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section
5-101.



      2.   Review by the Development Services Department. After
receipt of a complete application for designation of a landmark (see Section
5-101.K), the Development Services Department shall review the petition for
designation and send a written recommendation to the Plan Commission, with a
copy to the applicant, setting forth whether the designation should be
granted or denied and stating the grounds for any such recommendations as
they relate to the standards and criteria set forth in Section 5-110.C of
these regulations.



      3.   Review by the Plan Commission and Board of Trustees. The
Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing for the landmark designation and
the Village Board shall act on the recommendation of the Plan Commission. The
Village Board may accept, reject, or modify the recommended motion. For the
review proceedings regarding landmark designation please see Section 5-101 of
the Land Development Code.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   C.   Criteria for Designating Landmarks.  



      1.   Local Landmark Criteria. The following criteria are a
list of attributes to evaluate sites, places, buildings, structures,
improvements, archaeological sites, works of art, or other objects within the
corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park for designation as a
landmark.  The Plan Commission shall review each item to determine if it
applies to each application for designation.  The proposed landmark shall be
considered on the basis of one or more of the following attributes:   
(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



         a.   That it exemplifies or reflects the cultural,
political, economic or social history of the nation, state or community.



         b.   That it is associated or identified with an
historic person or with important event(s) in national, state or local
history.



         c.   That it embodies the distinguishing characteristics
of an architectural type inherently valuable for a study for a period, style,
method of construction, or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship.



         d.   That it represents the notable work of a builder,
designer, or architect whose individual creativity has provided unique
structures, improvements, or objects to the local area.



         e.   That it is a building, structure, improvement,
object or site embodying all or part of the above characteristics, which is
subject to encroachment of detrimental influences.



         f.   That it is a building, structure, improvement,
object or site of historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural
significance, which may or may not be threatened with alteration or
demolition by public or private action.



   D.   Local Register of Significant Places.



      1.   Local Register of Significant Places. The Development
Services Department shall maintain the Local Register of Significant Places.
The Local Register of Significant Places is comprised of sites, places,
buildings, structures, improvements, archaeological sites, works of art, or
other objects within the corporate limits of the Village of Orland Park that
have historical, architectural, cultural, and/ or archeological significance
to the Village of Orland Park.



      2.   Orland Park Landmarks. The following properties are duly
listed as part of Section 5-110 of the Village of Orland Park Land
Development Code. They are considered Landmarks of the Village of Orland Park
and shall each individually be known as an "Orland Park Landmark". Landmarks
that are on the National Register of Historic Places must comply with the
U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards outlined in Section 5-110.F below.



         a.   Landmarks.



            1.   9960 W. 143rd Street "Orland Park School";



            2.   9999 W. 143rd Street "Former Christ Lutheran
Church";



            3.   9953 W. 143rd Street;



            4.   9925 W. 143rd Street;



            5.   9917 W. 143rd Street First "Orland Park
Library";



            6.   14306-10 Union Avenue "Orland Park Hotel";



            7.   14314 Union Avenue "Loebe Brothers General
Store";



            8.   9952 W. 144th Street "Loebe House";



            9.   9967 W. 144th Street "Twin Towers Sanctuary"



               (National Register of Historic Places);



            10.   14316 Beacon Avenue "Orland State Bank";



            11.   14320-24 Beacon Avenue "Commercial Emporium";



            12.   14330 Beacon Avenue;



            13.   14315 Beacon Avenue;



            14.   14339 Beacon Avenue;



            15.   14420 Second Avenue "Cox House";



            16.   9830 W. 144th Place "Humphrey House"



               (National Register of Historic Places);



            17.   17701 S. 108th Avenue "Stellwagen Farm";



            18.   8041 W. 151st Street "Boley Farm";



            19.   14701 S. West Avenue "Hostert Log Cabins";



            20.   14500 S. Ravinia Avenue "Limestone Building";



            21.   14700 S. Ravinia Avenue "Orland Park Village
Center";



               i.   "Frederick T. Owens Village Hall";



               ii.   "William R. Vogel Orland Park Civic
Center";



               iii.   "Franklin E. Loebe" Recreation Center;



               iv.   "Ara Pace Veteran's Memorial";   



            22.   10756 Andrea Drive "Maue House"; (Ord. 2047
- 9/25/90)



   E.   Landmark Rights and Requirements .



      1.   Landmark Rights. A landmark designation does not:



         a.   Require the landmark to be open to the public;



         b.   Require the landmark owners to purchase or erect
plaques or markers;



         c.   Force the landmark owners to make improvements to
their properties;



         d.   Control the use of the landmark or limit its use;



         e.   Regulate interior improvements;



      2.   Landmark Requirements. A landmark designation:



         a.   Requires review by the Plan Commission and Village
Board for major or minor changes to the appearance of the landmark or site
plan of the landmark, as defined by Section 6-209.G. Such review requires the
issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness per the regulations of Section
6-209. See Section 5-101 for review procedures;



         b.   Requires administrative approval for routine
maintenance to the landmark as defined by Section 6-209.G;



         c.   Requires a 90 day demolition delay pending a public
hearing at the Plan Commission and a Village Board review per Section 5-101
of these regulations, and the approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness
for Demolition per Section 6-209.I of these regulations;



            1.   If a Certificate of Appropriateness for
Demolition is denied, a demolition permit shall not be issued until the 90
day demolition delay has expired per Section 6-209.I and until the landmark
is surveyed and documented for its historical and/or architectural
significance by a qualified historic preservation consultant and the survey
is archived with the Village of Orland Park Development Services Department;



            2.   If in 90 days from the denial of the
Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition a reasonable alternative to
demolition has been found by the Development Services Department, it shall be
presented to the Board of Trustees for review and consideration. The Village
Board of Trustees may then grant or modify with conditions the alternative
proposal of the Development Services Department and deny the demolition, or
deny the alternative proposal of the Development Services Department and
grant the Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition per Section
5-110.E.2.c.1.



(Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   F.   Landmarks Preservation, Rehabilitation, Restoration and
Incentives.



      1.   Preservation. The landmark designation works toward
preservation. The designation supports the action or process of protecting,
maintaining, and/ or stabilizing the existing materials, form, and integrity
of a historic or architecturally significant place or an individual component
to a place or object, while protecting its heritage value. Preservation can
include both short-term and interim measures to protect or stabilize the
place, as well as long-term actions to retard deterioration or prevent damage
so that the place can be kept serviceable through routine maintenance and
minimal repair, rather than extensive replacement and new construction.



         a.   United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Preservation. In the case of preservation, the Land Development Code of
the Village of Orland Park refers to the United States Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Preservation for the preservation of landmarks. The
Standards follow below and may be used as a reference:  (Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



            1.   A property will be used as it was
historically, or be given a new use that maximizes the retention of
distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships. Where a
treatment and use have not been identified, a property will be protected and,
if necessary, stabilized until additional work may be undertaken.



            2.   The historic character of a property will be
retained and preserved. The replacement of intact or repairable historic
materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that
characterize a property will be avoided.



            3.   Each property will be recognized as a
physical record of its time, place, and use. Work needed to stabilize,
consolidate, and conserve existing historic materials and features will be
physically and visually compatible, identifiable upon close inspection, and
properly documented for future research.



            4.   Changes to a property that have acquired
historic significance in their own right will be retained and preserved.



            5.   Distinctive materials, features, finishes,
and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property will be preserved.



            6.   The existing condition of historic features
will be evaluated to determine the appropriate level of intervention needed.
Where the severity of deterioration requires repair or limited replacement of
a distinctive feature, the new material will match the old in composition,
design, color, and texture.



            7.   Chemical or physical treatments, if
appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments
that cause damage to historic materials will not be used.



            8.   Archeological resources will be protected and
preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures
will be undertaken.



      2.   Rehabilitation. The landmark designation also works
toward rehabilitation. The designation supports the action or process of
making possible a continuing or compatible contemporary use of a historic or
architecturally significant place or of an individual component to a place or
object, through repair, alterations and/ or additions, while protecting its
heritage value.



         a.   United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation. In the case of rehabilitation, the Land Development Code
of the Village of Orland Park refers to the United States Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation for the rehabilitation of landmarks.
The Standards follow below and may be used as a reference:



            1.   A property will be used as it was
historically or be given a new use that requires minimal change to its
distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships.



            2.   The historic character of a property will be
retained and preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of
features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will
be avoided.



            3.   Each property will be recognized as a
physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false
sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
elements from other historic properties, will not be undertaken.



            4.   Changes to a property that have acquired
historic significance in their own right will be retained and preserved.



            5.   Distinctive materials, features, finishes,
and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property will be preserved.



            6.   Deteriorated historic features will be
repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in
design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of
missing features will be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.



            7.   Chemical or physical treatments, if
appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments
that cause damage to historic materials will not be used.



            8.   Archeological resources will be protected and
preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures
will be undertaken.



            9.   New additions, exterior alterations, or
related new construction will not destroy historic materials, features, and
spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work shall be
differentiated from the old and will be compatible with the historic
materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the
integrity of the property and its environment.



            10.   New additions and adjacent or related new
construction will be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.



      3.   Restoration. The landmark designation emphasizes and
works towards restoration as well. The designation supports the action or
process of accurately revealing, recovering or representing the state of a
historic or architecturally significant place or of an individual component
to a place or object, as it appeared at a particular period in its history,
while protecting its heritage value.



         a.   United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Restoration. In the case of restoration the Land Development Code of the
Village of Orland Park refers to the United States Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Restoration for the restoration of landmarks. The
Standards follow below and may be used as a reference:



            1.   A property will be used as it was
historically or be given a new use which reflects the property's restoration
period.



            2.   Materials and features from the restoration
period will be retained and preserved. The removal of materials or alteration
of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize the period
will not be undertaken.



            3.   Each property will be recognized as a
physical record of its time, place, and use. Work needed to stabilize,
consolidate and conserve materials and features from the restoration period
will be physically and visually compatible, identifiable upon close
inspection, and properly documented for future research.



            4.   Materials, features, spaces, and finishes
that characterize other historical periods will be documented prior to their
alteration or removal.



            5.   Distinctive materials, features, finishes,
and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize
the restoration period will be preserved.



            6.   Deteriorated features from the restoration
period will be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of
deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature
will match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials.



            7.   Replacement of missing features from the
restoration period will be substantiated by documentary and physical
evidence. A false sense of history will not be created by adding conjectural
features, features from other properties, or by combining features that never
existed together historically.



            8.   Chemical or physical treatments, if
appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments
that cause damage to historic materials will not be used.



            9.   Archeological resources affected by a project
will be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken.



            10.   Designs that were never executed
historically will not be constructed.



      4.   Landmark Incentives. Local landmarks are capable of
participating in local, county, state or federal tax incentive programs or
grants that assist in the preservation, rehabilitation or restoration of
historically or architecturally significant buildings. Qualification for
these incentives is based primarily on the criteria set out by each
individual program's lead agency. Local designation is often the first
requisite. Sites, structures, buildings etc. must be included on the Local
Register of Significant Places as officially recognized local landmarks in
order to participate.



   G.   Landmark De-designation Review Procedure.



      1.   Landmark De-designation. Landmarks shall be de-designated
by the Development Services Department based on the review of changes made to
them during a Certificate of Appropriateness review at the Plan Commission.
The Development Services Department shall write a report and recommendation
to the Plan Commission to de-designate a landmark. The same review sequence
outlined in Section 5-101.C for designating landmarks shall apply for
de-designating them.  (Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



      2.   Removal from the Register. De-designated landmarks shall
be removed from the Local Register of Significant Places and shall not be
eligible for local, county, state, or federal tax incentive programs or
grants.



   H.   Natural Resource Conservation, Natural Heritage Sites, and
Scenic Corridors.



      1.   Natural Resource Conservation. Section 5-110 of these
regulations shall not be used to landmark, and thereby regulate, or act as a
means to conserve, the natural resources of the Village of Orland Park. This
section does not authorize landmark status to be placed on any natural
resource in the Village of Orland Park. In so far as this section is
concerned, natural resources are conserved via the sustainable preservation,
restoration, rehabilitation and reuse of existing sites, buildings,
structures etc. that have landmark status. Section 6-213 of these
regulations, titled "Open Lands District" protects and preserves the
Village's natural areas.



      2.   Natural Heritage Sites. The Development Services
Department may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees a resolution for
the non-binding designation of "Orland Park Natural Heritage Site" on the
natural resources of the Village that are historically important to the
Village and/ or are ecologically significant to the area for the habitat of
wildlife or for the perpetuation of the prairie or savannah character once
prevalent in the region.



         a.   Non-binding Designation. The non-binding
designation is meant to act as a means of qualitative description for natural
resources. Natural resources as dynamic symbiotic systems cannot be preserved
like a landmark building or site regarding materials, resources and
regulatory oversight. The non-binding status preserves the Village's ability
to dynamically deal with natural resources and systems in conservation
efforts commonly employed by park services, forestry officials, and
ecologists, while still highlighting the important role the site has in the
history and identity of the Village of Orland Park.



      3.   Orland Park Natural Heritage Sites. The following sites
are duly listed as part of Section 5-110 of the Village of Orland Park Land
Development Code. They are considered Natural Heritage Sites of the Village
of Orland Park and shall each individually be known as an "Orland Park
Natural Heritage Site".



         a.   Natural Heritage Sites.



            1.   "Humphrey Woods", 14500 S Ravinia Avenue;



      4.   Scenic Corridors. Section 6-404 of these regulations
authorizes the establishment of scenic corridor easements which shall serve
to protect and maintain a rural/suburban atmosphere in certain sections of
the Village and its one and one-half (1 ½) mile jurisdiction. Such corridor
easements will also provide a refuge for natural resources and wildlife and a
natural buffer between more-developed areas. Such corridor easements shall be
known as "Scenic Corridors" per these regulations and may be marked
accordingly. In the context of landmark designation, scenic corridors shall
act to promote the preservation of historic, natural or scenic qualities
along public roads and streets. Regulation for scenic corridors shall be
established on a case by case basis with regard to the terms of the easement
per Section 6-404.



SECTION 5-111.   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   CHAPTER DELETED (Ord. 4210, 12/18/06)



   The content of this chapter was incorporated into new chapters for the
Village Center District (6-212) and the Old Orland Historic District
(6-209). 



SECTION 5-112.   DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.



(Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



   A.   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this Section to establish
standards and regulations for the review and approval of the development and
subdivision of land within the Village and its extraterritorial jurisdiction
in accordance with the Village's Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Capital
Improvements Program, and other goals, policies and regulations of the
Village.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08) 



   B.   J urisdiction and Applicability.



      1.   These procedures shall be applicable to:



         a.   all lots of record, subdivisions and
re-subdivisions, planned developments and development of land within the
corporate limits of the Village and within one and one-half (1 1/2) miles
beyond the corporate limits of the Village;



         b.   in the event another municipality's
extraterritorial jurisdiction overlaps the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the Village and there is a boundary agreement between the Village and that
municipality, these subdivision regulations shall be applicable to the
territory as described in the agreement;



         c.   in the event another municipality's
extraterritorial jurisdiction overlaps the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the Village and there is no applicable boundary agreement, these regulations
shall be applicable to the territory from the corporate limits of the Village
to a median line equidistant from its boundary and the boundary of the other
corporate authority nearest the Village at any given point on the land;



         d.   Not-with-standing the provisions of Subsection c,
above, if a development or subdivision is primarily located within a
neighboring municipality's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and where only  a
small percentage of the development or subdivision would be affected by the
exercise of the Village's jurisdiction, the applicant would not be required
to obtain development or subdivision approval by the Village.  However, if
the Village Manager determines that a substantial benefit to the Village
would be achieved by such review, such as the review of significant drainage,
streets or other development or subdivision-related issues, then the
applicant shall be required to comply with the provisions of these
regulations.  The applicant may appeal the determination of the Village
Manager to the Board of Trustees; and  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08) 



         e.   the development or subdivision of any lot or parcel
of land by use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale,
transfer or lease for a period of time exceeding five (5) years.  (Ord. 4412
- 9/2/08) 



      2.   Except as provided in Subsection 3 of this Section, no
land, structure or planned development within the Village or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction may be developed, used, or occupied unless a
final plan has been approved in accordance with the terms of these
regulations.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08) 



      3.   These development and subdivision procedures shall not be
applicable to:



         a.   the sale or exchange of parcels of land between
owners of adjoining and contiguous land which does not involve any new
streets or easements of access or create an unlawful condition on the
property;



         b.   the conveyance of parcels of land or interests
therein for uses as rights of way for railroads or other public utility
facilities which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;



         c.   the conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other
public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;



         d.   the conveyance of land for highway or other public
purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for
public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a
public use;



         e.   conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior
conveyances;



         f.   additions, improvements, remodeling or renovation
of less than 20% of the square footage of the original structure; and



         g.   the development of a single family home on a single
lot of record created after 1955.



   C.   General Procedures.



      1.   Development Review.  For all development review
procedures associated with the approval process refer to Section 5-101 of
these regulations.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08) 



   D.   Record Plat of Subdivision Procedure.



      1.   Purpose.  The purpose of the record plat of subdivision
review is to determine whether the record plat, and required subsequent plats
as a result of the subdivision, are in substantial conformance with the
approved final plan. This procedure shall include but not be limited to plats
of vacation, dedication, easement, abrogation and consolidation.  (Ord. 4412
- 9/2/08) 



      2.   Initiation.  An application for record plat of
subdivision review may be submitted by the owner, an agent authorized in
writing to act on the owner's behalf, or other person having a written
contractual interest in the parcel of land proposed for subdivision.
Topographical and profile studies must be submitted prior to plat approval. 
Park land shall be deeded to the Village prior to plat approval.  All
conditions of Village Board plan approval must be addressed and security
provided for landscaping prior to plat approval. (Ord. 3070-10/20/9; Amd.
Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      3.   Review and Recommendation by the Development Services
Department.   After a final plan has been approved by the Board of Trustees,
the petitioner shall prepare and submit an application and a record plat of
subdivision on mylar or vellum to the Development Services Department.  Said
Department shall certify that the record plat conforms to the approved final
plan.  A recommendation will then be forwarded to the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      4.   Board Action. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the
Development Services Department staff on a record plat, the Board of Trustees
shall review the application and approve, continue with conditions, or
disapprove the record plat pursuant to Section 5-101.B.3.c. The Village
President, the Village Clerk, and the Village Comptroller shall sign the
approved record plat.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      5.   Recording of Plat.   All record plats shall be recorded
by the Village with the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles in the
County in which the land is located. 



   All record plats shall be recorded at a time specified by the
developer, within one (1) year of approval of the final plan by the
Village.  No record plat shall be recorded until the developer has withdrawn
the property from registration in Torrens pursuant to the procedures required
by law, has satisfactorily complied with the provisions of Subsection E,
below, regarding guarantees of improvements, has paid the fee of the Recorder
or Registrar of Titles, and has paid any other applicable fees.



         a.   Plats should include the required school district
statement within the owner's certificate;



         b.   Plats should include the authorization statement
from surveyor authorizing the representative of the Village of Orland Park to
record the plat.



   E.   Guarantees for Improvement Completion



      1.   General.  In order to assure that growth in the Village
will be orderly and to guarantee the completion of public or private
improvements required by these regulations after final approval, no final
engineering and no building permits shall be approved/issued, and no
installation or construction of such improvements shall commence until the
requirements of this Section have been met.  This Section shall also apply
to development within the Village's one and one-half (1 1/2) mile
extraterritorial jurisdiction unless the Village obtains written
documentation from the developer that he or she has provided the other
applicable governmental unit with a performance guarantee, insuring the
completion of such improvements.  The provision of any performance guarantee
does not in any way relieve the developer and/or owner from the obligation to
complete all private or public improvements related to the development. 
(Ord.2746 - 6/5/95; Amd. Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      2.   Performance Guarantee.  A performance guarantee
acceptable to the Village must be provided in accordance with the provisions
of this Section and shall constitute part of the final approval required by
the Board of Trustees.  The guarantee shall constitute an agreement signed
by the applicant and the Village Manager, and approved by the Village
Attorney, that guarantees the completion of all required improvements within
a specified time.  The agreement shall indicate the title and date of the
final engineering plans reviewed by the designee of the Development Services
Department, for the purpose of establishing the guarantee amount, and that
security as provided in this section, equal  to 125% of the total projected
costs of public improvements. This shall be submitted to the Village. (Ord.
3070 - 10/20/97; Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      3.   Security Methods.  One of the following security methods
shall be utilized to guarantee the comple-tion of public improvements:



         a.   Letter of Credit



            1.   Form:  The applicant may file an irrevocable
letter of credit issued by any local financial institution approved by the
Village Manager and the Village Attorney, in accordance with guidelines
established by the Board of Trustees.  The letter of credit shall be in the
same written form as the sample letter of credit that is provided by the
Finance Department.



            2.   Terms:  The letter of credit shall be in an
amount sufficient to pay for the cost of construction of the public
improvements, landscaping on private and public property for single family
and multi-family residential developments and all non-residential
developments, and all engineering costs if deemed necessary by the Village
Engineer.  The Village will collect an additional 7% of the total cost of
construction to recover for management and administrative time and expenses
incurred by the Village staff in processing and administering the public
improvements and landscaping. Any conditions that the applicant or issuing
financial institution seeks to attach to collection or use of the funds, must
be included in the terms of the letter of credit. The letter of credit shall
provide that the issuing financial institution shall pay to the Village, or
as the Village directs, such amounts as may be required to complete the
improvements according to the approved specifications.  The letter of credit
should provide that its amount will be reduced from time to time as payments
for improvements approved by the Village Engineer are made, but at no time
shall the available balance be less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total
estimated cost of the improvements yet to be accepted by the Village.  (Ord.
4125 – 4/17/06)



            3.   Time Limit:  The letter of credit shall be
irrevocable for at least twelve (12) months and shall have an expiration date
of not less than sixty (60) days after the date of completion specified for
the improvements. The letter of credit shall automatically be extended for
additional periods of one (1) year unless the Village notifies the applicant
at least thirty (30) days in advance of the expiration date that the Village
will not accept an extension of the letter of credit.  If any balance
remains at the expiration of any time limit placed on the letter of credit,
the applicant shall be notified that the current letter of credit must be
renewed or that said balance must either be deposited with the Village in a
cash escrow, or a new letter of credit must be provided.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         b.   Other Guarantee Security Method.  The Board of
Trustees may, at its discretion, approve any other security method. 



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      4.   Insufficient Fund Balance.  If, at any time before the
construction of all required improvements has been completed, the balance of
funds remaining undisbursed under any guarantee provided in accordance with
this section is not sufficient, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, to
cover the costs of construction of said improvements and all engineering
costs (including the engineering and inspection fees of the Village) or if by
reason of any order, decree or writ of any court, or for any other reason,
the said undisbursed balance of funds shall be withheld, diminished or
otherwise unavailable for the purposes provided herein, the applicant agrees
to cause the balance to be increased to such amount as shall be required by
the Village for such purposes, in the exercise of its judgment, or shall
provide such other guarantee of performance as may be required by the
Village.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      5.   Time Limit.  All performance guarantees shall provide
that if the required improvements are not installed within two (2) years of
approval of the final plan, or a period of time otherwise specified by the
Village, or in an applicable agreement between the Village and developer, the
Village may deem the applicant to be in default, and may proceed in
accordance with Section 6 below.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      6.   Default.  In the event the Village Engineer determines,
in the exercise of his judgment, that the applicant has failed to install
proposed improvements in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications, or has failed to comply with the terms of the guarantees
provided in this Section, the Board of Trustees may take any of the following
actions:



         a.   Disbursement of Letter of Credit.  The Board of
Trustees may advise the  applicant in writing of the failure to install
improvements, and give the applicant thirty (30) days to cure such failure. 
If the applicant fails to cure said failure, the Village may, at its option,
declare the applicant in default, and all monies on deposit pursuant to the 
letter of credit shall be disbursed by the letter of credit provider upon
authorization of the Village Engineer. 



         b.   Disbursement of Other Security Guarantees. The
Board of Trustees may advise the applicant in writing of the failure to
install improvements, and give the applicant thirty (30) days to cure such
failure. If the applicant fails to cure said failure, the Village may, at its
option, declare the applicant in default, and all monies on deposit pursuant
to the specified security guarantee shall be disbursed by the guarantee
provider upon authorization of the Village Engineer.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      7.   Guarantee Amount.  The amount of the performance
guarantee shall cover all construction costs.  The guarantee shall be in the
following minimum amounts unless the applicant can show that certain of the
costs have already been paid or construction has been satisfactorily
completed. 



      Construction Cost:



         a.   One hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the
estimated construction cost of all public improvements, including public
improvements on private property, as approved and designated by the Village
Engineer;



            1.   Note: The provisions of 8.a.3.a below plus
the provisions of 8.a.3.b below equal to the above mentioned provision in 7.a



         b.   Plus one-hundred percent (100%) of the estimated
cost of landscaping on private and public property. In single family detached
developments, private foundation landscaping and lawn seeding are not
included in the letter of credit.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      8.   Reduction in Amount of Guarantee.



         a.   The applicant may from time to time as the public
improvements are constructed, request a reduction in the amount of guarantee
furnished. Said request shall be made by the applicant to the Public Works
Department by filing the below documents.  The Village Manager's Office
shall provide final approval of the request for a reduction in the amount
guarantee furnished.



            1.   A request for reduction indicating the
requested amount;



            2.   A new or substitute letter of credit, or
other approved security method for the reduced amount, if required (to be
filed within seven (7) days after the approval of the reduction); 



            3.   An estimate by the applicant's engineer
containing the following information:



               a.   The estimated cost of construction of
the public improvements then not completed (less sidewalks on buildable lots);



               b.   The cost of contingencies and
escalation of the cost of public improvements shall increase the above
estimated amount by twenty-five percent (25%); 



               c.   Fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of
construction of the improvements constructed and in place shall remain in the
letter of credit; and



               d.   Twenty-five percent (25%) of the
estimated cost of  sidewalks on buildable lots, not to be reduced until  at
least seventy-five percent (75%) of the sidewalks are completed. 



            4.   Evidence acceptable to the Village Attorney
that the cost of the public improvements is either paid or otherwise
adequately provided for.



         b.   The Village Engineer shall submit the above
documents in writing to the Public Works Department, with the exception of
those documents provided in accordance with Subsection 5-112.E.3.a of this
Section.  The Public Works Department shall recommend to the Village
Manager's Office approval or disapproval of said request. No reduction in the
guarantee furnished shall be granted which would reduce said guarantee below
a sum which is referenced in 5-112.E.8.a.3. 



         c.   In the event the reduction in amount of guarantee
is approved by the Village Manager's Office for a letter of credit, such
approval shall not become effective unless a new or substitute letter of
credit is received by the Village within seven (7) days after such approval.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      9.   Inspection and Certification of Improvements.



         a.   General.  Unless otherwise specifically provided,
inspection of the construction of the improvements shall be by the Village
Engineer or Village Consultant, and shall be paid for by the applicant should
the Village require compensation for its efforts.  No improvements shall be
constructed, and therefore no improvements shall be inspected, prior to final
plan approval. 



         b.   Certification.  Upon completion of all required
construction, the applicant's engineer shall certify that the improvements
comply in all respects with the plans and specifications approved by the
Board of Trustees.  All work shall at all times be subject to inspection by
the Village Manager, the Village Engineer, other Village officials, and their
representatives.  Regardless of contracts, agreements, or inspections
performed, the final responsibility for the construction of all improvements
in accordance with the applicable standards rests with the applicant. 
Certification by the applicant's engineer shall not constitute a waiver by
the Village of the right to draw funds under the security provided herein on
account of defects in or failure of any improvement that is detected or which
occurs following such certification.



         c.   Notice of Defects.   The Village Engineer shall
provide timely notice to the  developer whenever inspection reveals that an
improvement does not  conform to the 1 standards and specifications required
by these regulations. The developer shall have thirty (30) days from the
issuance of such notice to cure or to substantially cure such defect.  The
Village may not declare a default during the thirty (30) day cure period on
account of any such defect  unless it is clear that the developer does not
intend to cure the defect. 



         d.   Exemptions.  Because neighboring jurisdictions and
other utility districts are responsible for inspecting construction sites
within their territorial limits, and because the Village desires to avoid
duplicating the inspection of these projects, the Village shall only inspect
development located within its corporate limits.  The Village shall be
entitled to rely on the written inspection reports submitted by the engineers
of such neighboring jurisdictions and utility districts.  The Village
Engineer shall be entitled to verify any inspection report received from a
neighboring jurisdiction or utility district, and shall be given access to
the construction site to conduct such independent analyses.



         e.   Engineering Plan Review and Inspection Fee.



            1.   Engineering Plan Review. The plans and
specifications for all public and private improvements that shall be made
under the provisions of these regulations shall be submitted to the Village
Development Services Department for inspection and review.  As compensation
for Village staff plan review, a fee, if determined by ordinance of the
Village Board of Trustees, shall be paid to the Village at the time the plans
and specifications are finally approved by the Village.  In addition,
compensation for plan review by an engineering consultant for the Village
shall be equal to the amount charged to the Village by the consultant and
shall be paid by the applicant to the Village prior to the issuance of
building permits.



               a.   Compensation for engineering plan
review by Village staff shall be set by ordinance of the Village Board, and
shall be paid by the applicant to the Village at the time of final
engineering approval and before a building permit is issued. The compensation
levels may be amended from time to time. For an updated schedule contact the
Development Services Department. (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)   



            2.   Engineering Inspections. All public and
private improvements located within the Village's corporate limits that are
guaranteed under the provisions of this Section shall be inspected during the
course of construction by the Village Engineer, the Village's Engineering
Consultant, or their designee.  As compensation for such inspection by
Village staff, a fee if determined by ordinance of the Village Board of
Trustees shall be paid to the Village at the time the final engineering plans
are approved by the Village Engineer. In addition, compensation for
engineering inspection by an engineering consultant for the Village shall be
equal to the amount charged to the Village by the consultant and shall be
paid by the applicant to the Village prior to the issuance of building
permits.



               a.   Compensation for engineering
inspections by Village staff shall be set by ordinance of the Village Board,
and shall be paid by the applicant to the Village. The compensation levels
may be amended from time to time. For an updated schedule contact the
Development Services Department.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



            3.   Landscape Plan Review and Inspections. All
preliminary landscape plans submitted to the Village in conjunction with
single family and multifamily developments over two (2) units and with all
non-residential developments, or for any other required landscape plans as
detailed in Section 6-305 Landscape and Tree Preservation, shall be reviewed
by the Plan Commission, Committee and Board of Trustees before Village
approval. All final landscape plans shall incorporate conditions of approval
of the Board approved preliminary landscape plan, and shall be reviewed and
receive final approval from the Development Services Department upon
recommendation of approval by the Village landscape consultant, if applicable.



            Upon installation of required landscaping, the
developer or property owner shall contact the Development Services Department
to schedule a landscape inspection, which will initiate the landscape
inspection process. All landscaping shall be inspected for proper
installation and compliance with the approved landscape plan and any
associated documentation, including hydro-period analyses or M&M Plans. A
minimum of three (3) years of consecutive naturalized landscape area
inspection approvals shall be attained before Village approval and acceptance
of any stormwater management area. A minimum of one (1) year of site
landscape approvals shall be attained before a letter of credit reduction can
be requested. No letter of credit release shall be issued until a final
landscape inspection approval has been granted by the Development Services
Department. The fees charged to the Village by its landscaping consultant for
landscape plan review shall be paid by the petitioner to the Village at the
time of petition. Fees charged to the Village by its landscaping consultant
for inspections of installed landscaping shall be paid by the petitioner to
the Village by the applicant before final letter of credit release.  (Ord.
3672 – 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 5061–1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17; Amd.
Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      10.   Maintenance Guarantee.



         a.   General.  The applicant shall guarantee the public
improvements against defects in materials and workmanship for a period of two
(2) years from the date of acceptance of public improvements by the
Village.  The applicant agrees to repair or replace any of said public
improvements, including landscaping, which, during said two (2) year period
after acceptance, shall become damaged or deficient due to defective
materials or workmanship.



         a.   Private Street Improvements.  The applicant shall
guarantee the private street improvements against defects in materials and
workmanship for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance of
private street improvements by the Village.  The maintenance of private
roadways shall be the responsibility of the applicant until the time of final
maintenance guaranty release, when the owner or homeowner's association shall
become responsible for maintenance. 



         c.   Conditions of Guarantee.   The guarantee required
by this Section shall include five percent (5%) of the final construction
costs of the improvements in order to guarantee the cost of replacement of
any defective materials used in the construction of the improvements.  Said
amount shall remain in force for the aforesaid two (2) year maintenance
period and shall be for use by the Village to effect such repairs deemed
necessary for public safety and which the applicant has neglected to repair
for a forty-eight (48) hour period after notification.



         d.   Disbursements of Account.   Disbursements from the
letter of credit or other security guarantee shall be made solely upon the
direction of the Village, and shall not be subject to approval or disapproval
by the applicant or the financial institution issuing the letter of credit or
their agents. 



         e.   Return of Funds.   Within forty-five (45) days
following the two (2) year maintenance period, the the financial institution
issuing the letter of credit or other security guarantee shall release to the
applicant, without further demand or notice, any balance of funds then
remaining undisbursed under said letter of credit or other security
guarantee.  The financial institution shall notify the Village of such
return of funds to the applicant.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      11.   Damage and Nuisance Guarantee.



         a.   General.  The guarantee of completion of public
improvements shall also provide for the repair of damages and abatement of
nuisances created by the applicant with respect to existing and subsequently
installed landscaping, streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, parkways, water
and sanitary sewerage facilities, culverts, catch basins and/or storm sewers.



         b.   Guarantee Provisions.  The damage and nuisance
guarantee shall be in the total or prorated amount of $1,000 per platted
block, or total of five percent (5%) of the construction cost of the new
improvements, whichever amount is greater, and shall be provided upon the
commencement of land development by letter of credit as provided in Section
5-112.E.3.  In addition, security shall be required in the amount necessary
to remove any silt eroded and deposited within one-half (1/2) mile of the
construction site.



         c.   Release of Funds.   Upon completion of all
required development or subdivision improvements, the applicant's engineer
shall prepare a certified statement that the improvements comply with the
plans and specifications approved by the Board of Trustees, and shall forward
the statement to the Village, together with a request for preliminary
approval of improvements.  The Village Engineer shall verify whether the
improvements comply with the approved plans and specifications, and, pursuant
to Section 5-112.E.10 shall prepare a statement of preliminary approval for
the Board of Trustees.  Upon acceptance of that statement of preliminary
approval, the Board of Trustees shall direct the financial institu-tion
issuing the letter of credit or other security guarantee to pay over to the
applicant, without further demand or notice, any balance of funds then
remaining undisbursed under said letter of credit or other security guarantee.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



   F.   Acceptance of Improvements.   The approval of a subdivision
plat by the Village Board of Trustees shall not constitute an acceptance by
the Village of any improvements constructed therein.  The Village shall
accept the dedication of any validly certified improvement within thirty (30)
days of the developer's offer to dedicate the improvement.  The acceptance
of improvements shall be made as follows:



      1.   Letter of Acceptance from the Village Manager's Office.
  The Village Manager's Office, with a written recommendation from the
Public Works Department, shall issue a letter of acceptance to the
petitioner/ applicant that states that all required improvements have been
fully completed, and that said improvements meet the design and operating
standards and requirements of the Village and other agencies, including the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Illinois Department of
Transportation. A copy of that letter shall be filed with the Development
Services Department and the Village Manager's Office. 



         a.   The applicant's engineer shall provide to the
Village Engineer one hard copy and one copy in electronic format compatible
with current Village software of "as built" drawings. All utilities and
public improvements located within the development, including right-of-way
lines, lot numbers, lot lines, geographic positioning system coordinate data
of all utilities, and development mapping data compatible with the current
Village geographic information system shall be included as overlay maps for
the purposes of review.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      2.   Approval of Village Attorney.   The Village Attorney
shall approve such legal documentation as is necessary in his/her opinion to
protect the interests of the Village, including valid lien waivers from all
persons who provided materials or performed work on the improvement for which
the certification has been offered.  When applicable, the Village Attorney
shall require the applicant to transfer title to the public improvements to
the Village.  The Village Attorney shall consider the following documents
(where appropriate) for the closing: 



         a.   A bill of sale for the personal property to become
public property located within the subdivision;



         b.   An assignment to the Village of the applicant's
rights and interests and warranties with respect to said personal property in
the subdivision;



         c.   A quit claim deed for all mains, valve  boxes,
streets, etc. for the public improvements located in the subdivision;



         d.   UCC searches with respect to the public personal
property located in the subdivision;



         e.   Judgment searches for the applicant;



         f.   Federal tax lien searches with respect to the
development/ subdivision and the applicant;



         g.   A certificate from the applicant's engineer that
the improvements are constructed in accordance with the approved engineering
drawings or an explanation and certification as to any deviations;



         h.   A certificate from the  applicant's attorney that
the appropriate corporate action has been taken by the applicant to make the
conveyances through the bill of sale, quit claim deed or other documents; and



         i.   Disclosure of beneficial interest in any land
trusts.



   The Village's acceptance of dedication shall be expressly conditioned
on the presentation by the applicant of a policy of title insurance for the
benefit of the Village showing that the applicant owns the improvement in fee
simple and that there are no liens, encumbrances, or other restrictions on
the improvement unacceptable to the Village Attorney in his reasonable
judgment.  Acceptance of dedication of any improvement shall not constitute
a waiver by the Village of the right to draw funds under the security
provided herein on account of any defect in or failure of the improvement
that is dedicated or which occurs after the acceptance of the dedication.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      3.   Resolution.  Upon receipt of the Village Manager's
Office letter of acceptance and the approval of the Village Attorney of the
improvements through the turnover proceedings identified in Section
5-112.F.2, above, the Board of Trustees shall adopt a resolution stating that
the Village accepts the improvements. (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



   G..   Private Improvements.



      1.   Privately Owned Improvements. Applicants constructing
privately owned improvements, including landscaping, ponds, bike and walking
paths, and private streets, shall demonstrate that adequate provision has
been made for the maintenance of such improvements.  Developers may create
either a homeowners association or a reciprocal easement relationship as a
means of demonstrating such provision.



      2.   Homeowners Association Agreements. The declaration of
covenants establishing a homeowners' association shall provide for the
maintenance of all common areas located within the development.  The
declaration shall further provide that if the common areas are not properly
maintained, the Village shall have the right to perform or cause to be
performed such maintenance, at the cost of the association or the owners of
property within the development, as applicable.  If the homeowners'
association or owners, as applicable, should fail to pay such cost upon
demand, the Village shall have the same rights as the homeowners' association
to  assess and  to collect the costs of such maintenance and to enforce in
its name and the name of the association, as applicable, all liens for such
costs granted to the association.



      3.   Easements.  If no homeowner's association is created,
the applicant shall create a reciprocal easement relationship between and
among all the properties in the development which makes adequate provision
for the maintenance of all common areas in the development.  The easement
documents shall provide a mechanism for:



         a.   sharing the costs of such maintenance on an
equitable basis among the owners of all lots in the development;



         b.   creating a lien on any owner's lot and for personal
liability of such owner if such owner shall fail to pay such owner's share of
such maintenance costs; and



         c.   enforcing such liens.



      4.   Maintenance Failure. If the lot owners fail to perform
such maintenance as may be reasonably necessary, the Village shall have the
right to perform or cause to be performed such maintenance as the Village
deems necessary, and in such event, may avail itself of the mechanism to
collect the costs of such maintenance from the owners.



         a.   The approval of a homeowners' association
declaration or a reciprocal easement relationship by the homeowners shall not
constitute an acceptance by the Village of such provisions for the
maintenance of the private improvements.  All such documents are subject to
the prior approval of the Village Attorney, which approval shall be obtained
by the applicant before an application for final plat approval is submitted
to the Board of Trustees.



   H.   Development and Subdivision Exactions: Dedication of Land and
Fees In Lieu of Dedication.



      1.   Purpose. In order to serve the educational, recreational
and transportation needs of new residents, applicants are required to either
donate land or cash or make improvements to the Village's parks, schools,
library system and transportation facilities as a condition of development or
subdivision approval.  (Ord. 2539  3/21/94; Amd. Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      2.   Park Exactions.



         a.   General Requirements.  The amount of park
facilities for new residents is partly based on data and policy in the
Village's Comprehensive Plan, which recommends a ratio of ten (10) acres of
active parks per 1,000 residents.  Of the ten (10) acres, five (5) acres are
designated for neighborhood parks, and five (5) acres are designated for
community parks. The capital improvement cost of Village parks averaged
$90,000 per acre in 1996.  The fee schedule is $45,000 per acre in 1996,
$67,500 in 1997, and $90,000 in 1998. Because neighborhood parks are intended
to contain facilities for immediately surrounding residents, and because the
need for new neighborhood parks is generated by new residents, new housing
development is being required by these regulations to pay 100% of land and
capital costs.  It is presumed that other revenues will pay for maintenance
and services in the new neighborhood parks. Because community parks serve all
residents, new housing development is only being required by these
regulations to pay forty percent (40%) of land and capital costs.  It is
presumed that other revenues will pay for sixty percent (60%) of land and
capital costs and one hundred percent (100%) of maintenance and service costs
of community parks.  Park exaction fees apply to all new residential
developments of two or more units.  (Ord.2860 - 3/18/96; Amd. Ord. 4412 -
9/2/08)



         b.   Fair Share Donation Formula.



            1.   Land Ratio.  Applicants for approval for
residential developments shall donate land to the Village at a ratio of seven
(7) acres per 1,000 people anticipated to ultimately reside in that
development.



            2.   Cash Ratio.  Applicants for approval for
residential developments shall also donate cash to the Village equal to the
capital improvement cost of seven (7) acres of park land for every 1,000
people anticipated to ultimately reside in that development per Table
5-112(H)(9).  The capital improvement cost per acre of park land shall be
determined by the Village based on empirical study of existing Village parks
and updated periodically.



            3.   Projected Population.  The ultimate
population of a development shall be projected using Table 5-112(H)(9).  If
an applicant does not commit to a unit mix in the application for development
approval, the Village shall assume that all detached single family units will
be four bedroom, all attached single family units will be three bedroom, and
all apartment/condominium units will be two bedrooms.  The Board of Trustees
may amend these regulations and Table 5-112(H)(9) as new data becomes
available on family size in the Village.



            4.   Location.  Land donated for new parks shall
be located based generally on the Village's Comprehensive Plan and official
map and shall specifically consider the design of each development.  The
amount of land required shall not include wetlands, flood plain or detention
facilities.



         c.   Park Donation Substitutions.  If park land would
be more appropriately located off-site, the Board of Trustees may agree to
accept cash in lieu of land from an applicant for residential development. 
The amount of land required from an applicant for residential development may
be reduced depending on the amount of the improved land, up to two (2) acres
established in a private park by the applicant, provided that such land is
determined to be of equivalent value and available by right to all residents
of the development. The applicant shall present evidence that the private
facility shall be equally available to all residents of the development. 



(Ord. 4412 -9/2/08)



      3.   School Exactions.



         a.   Requirement and Population Ratio.   The ultimate
number of students to be generated by a development shall directly relate to
the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites.  The land
dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: (1)
estimated children to be served in each school classification over (2) the
maximum recommended number of students to be served in such school
classification as stated herein and then applying such ratio to (3) the
minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each such school
classification.  The product of this calculation shall be the number of
acres of land the applicant must provide in order for the Village to have
sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increase of children
in each such school classification.



(Ord. 4412 -9/2/08)



         b.   School Classification and Size of School Site.
School classifications and size of school sites within the Village and its
planning jurisdiction shall be determined in accordance with the following
criteria: (Ord. 2539 - 3/21/94)                     



 

School Classifications by Grades
 
Maximum Number of Students for each such School Classifications
 
Minimum Number of Acres of and for each School Site of Such Classifications


Elementary Schools- Grades K-5
 
600 Students
 
12 Acres


Junior High Schools Grades 6-8
 
700 Students
 
19.5 Acres


High School Grades 9-12
 
2,500 Students
(Ord. 4183 - 9/18/06)
 
66 Acres
(Ord. 2539 - 3/21/94)



 



         c.   Location.  The Village's Comprehensive Plan shall
be used as the criteria in locating school sites.  If the Comprehensive Plan
fails to provide the necessary designation for the location of particular
school sites, then such designation shall be provided by the Village in
cooperation with the affected school district.  Such information shall be
made available to a subdivider within thirty (30) days of the request for
such information.



         d.   School Access.  All land dedicated for school
sites shall have vehicular access to public streets from two (2) separate
points, as approved by the Board of Trustees.



      4.   Combining Lands.



         a.   Whenever possible, and whenever in the best
interests of the Village and the affected school district, land dedicated for
park and recreation sites shall be contiguous to land dedicated for a school
site.



         b.   Where the development is less than forty (40)
acres, park and recreation land or school sites which are to be dedicated
should, where possible, and in the best interests of the Village and affected
school districts, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in
order to produce usable park and recreation lands or school sites and thereby
minimize hardship on a particular applicant.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      5.   Criteria for Requiring a Contribution of Cash in Lieu of
Park and Recreation Land and School Sites.



         a.   General.  Where the development is small and the
resulting site is too small to be practical, or when the available land is
inappropriate for park and recreation land use or for a school site, or when
land for park and recreation use cannot be made contiguous to land dedication
for a school site, the Board of Trustees, upon recommendation of the affected
school district and using the standards provided in this Section as a guide,
shall determine whether the applicant shall be required to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of the required land dedication. 



         b.   School and Park Accounting Trusts and Use of Fees.



            1.   The cash contributions in lieu of land for
park and recreation use shall be held in trust by the Village for expenditure
by the Village or by such other appropriate agency, as determined by the
Board of Trustees and as set out by intergovernmen-tal agreement.  Such cash
contributions shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for parks and
recreation which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of
the residents of the subdivision or development, or for the improvement of
recreation facilities and other parks already existing within the Village
which will benefit the development or subdivision.



            2.   The cash contributions in lieu of school
sites and the cash paid relating to high schools shall be held in trust by
the affected school district.  Such cash contributions shall be used for the
acquisition of land for a school site, the improvement of existing or new
sites or the construction of new schools, or the addition or improvement of
existing buildings to serve the immediate or future needs of children from
that development or subdivision or for the improvement to any existing school
site which will benefit the development or subdivision.



         c.   Refunds. If any portion of a cash contribution in
lieu of park and recreation land dedication or cash contribution in lieu of
school site land dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth above
within fifteen (15) years from the date of receipt, said portion shall be
refunded to the applicant or any successors of such applicant who made such
contribution if so requested.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      6.   Transportation Exactions.



         a.   General Requirements.  All applicants shall
install improvements to the Village's trans-portation system that the Village
requires to serve the proposed development or subdivision, and shall pay an
exaction in lieu, as a condition of the development or subdivision approval.



         b.   Credit.  All applicants shall be entitled to a
credit against the payment of this transportation exaction for any of the
following improvements:



            1.   Any improvements required by the Village to
off-site roads not contiguous to the development;



            2.   Any road improvements to Township maintained
roads that are contiguous to the development that will be dedicated to the
Village pursuant to an agreement between the Township and the Village within
three (3) years after final approval by the Board of Trustees of the
subdivision or re-subdivision plat or final development plan pursuant to the
terms of Subsection E hereof.



            3.   Applicants will not be entitled to a credit
for road improvements which provide for safe access to the development,
including but not limited to turn lanes, deceleration lanes and road
widenings.  (Ord.2860 - 3/18/96)



         c.   Fair Share Exaction.  All applicants shall pay the
following transportation exaction, except applicants that are redeveloping
properties of similar impact that have already contributed transportation
exactions:



 

Residential:
 
$1,500 per lot or per dwelling unit, whichever is greater


Nonresidential:
 
$1.15 per sq. ft. for retail


 
 
$0.90 per sq. ft. for office


 
 
$0.60 per sq. ft. for industrial



 



   These fees are based on the expected traffic that will be generated by
each type of development, based on the estimated cost per lane mile.  If the
density or intensity of the development at the time of building permit
issuance exceeds that which the applicant had represented that he or she
would build at the time of plat approval, the applicant shall pay an
additional fee, based on the fees set forth in this Section.  If there is
any question regarding the appropriate category for a nonresidential
development for the purposes of this subsection, the nonresidential
development shall be treated as if the development belonged in the most
similar category, as determined by the Development Services Department or its
designee.  An applicant  may appeal this determination to the Board of
Trustees.  The Village may elect to assume the obligation of an exaction fee
as an incentive to encourage industrial and office development, so long as
the Village follows the standards and procedures adopted by the Village for
determining when such abatement is appropriate. (Amd. Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



         d.   Transportation Accounting Trust and Use of Fees.  
The cash contributions shall be held in trust by the Village, and shall be
used for the purpose of acquisition, expansion and development of the
transportation facilities that are needed to serve the immediate or future
needs of residents from that development or for the improvement to any
transportation facility which will benefit the development.  The funds
collected shall be expended for facilities that include, but are not limited
to:



            1.   design and construction plan preparation;



            2.   right-of-way acquisition;



            3.   site acquisition;



            4.   construction or improvement of new or
existing through lanes;



            5.   construction or improvement of new or
existing turn lanes;



            6.   construction or improvement of new or
existing bridges;



            7.   construction or improvement of new or
existing drainage facilities in conjunction with  roadway construction;



            8.   purchase and installation of street lighting
and traffic signalization; and



            9.   construction or improvement of new or
existing curbs, sidewalks, medians and shoulders.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      7.   Library Fees.



         a.   General Requirements.  All applicants for
residential developments within the Village shall pay a library fee in the
amount of $125.00 per each residential unit to the Village.  The cash
contribution shall be held in trust by the Village for expenditure by the
Orland Park Library Board.



         b.   Timing of Payment.   The fee shall be a one time
charge payable in full prior to the issuance of a building permit.



         c.   Use of Funds.   The library fees collected shall
be used only for library improvements and services.  Library "improvements
and services" are defined to include expenses for library personnel and
library operation, the cost of library buildings, books, and other materials.



         d.   Exemptions.  Applicants of the following
residential development shall be exempted from payment of the library fee:



            1.   Alterations or expansion of an existing
dwelling unit where no additional units are created and the use is not
changed.



            2.   The construction of accessory buildings or
structures which are not dwelling units and which do not constitute an
increase in intensity or use; and



            3.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially
destroyed building or structure of the same size and use.  (Ord. 2539 
3/21/94)



      8.   Criteria for Requiring Dedication and Contribution.  
There will be situations in developments when a combination of land
dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary.  These
occasions will arise when:



         a.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is
proposed as the location for park and recrea-tion lands, school site purposes
or transportation facilities.  That portion of the land within the
development falling within any of these locations shall be dedicated as a
site and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any
additional land that would have been required to be dedicated; or



         b.   A major part of the local park and recreation land
or school site or transportation facility site has already been acquired and
only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the
site.  The small portion shall be dedicated and a cash contribution shall be
required in lieu of any additional land that would have been required to be
dedicated.



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      9.   Fair Market Value.  The cash contributions in lieu of
land shall be based on the "fair market value" of improved land in the
area.  Improved land for purposes of this Section is specified in Section 10
below.



         a.   The "fair market value" of such improved land is
$134,689 per acre as of January 1, 2009 for all properties within the Village
and its one and one half (1 ½) mile jurisdiction.  Refer to the Village of
Orland Park fee structure summary in the Development Services Department. 



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



         b.   The "fair market value" of such improved land is
$75,000 per acre until January 1, 1997, for all properties within the Village
and its one and one half (1 1/2) mile jurisdiction.  After January 1, 1997,
the "fair market value" shall be increased by a factor of five (5) percent
per annum, on January 1 of each year beginning with 1998.  Refer to the
Village of Orland Park fee structure summary in the Development Services
Department. 



         c.   The applicable figure shall be used in making any
calculation herein unless the applicant or an affected school district files
a written objection thereto with the Board of Trustees.  In the event of any
such objection, the applicant or affected school district shall submit an
appraisal by an appraiser mutually acceptable to the applicant and the Board
of Trustees.  The appraisal shall show the "fair market value" per acre of
such improved site as described in Subsection 10 (a) below in the area of the
development.  A final determination of said "fair market value" per acre of
such improved site shall be made by the Board of Trustees based upon such
information submitted by the appraiser and from other sources which may be
obtained by the Board of Trustees or the affected school district or the
applicant.  When evidence is presented to support a written objection, it
shall be specific to the applicable area:



            1.   Unincorporated areas of Orland and Palos
Townships. 



            2.   Unincorporated areas of Homer and Frankfort
Townships.



            3.   Village of Orland Park.



(Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00; Amd. Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      10.   Density Formula.



         a.   A document entitled, "Table of Estimated Ultimate
Population Per Dwelling Unit," prepared by the Illinois School Consulting
Service located in Naperville, Illinois, is attached hereto as Table
5-112(H)(9).  Such Table is generally indicative of current and short range
projected trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in
calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or cash
contributions in lieu thereof.  It is recognized that population density,
age distribution and local conditions change over a period of time. 
Therefore, the Table shall be updated every two (2) years, if felt necessary
in the opinion of the Board of Trustees to reflect the latest Table published
by the Illinois Consulting Service or a comparable organization.  If the
Board of Trustees fails to renew and update said Table, such failure shall
not be deemed to invalidate this Section or any parts hereof.



         b.   An applicant may file a written objection to Table
5-112(H)(9) with the Board of Trustees and shall submit his or her own
demographic study that shows the estimated additional population to be
generated from the development.  The Board of Trustees shall make a
determination of the density formula to be used in calculating the dedication
or contribution required herein after review of such demographic information.



         c.   An applicant of detached single family dwellings
with commonly maintained lots may present to the Board of Trustees written
evidence to support a request that the dwellings be treated as single family
attached dwellings for school impact fee purposes.  Such evidence shall
include, but need not be limited to, an anticipated resident profile,
discussion of marketing efforts to attract that profile, a description of the
common amenities to be provided and a discussion of why the proposed
development is expected to generate fewer school age children than a similar
single family development with privately maintained lots.  The Board of
Trustees shall make a determination after considering the evidence submitted
by the applicant. 



(Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00; Amd. Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



 

Table of Estimated Ultimate Population 5-112.H.9
Table 5-112(H)(9)   Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling
Unit (School Donation)
(Children Per Unit)


Type of Unit
 
Pre-School
 
Elementary
 
Junior High
 
TOTAL
 
High School
 
 


 
 
Grades K-5
 
Grades 6-8
 
Grades K-8
 
Grades 9-12
 
Adults
 
Total Per


 
0-4 Years
 
5-10 Years
 
11-13 Years
 
5-13 Years
 
14-17 Years
 
18 and Up
 
Unit




Detached Single Family


2 Bedroom
 
0.12
 
0.411
 
0.138
 
0.549
 
0.222
 
1.856
 
2.746


3 Bedroom
 
0.268
 
0.486
 
0.153
 
0.639
 
0.135
 
1.913
 
2.955


4 Bedroom
 
0.371
 
0.702
 
0.259
 
0.961
 
0.242
 
1.985
 
3.532


5 Bedroom
 
0.386
 
0.59
 
0.236
 
0.826
 
0.242
 
2.191
 
3.645


Attached Single Family


1 Bedroom
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0


2 Bedroom
 
0.206
 
0.084
 
0.057
 
0.141
 
0.03
 
1.318
 
1.697


3 Bedroom
 
0.214
 
0.104
 
0.039
 
0.143
 
0.05
 
1.966
 
2.374


4 Bedroom
 
0.183
 
0.271
 
0.106
 
0.377
 
0.105
 
2.102
 
2.767


Apartments


Efficiency
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
1.4
 
1.4


1 Bedroom
 
0.058
 
0.032
 
0.012
 
0.044
 
0.013
 
1.653
 
1.71


2 Bedroom
 
0.129
 
0.064
 
0.031
 
0.095
 
0.038
 
1.744
 
2.007


3 Bedroom
 
0.199
 
0.115
 
0.073
 
0.188
 
0.083
 
2.005
 
2.475




 



   NOTE: There are only three (3) significant categories provided in this
chart. Because of the similarity of yields of all types of attached
single-family, only one category is provided. The same is true with
apartments; thus one category. Because of the relatively short history of
some newer types of detached and attached single-family units, individual
evaluations may be necessary. 



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      11.   Improved Sites.  All sites to be dedicated or conveyed
shall be improved by the applicant at his or her cost.  The improvement of
sites shall be guaranteed by giving security in conformance with the
requirements of Subsection E.



         a.   An "improved site" for purposes of this Section
shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:



            1.   Contour and grading and storm water
management;



            2.   All utilities to service the site consisting
of electric, water, sewer, streets, curbs and gutters and all required
drainage;



            3.   Sites for parks and recreation lands shall
include improvements for paved parking facilities sufficient to service such
sites;



            4.   Sites for park and recreation lands shall
comply with all landscape regulations es-tablished pursuant to the Village's
Zoning Ordinance; and



            5.   Other improvements that may be appropriate to
the site.



         b.   Responsibility. The improvement plans, installation
and security required by these regulations shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.



         c.   Plan Approval. Plans for the improvement of
dedicated sites shall be approved by the Board of Trustees as part of the
development's  final development approval.



         d.   Phasing. The improvement of all dedicated sites
shall be completed by the applicant before twenty percent (20%) of the
occupancy permits for dwelling units have been issued, or by another date as
determined by the Board of Trustees but in no event later than three (3)
years of final approval.



      12.   Reservation of Additional Land.   Where the
Comprehensive Plan or the designation by the Village calls for a larger
amount of land in a particular subdivision or planned development for school
sites, park and recreation use, transportation facilities, or as additional
public land than the applicant is required to dedicate, the land needed
beyond the applicant's contribution shall be reserved for subsequent
acquisition by the Village or the school district in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois Municipal Code, Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, ?11-12-8.



      13.   Topography and Grading.   The slope, topography and
geology of the dedicated site and its surroundings must be suitable for its
intended purposes.  An applicant shall allow the Village or school district
to have access to proposed sites for the purpose of conducting soil boring
tests.



      14.   Timing of Conveyance   An applicant shall convey to the
Village, the affected school district, or such other governmental body,
corporation or other qualified owner as determined by the Village, the land
required under this Section at the time of final approval by the Board of
Trustees of the subdivision or resubdivision plat or final development plan,
by the delivery of the following documents:



(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



         a.   A good and sufficient Trustee's or Warranty Deed
conveying fee simple title free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
(except liens or encumbrances dischargeable by cash accompanying said deed)
except for current real estate taxes;



         b.   Preliminary commitment for title insurance issued
by a title insurance company acceptable to the Board of Trustees covering a
date not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of conveyance in the
amount of the fair market value of the land to be conveyed as established
herein, subject only to the matters hereof, and to such other matters
acceptable to the Board of Trustees;



         c.   An affidavit of title to the real estate;



         d.   Completed Illinois Department of Revenue and Cook
County Real Estate Declarations;



         e.   A deposit of money equal to 115% of the most
ascertainable taxes for the year, pro-rated to the date the deed is delivered.



         f.   A plat of survey containing thereon the legal
description of the property to be conveyed and any other matters which may be
required by the Development Services Department or the school district. 
(Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      15.   Timing of Payment. Cash contributions required under
this Section shall be paid as follows:



         a.   All fees required pursuant to this Section,
including fees arising from the development of land located in the Village's
one and one-half (1-1/2) mile planning jurisdiction that may be the subject
of an intergovernmental agreement, shall be due and owing prior to final plat
approval by the Board of Trustees, or as provided by the terms of a developer
agreement entered into between the Village and an applicant.  However, if
the applicant's lands are the subject matter of an annexation agreement,
payment shall be made at the times and in the manner provided in said
annexation agreement.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



         b.   It shall be the duty of the Village Comptroller to
establish regulations and procedures for the collection and administration of
the cash contributions required under this Section.



      16.   Credit for Land or Contribution of Cash in Lieu of Land
Given Under Annexation Agreements.   If an applicant has given land and a
contribution of money or a contribution of cash in lieu of land as part of an
annexation agreement and thereafter the applicant or his or her successors
submits a plan of subdivision or resubdivision or final development plan
which will increase the density of population in those areas covered by the
annexation agreement, then the applicant shall be required to make an
additional contribution of park and recreation land or land for school sites
or land for transportation facilities or of cash in lieu thereof as outlined
above.  The additional land or cash in lieu of land to be contributed shall
be the difference between that land or cash in lieu of land required as
determined from the plat of subdivision or resubdivision or final development
plan and that land or cash in lieu of land previously contributed under the
annexation agreement.



      17.   Developer Agreements.  The Village may enter into a
developer agreement with any applicant which sets forth the time and manner
of compliance with the terms of this Section and implementation of any other
provisions of these regulations.  If any developer agreement has previously
been entered into between the Village and an applicant, and that agreement
remains in full force and effect, the provisions of that agreement shall
control and this Section shall have no force and effect, provided that the
applicant complies with the terms of such agreement.  However, if such
applicant is not complying with the terms of that agreement or the agreement
does not set forth a specific dollar amount that the applicant is required to
pay to the Village, then the provisions of this Section shall apply and the
Village shall utilize the fees set forth herein to determine the appropriate
exaction amount, less credits, if any.  Further, if the development
contemplated by an applicant has either increased in density or has otherwise
increased the traffic on the Village's transportation system previously
estimated following annexation, then the developer agreement previously
entered into between the applicant and the Village shall be amended and the
applicant shall pay an additional pro-rata fee, based on the fees set forth
in this Section, less credits, if any.  (Ord. 4412 - 9/2/08)



      18.   Audit Reports.  The Village shall have the right to
request and receive from the affected school districts, or such other
appropriate agencies, annual audit reports and any other information the
Village may need from time to time to insure compliance with this Section.



      19.   Indemnification.  The affected school districts, or
such other appropriate agencies, shall be required, as a condition of
receiving the donations hereunder, to indemnify and hold harmless the Village
from any loss, claims and causes of actions of every kind incurred by the
Village as a result, either directly or indirectly, of the passage of this
Section, or the administration or enforcement thereof, including any so
incurred as a result of a lawsuit brought or threatened by an applicant.. 
If the Village is sued by any applicant as a result, directly or indirectly,
of the passage of this Section, the school district or other appropriate
agencies affected may, at its option, undertake the defense thereof but all
costs and expenses of such defense, including attorneys' fees, shall then be
borne by the affected school district or appropriate agencies.  (Ord. 4412 -
9/2/08)



ARTICLE 6:
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



PART 1: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP



SECTION 6-101.   ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



(Entire Section Amended by Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



   A.   Purpose. In order to carry out the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Village and the purposes of these regulations, the
following districts are hereby created:



      1.   E-1   Estate Residential District



      2.   R-1   Residential District



      3.   R-2   Residential District



      4.   R-3   Residential District



      5.   R-4   Residential District



      6.   LSPD   Large Scale Planned Development District (Ord.
2514 - 1/17/94)



      7.   RSB   Residential/Supporting Business District



      8.   BIZ   General Business District



      9.   MFG   Manufacturing District



      10.   OOH   Old Orland Historic District



      11.   COR   Mixed Use Core District



      12.   ORI   Mixed Use Office, Research & Industrial District



      13.   VC   Village Center District (Ord. 2746 - 6/5/95)



      14.   OL   Open Lands District (Ord. 4217 - 2/5/07)



      15.   RMC   Regional Mixed-Use Campus (Ord. 5168 –
2/20/17)



   B.   Boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are described on
the Zoning District Map, attached hereto and incorporated herein.



SECTION 6-102.   ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of the Zoning District Map is to set
forth the boundaries of the zoning districts established in Section 6-101 as
they may be applied from time to time to all land within the corporate limits
of the Village.



   B.   Interpretation of Boundaries.   Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of the zoning districts shown on the Zoning
District Map amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions of
Section 5-108 of these regulations, the following rules shall be used to
interpret the maps:



      1.   In cases where a boundary line is located within a street
or alley right-of-way, railroad or utility line right-of-way, easement, or
navigable or non-navigable waterway, it shall be considered to be in the
center of the right-of-way, easement or waterway.  If the actual location of
such right-of-way, easement, or waterway varies slightly from the location as
shown on the map, then the actual location shall control.



      2.   In cases where the map shows a boundary line as being
located a specific distance from a street line or other physical feature,
this distance shall control.



      3.   Where the map shows a district boundary to approximately
coincide with a property line or Village limit line, the property line or
Village limit line shall be considered to be the district boundary, unless
otherwise indicated.



      4.   In cases where a district boundary does not coincide or
approximately coincide with any street, alley, railroad, waterway, or
property line, and no dimensions are shown, the location of the boundary
shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.



   C.   Maintenance of Map.   The originals of the Zoning District Map
shall be signed by the Village Clerk and the President of the Board of
Trustees and retained in the offices of the Village Clerk.  Copies of the
Zoning District Map shall be maintained by the Village and kept up-to-date by
posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments.  (Ord. 4374 - 6/30/08)



   D.   Update.  The Zoning District Map shall be updated twice a year
and shall be published in accordance with Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, sec.
11-13-19 (1989).



SECTION 6-103.   ZONING OF NEWLY ANNEXED LAND AND REZONING.



   A.   Annexation.  All fully developed land which shall be annexed
to the Village shall be classified into the zoning district that is most
compatible, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, with the Village's
Comprehensive Plan.  All undeveloped or partially developed land which shall
be annexed to the Village shall be automatically classified and zoned in the
E-1 Estate Residence District until otherwise classified in accordance with
the Village's Comprehensive Plan.



   B.   Petition For Annexation.  The owner of any land proposed for
annexation to the Village shall file with the Development Services Department
a petition for annexation.  The Development Services Department shall review
such application and shall recommend to the Board of Trustees whether such
annexation should be approved.  If such petition involves a zoning
classification other than E-1, the petition shall be referred to the Plan
Commission which shall recommend to the Board of Trustees the appropriate
zoning district in accordance with the procedures of Section 5-108.  If such
petition involves an annexation agreement, the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 24, ?7-1-2, as amended, shall be followed.  (Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



   C.   Proposal for Rezoning. If a petition or application is made
requesting a map amendment to a property other than E-1, the petition goes to
Plan Commission as a public hearing and shall include a site plan in its
submission to the Development Services Department.  (Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



   DistrictsTables were deleted



Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



SECTION 6-104.   BULK REGULATIONS.



   A.   General.



      1.   All development, except as provided by special use, must
conform to the minimum bulk regulations as set out in this Section.



      2.   No building, structure or land located in the Village
shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure shall be erected,
moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered unless in accordance with
the minimum lot area, lot width, setback and open space requirements set
forth on Table 6-104(A) or as otherwise required by these regulations.



      3.   No setbacks existing on the effective date of these
regulations shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below if
already less than the minimum setback requirements set out in Table 6-104(A)
for equivalent new construction.



      4.   No lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more
lots unless all lots resulting from such division conform with all applicable
minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in which such lots are
located or as otherwise provided in these regulations.



      5.   (Reserved.)



      6.   Any lot which was of record at the time of the adoption
of these regulations, and which does not meet the requirements for minimum
lot width and area set forth on Table 6-104(A), may be utilized for a use
permitted under the zoning district in which the lot is located, provided
that the applicable setbacks and other provisions of these regulations are
met. (Amd. Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



(Table 6-104(A), including amendments by Ord. 2514 – 1/17/94, Ord. 4015 -
5/2/05, Ord. 4926 – 9/15/14, Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16, and Ord. 5168 –
2/20/17, was deleted by Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18.)



   B.   Lot Coverage.



      1.   Location of Required Open Space.



         a.   Open spaces shall be maintained on all lots outside
of the required building setback (the building envelope), unless otherwise
enabled by these regulations as accessory uses and structures.  Required
building setbacks shall be measured inward from the property lines of the
subject site.



         b.   No required setbacks, other open space, or minimum
lot area allocated to a building shall be used to satisfy the setbacks or
other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.



      2.   Uses and Structures Prohibited in Required Setbacks.



         a.   No principal building or structure shall be located
within any setback required by these regulations.



         b.   Except as otherwise provided in Section 6-306 of
these regulations, no off-street parking area, maneuvering area for parking
spaces, or loading area shall be located within any required front setback or
within any required side setback which abuts a street.  This restriction
shall not apply to driveways of single family detached dwellings providing
access from the street to the parking area.



         c.   No outdoor storage of goods and materials or refuse
containers shall be located within any required front setback, or within any
required side setback which abuts a street, except for the temporary
placement of refuse containers for curbside pick-up in residential districts.



      3.   Maintenance of Setbacks and Other Open Spaces.   The
maintenance of setbacks and other open spaces and minimum lot areas set forth
on Table 6-104(A) shall be a continuing obligation of the owner(s) of the
property.



      4.   Required Building Setbacks v. Actual Building Setbacks. 
The regulations of this section and the subsequent zoning districts establish
the required building setbacks for the lots of each zoning district,
effectively establishing a building envelope in which to erect principal
structures, additions and accessory uses and structures.  The setbacks of
each zoning district shall be interpreted to read as the required setbacks. 
In  the case when a principal building is set back further than the required
setback, the actual setback, being more restrictive, shall not govern nor
override the ability of a property owner to construct within the zone's
established building envelope, which meets the required building setbacks. 
The exception to this is fences and similar accessory structures, which have
regulations regarding presence in front yard spaces. (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



   C.   Number of Buildings Per Lot.  No more than one (1) principal
building devoted to a single use shall be located on a lot, except as
approved as a special use for planned development in accordance with these
regulations.  (Ord. 3130 - 5/18/98)



   D.   Height Limitations.  Except as otherwise provided in this
Subsection and listed below, height limitations for all structures are listed
in each district, in Sections 6-201 through 6-213.



      1.   The height limitation established for each district shall
not apply to public utility poles and lines, skylights, fire towers, spires,
cooling towers, parapet walls, co-located wireless communication facilities,
and roof structures for elevators, stairways, tanks, heating, ventilation and
air-conditioning equipment, or similar equipment for the operation and
maintenance of a building.



      2.   Unless located in or adjacent to a residential district,
the height limitation shall not apply to radio or television towers,
steeples, chimneys, and water tanks. Freestanding wireless communication
facilities must meet the height requirements of Section 6-311.



      3.   Structures exempted from the maximum height provisions by
Subsections (1) and (2) above may not exceed a height of ten (10) feet above
the average roof line of the building to which they are affixed or adjacent
unless permitted by a special use permit. Wireless communication facilities
shall follow the height regulations of Section 6-311. (Amd. Ord. 4926 -
9/15/14)



   E.   Clear Sight Triangles at Street Intersections.



      1.   The restrictions set out in this Subsection shall apply
to the following triangles of land abutting street intersections:



         a.   Arterial streets:  The triangle bounded on two (2)
sides by the curb (or pavement edge where there is no curb), measured in each
direction along the curb or pavement edge for 50 feet from their point of
intersection or pavement edge, and on the third side by the diagonal line
connecting the ends of the 50-foot sides; and



         b.   Collector streets:  The triangle bounded on two
(2) sides by the inter-secting street lines, measured 35 feet in each
direction from their point of intersection, and on the third side by the
diagonal line connecting the ends of the 35-foot sides.



      2.   Within the triangles identified in Subsection (1) 
above, and except as provided in Subsection (3) below, no structure, sign,
plant, shrub, tree, berm, fence, wall, or other object of any kind shall be
installed, constructed, set out or maintained so as to obstruct
cross-visibility at a level between 30 and 72 inches above the height of the
curb.



      3.   The restrictions of this Subsection shall not apply to:



         a.   Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural
topography, rise 30 or more inches above the level of the center of the
adjacent intersection;



         b.   Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such a
manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the area between 30 and 72 inches
above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection; and



         c.   Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street
markers, and traffic control devices.



   F.   Obstruction of Public Right-of Way.   Except as otherwise
permitted by these regulations, no structure, fence, landscaping, driveway,
parking lot, newspaper vending machine or mailbox shall be permitted which
obstructs or otherwise interferes with public use of a street right-of-way or
other public easement.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10 moved Section 6-301 "Bulk Regulations" to Section 6-104
for reorganization)



PART 2: DISTRICT REGULATIONS



SECTION 6-201.   E-1 ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  The E-1 District is established to preserve and
enhance very low density residential areas characterized by an essentially
rural character.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the E-1 District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Sections 5-101 through 5-104:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;  (Ord.
4374 - 6/2/08)



         a.   Accessory garages up to four (4) vehicles;



         b.   Accessory five (5) vehicle garage if it is
side-load and not facing a public street;



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle as
provided in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
the development of nearby properties;



      (Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      3.   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, provided
that any parking lots are located at least 500 feet from any lot line;



      4.   Single family detached dwellings; and



      5.   Small residential-care homes with 1-5 residents, provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 450 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility.



      6.   Day Care Home. (Ord.2860 - 3/18/96)



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as 
special uses in the E-1 District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      1.   Cemeteries;



      2.   Convents, monasteries and schools, limited to public and
private not-for-profit preschools, elementary and secondary schools and
colleges/universities with day and boarding programs, provided that:  (Ord.
3672 - 8/5/02)



         a.   The use is located on a lot at least five (5) acres
in area;



         b.   No building is located within 25 feet of a side lot
line; and



         c.   The use is located no closer that 1,000 feet to any
other boarding school, college, seminary, convent, monastery,
residential-care home, nursing home, or congregate elderly housing facility.



      3.   Golf courses, including uses normally ancillary to such
uses, such as restaurants, but not including commercially operated driving
ranges or miniature golf courses, provided that such ancillary uses, parking
and all structures are located at least five hundred (500) feet from any lot
line;



      4.   Governmental uses;



      5.   Horse stables, provided that:



         a.   The stable is located on a lot at least three (3)
acres in area;



         b.   A minimum of one (1) acre of the lot is devoted
exclusively to horses;



         c.   A fence of not less than five and no more than six
(6) feet high is maintained around the paddock, pasture or other area where a
horse would be left unattended;



         d.   A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet separates
the stable and horse fence from any property line; and



         e.   A waste management plan for controlling manure is
approved.



      6.   Medium-sized residential-care homes with 6, 7 or 8
residents provided that:



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 660 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility;



      7.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter for
up to eight (8) adults, provided that no building is located within 25 feet
of a side lot line.  (Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      8.   Private marinas, slips and docks, provided that:



         a.   Only those commercial uses that are accessory to
the marina are located on the premises; and



         b.   Public fishing is permitted from the marina dock.



      9.   Public utility structures, other than electrical
generating facilities, provided that:



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



         a.   No building is located within 25 feet of a side lot
line;



         b.   The facility is constructed and operated to comply
with all applicable local, state and federal regulations;



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within 300 feet of any stream or other body of water or any existing or
proposed dwelling; and



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



      10.   Planned developments that include a site that is or is
intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal use, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.



         a.   Residential planned development, provided that:



            1.   No more than one (1) dwelling for every one
(1) gross acre of land is permitted, unless a critical and sensitive area
located on the map identified in the Village's Comprehensive Plan is present
on the parcel proposed for development, in which event smaller lots may  be
permitted, provided that:



               a.   the overall net density is not
increased;



               b.   no lot has an area of less than 35,000
square feet; and



               c.   the side setback is at least 25% of the
width of the lot.



            2.   Buildings are oriented to provide views of
common open space, forests, valleys, ponds and hills to the maximum extent
practicable; and



            3.   Streets are designed to provide a variety of
views and approaches.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      11.   Wireless Communication Facilities located on
institutional parcels per Code Section 6-311.  (Ord. 4442 - 12/15/08)



   D.   Minimum Lot Sizes.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no principal use in the E-1 District shall be permitted on a lot less than
one acre (43,560 square feet) in area and a width of less than 150 feet. 
Lots fronting cul-de-sac bulbs shall have a minimum lot width of fifty (50)
feet at the right-of-way line and meet zoning district lot width at the front
setback.



(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   E.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
E-1 District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be
considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall therefore be considered to be the "side" setback. (Ord.2959 - 11/18/96;
Amd. Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      1.   Front.



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial: Fifty (50) feet
from the property line.  (Ord. 3070 -10/20/97)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Fifty (50) feet from
the property line. (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97)



         c.   Abutting all other streets: Fifty (50) feet from
the property line. (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      2.   Side and Corner Side.  (Ord. 4183 - 9/18/06)



         a.   Major or minor arterial: Fifty (50) feet from the
property line.



         b.   Major collector: Fifty (50) feet from the property
line.



         c.   All other streets and sides not abutting a
street:  Twenty-five (25) feet from the property.  (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



         d.   Side yards with side loading garages shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet and the driveway must be a minimum of three (3)
feet from the nearest side property line.  (Ord. 4738 - 6/18/12)



            (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      3.   Rear.   All lots: Fifty (50) feet from the property
line. (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   F.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will-so long as they meet the following
performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage includes the
area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water storage, and other
impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to twenty percent (20%) lot coverage by
right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an additional 5% for an
accessory structure.  A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the lot
shall be green space.



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit.  Seventy percent (70%) of the lot shall be green
space.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade when it can demonstrate the
permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) of the
lot shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Premium grade when it
can demonstrate the permanent installation of at least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows up to seventy percent (70%) lot
coverage by right to non-residential land uses.  A minimum of thirty percent
(30%) of the lot shall be green space.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Height.  No structure may exceed thirty-five (35) feet to the
mean height of the roof.



(Ord. 4210 - 12/18/06)



SECTION 6-202.   R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  The R-1 District is established to protect, promote
and maintain areas that are developing or have been developed with
single-family detached housing and limited public and institutional uses that
are compatible with a low density residential neighborhood.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the R-1 District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Sections 5-101 through 5-104:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;  (Ord.
4374 - 6/30/08)



         a.   Garages for four (4) vehicles;



         b.   Accessory five (5) vehicle garage if it is
side-load and not facing a public street;



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties;



(Ord. 4374 - 6/30/08)



      3.   Golf courses, including uses normally ancillary to such
uses, such as restaurants, but not including commercially operated driving
ranges or miniature golf courses, provided that such ancillary uses, parking
and all structures are located at least  five hundred (500) feet from any
lot line;



      4.   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, provided
that any parking lots are located at least 500 feet from any lot line;



      5.   Single family detached dwellings; and (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      6.   Small residential-care homes with 1-5 residents, provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 450 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility.



      7.   Day Care Home. (Ord. 2 860 - 3/18/96)



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the  R-1 District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Cemeteries;



      2.   Convents, monasteries and schools, limited to public and
private not-for-profit preschools, elementary and secondary schools and
colleges/universities with day and boarding programs, provided that:  (Ord.
3672 - 8/5/02)



         a.   The use is located on a lot at least five (5) acres
in area;



         b.   No building is located within 25 feet of a side lot
line; and



         c.   The use is located no closer than 1,000 feet to any
other boarding school, college, seminary, convent, monastery,
residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing facility.



      3.   Governmental uses;



      4.   Medium-sized residential-care homes with 6, 7 or 8
residents, provided that:



(Ord. 4374 - 6/30/08)



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 660 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility;



      5.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter for
up to eight (8) adults, provided that:



         a.   The use is located on a lot not less than 12,000
square feet and a width of 90 feet; and



         c.   No structure is located within 25 feet of a side
lot line.



      6.   Planned Developments that include a site that is or is
intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal use, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.



         a.   Residential planned development, provided that:



            1.   The dwelling units are located on the parcel
to ensure adequate privacy for residents, such as by the separation of
buildings or landscaping between buildings;



            2.   No more than one (1) dwelling unit for every
½ gross acre of land is permitted, unless a critical and sensitive area
located on the map identified in the Village's Comprehensive Plan is present
on the parcel proposed for development, in which event smaller lots may be
permitted, provided that:



               a.   the overall density is not increased;



               b.   no lot is less than 18,000 square feet;
and



               c.   the side setback is at least
twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot.



            3.   Buildings are oriented to provide views of
common open space, forests, valleys, ponds and hills to the maximum extent
practicable; and



            4.   Streets are designed to follow natural soils
and contours and provide a variety of views and approaches.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      7.   Public utility structures, excluding electrical
generating facilities and wastewater treatment facilities, provided that: 
(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed and operated to comply
with all applicable local, state and federal regulations; 



         c.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.  (Ord. 4374 - 6/30/08)



      8.   Wireless Communication Facilities located on
institutional parcels per Code Section 6-311.  (Ord. 4442 - 12/15/08)



   D.   Minimum Lot Sizes.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no principal use in the R-1 District shall be permitted on a lot less than
21,780 square feet in area and a width (see definition) of less than one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet adding 10% for a corner lot width. Lots
fronting cul-de-sac bulbs shall have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet
at the right-of-way line and meet zoning district lot width at the front
setback. (Ord. 2959 -11/18/96 & Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   E.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
R-1 District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be
considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall therefore be considered to be the "corner side" setback.  (Ord.
3070-10/20/97)



      1.   Front.



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45)
feet from the property line. (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.  (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other streets: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.  (Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      2.   Side.   



            All lots:  Not less than 15% of the width of the lot
on each side of the principal building to the side lot line.  Side yards
with side loading garages shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet and the
driveway must be a minimum of three (3) feet from the nearest side property
line.    Where the width of a lot varies, the average of the lot width at
the front setback line and the rear setback line shall be used to make the
15% calculation; however no side yard shall be less than 12.5 feet. 
(Ord.2586-6/6/94 - Ord.2959-11/18/96  - Ord. 3070-10/20/97 - Ord. 3199 -
11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4738 - 6/18/12)



      3.   Corner Side. 



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial:  Twenty five
(25) feet from the property line. (Ord. 3070-10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Twenty (20) feet from
the property line. (Ord. 3070-10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other streets: Fifteen (15) feet from
the property line or 15% of the lot width, whichever is greater. Corner side
yards with side loading garages shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet and
the driveway shall be a minimum of three (3) feet from the nearest side
property line. (Ord.2586 - 6/6/94; Amd. Ord. 3070 - 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 4210
- 12/18/06)



      4.   Rear.   



            All lots: Forty-five (45) feet from the property
line. (Ord. 3070-10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   F.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will–so long as they meet the
following performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage
includes the area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water
storage, and other impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to thirty percent (30%) lot coverage by
right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an additional 5% for an
accessory structure. A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot shall
be green space.



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit. A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the lot shall be
green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade when it can demonstrate
the permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) of the
lot shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Premium grade when it
can demonstrate the permanent installation of at least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows up to seventy percent (70%) lot
coverage by right to non-residential land uses.  A minimum of thirty percent
(30%) of the lot shall be green space.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Height.  No structure may exceed thirty-five (35) feet to the
mean height of the roof. (Ord.  4210 - 12/18/06)



SECTION 6-203.   R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  The R-2 District is established to protect, promote
and maintain the development of single-family detached housing and limited
public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding
residential neighborhood.  The development standards and range of allowable
uses are designed to provide for residential living at a slightly higher
density of development than that of the R-1 district.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the R-2 District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 5-101 through 5-104:



(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;  (Ord.
4374 - 6/2/08)



         a.   Garages for three (3) vehicles;



         b.   Accessory four (4) vehicle garage if it is
side-load and not facing a public street;



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties;



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      3.   Day Care Home;  (Ord.2680 - 3/18/96)



      4.   Golf courses, including uses normally ancillary to such
uses, such as restaurants, but not including commercially operated driving
ranges or miniature golf courses, provided that such ancillary uses, parking
and all structures are located at least five hundred (500) feet from any lot
line;



      5.   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, provided
that any parking lots are located at least 500 feet from any lot line;



      6.   Single family detached dwellings; and (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      7.   Small residential-care homes with 1-5 residents, provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 450 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility.



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the R-2 District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Cemeteries;



      2.   Convents, monasteries and schools, limited to public and
private not-for-profit preschools, elementary and secondary schools and
colleges/universities with day and boarding programs, provided that:  (Ord.
3672 - 8/5/02)



         a.   The use is located on a lot at least five (5) acres
in area;



         b.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line; and



         c.   The use is located no closer than 1,000 feet to any
other boarding school, college, seminary, convent, monastery,
residential-care home, nursing home, congregate elderly housing facility.



      3.   Governmental uses;



      4.   Medium-sized residential-care homes with 6, 7 or 8
residents, provided that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 660 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      5.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter for
up to eight (8) adults, provided that:



         a.   The use is located on a lot not less than 12,000
square feet and a width of ninety (90) feet; and



         b.   No structure is located within twenty-five (25)
feet of a side lot line.



      6.   Planned Developments that include a site that is or is
intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal use, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.



         a.   Residential planned development, provided that:



            1.   The dwelling units are located on the parcel
to ensure adequate privacy for residents, such as by the separation of
buildings or landscaping between buildings;



            2.   No more than one (1) dwelling unit for every
½ gross acre of land is permitted, unless a critical and sensitive area
located on the map identified in the Village's Comprehensive Plan is present
on the parcel proposed for development, in which event smaller lots may be
permitted, provided that:



               a.   the overall density is not increased;



               b.   no lot is less than 12,500 square feet;
and



               c.   the side setback is at least
twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot.



            3.   Buildings are oriented to provide views of
common open space, forests, valleys, ponds and hills to the maximum extent
practicable; and



            4.   Streets are designed to follow natural soils
and contours and provide a variety of views and approaches.



   (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      7.   Public utility structures, other than electrical
generating facilities, provided that:



(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed and operated to comply
with all applicable local, state and federal regulations;



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within 300 feet of any stream or other body of water or any existing or
proposed dwelling; and 



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      8.   Wireless Communication Facilities located on
institutional parcels per Code Section 6-311.  (Ord. 4442 - 12/15/08)



   D.   Minimum Lot Sizes.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no principal use in the R-2 District shall be permitted on a lot less than
15,000 square feet in area and a width of less than one hundred (100) feet
adding 10% for a corner lot width.  Lots fronting cul-de-sac bulbs shall
have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet at the right-of-way line and meet
zoning district lot width at the front setback.  (Ord.2959-11/18/96 & Ord.
3672 - 8/5/02)



   E.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
R-2 District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be
considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall therefore be considered to be the "side" setback.



      1.   Front.



         a.   Major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Major collector: Forty (40) feet from the property
line.



         c.   All other streets: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line. Front porches may have a reduced setback of five (5)
additional feet.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      2.   Side.   All streets:  Not less than 10% of the width
of the lot on each side of the principal building to the side lot line. 
Side yards with side loading garages shall be a minimum of 20 feet and the
driveway must be a minimum of three (3) feet from the nearest side property
line.    For irregular lots, not less than 10 feet on each side of the
principal building to the side lot line. (Ord.2462 - 10/18/93; Amd. Ord.2959
- 11/18/9;  Amd. Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98;  Amd. Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02; Amd. Ord.
4738 - 6/18/12)



      3.   Corner Side. 



         a.   Major or minor arterial: Twenty five (25) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Major collector: Twenty (20) feet from the property
line.



         c.   All other streets: Fifteen (15) feet from the
property line.  (Ord. 2586 - 6/6/94; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16) 



      4.   Rear.   



         a.   Major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Major collector: Forty (40) feet from the property
line.



         c.   All other streets: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line.  (Ord. 2746 - 6/5/95; Amd. Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5126
- 9/19/16)



   F.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will–so long as they meet the
following performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage
includes the area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water
storage, and other impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to thirty percent (30%) lot coverage by
right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an additional 5% for an
accessory structure.  A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot shall
be green space.  An additional 3% lot coverage allowance is provided for
single family homes with side-loaded garages (38% by right/ 62% green space).



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the lot shall
be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade when it can
demonstrate the permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) of the
lot shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Premium grade when it
can demonstrate the permanent installation of at least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows up to seventy percent (70%) lot
coverage by right to non-residential land uses.  A minimum of thirty percent
(30%) of the lot shall be green space.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Height.  No structure may exceed thirty-five (35) feet to the
mean height of the roof.          (Ord. 4210 - 12/18/06)



SECTION 6-203.5.   R-2A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



(Entire Section Ord. 4217 - 2/5/07)



   A.   Purpose.  The R-2A District is established to bring existing
lots into conformance with zoning standards and facilitate remodeling and
additions.  The R-2A Residential District shall not apply to lots recorded
after January 1, 2006.  (Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the R-2A District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 5-101 through 5-104:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;  (Ord.
4374 - 6/2/08)



         a.   Garages for three (3) vehicles;



         b.   Accessory four (4) vehicle garage if it is
side-load and not facing a public street;



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      3.   Day Care Home; 



      4.   Golf courses, including uses normally ancillary to such
uses, such as restaurants, but not including commercially operated driving
ranges or miniature golf courses, provided that such ancillary uses, parking
and all structures are located at least five hundred (500) feet from any lot
line;



      5.   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, provided
that any parking lots are located at least 500 feet from any lot line;



      6.   Single family detached dwellings; and (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      7.   Small residential-care homes with 1-5 residents, provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 450 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility.



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as 
special uses in the R-2A District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Cemeteries;



      2.   Convents, monasteries and schools, limited to public and
private not-for-profit preschools, elementary and secondary schools and
colleges/universities with day and boarding programs, provided that: 



         a.   The use is located on a lot at least five (5) acres
in area;



         b.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line; and



         c.   The use is located no closer than 1,000 feet to any
other boarding school, college, seminary, convent, monastery,
residential-care home, nursing home, congregate elderly housing facility.



      3.   Governmental uses;



      4.   Medium-sized residential-care homes with 6, 7 or 8
residents, provided that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 660 feet to any
other residential-care home, nursing home or congregate elderly housing
facility.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      5.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter for
up to eight (8) adults provided that:



         a.   The use is located on a lot not less than 12,000
square feet and a width of ninety (90) feet; and



         b.   No structure is located within twenty-five (25)
feet of a side lot line.



      6.   Planned Developments that include a site that is or is
intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal use, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.



         a.   Residential planned development provided that:



            1.   The dwelling units are located on the
property to ensure adequate privacy for residents, such as by the separation
of building or landscaping between buildings;



            2.   No more than one (1) dwelling unit for every
½ gross acre of land is permitted, unless a critical and sensitive area
located on the Map identified in the Village's Comprehensive Plan is present
on the parcel proposed for development, in which event smaller lots may be
permitted provided that:



               a.   the overall density is not increased;



               b.   no lot is less than 12,500 square feet;
and



               c.   the side setback is no less than
twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot.



            3.   Buildings are oriented to provide views of
common open space, forests, valleys, ponds and hills to the maximum extent
practicable; and



            4.   Streets are designed to follow natural soils
and contours and provide a variety of views and approaches.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      7.   Public utility structures, other than electrical
generating facilities, provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed and operated to comply
with all applicable local, state and federal regulations;



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within 300 feet of any stream or other body of water or any existing or
proposed dwelling; and



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      8.   Wireless Communication Facilities located on
institutional parcels per Code Section 6-311.  (Ord. 4442 - 12/15/08)



   D.   Minimum Lot Sizes.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no principal use in the R-2A District shall be permitted on a lot less than
15,000 square feet in area and a width of less than one hundred (100) feet
adding 10% for a corner lot width.  Lots fronting cul-de-sac bulbs shall
have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet at the right-of-way line and meet
zoning district lot width at the front setback. 



   E.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
R-2A District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be
considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall therefore be considered to be the "side" setback.



      1.   Front.



         a.   Major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Major collector: Forty (40) feet from the property
line.



         c.   All other streets: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line.



         d.   Front porches may have a reduced setback of five
(5) additional feet. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      2.   Side.   All streets:  Not less than 10% of the width
of the lot on each side of the principal building to the side lot line. 
Side yards with side loading garages shall be a minimum of 20 feet and the
driveway must be a minimum of three (3) feet from the nearest side property
line.  For irregular lots, not less than 10 feet on each side of the
principal building to the side lot line.  (Ord. 4738 - 6/18/12)



      3.   Corner Side. 



         a.   Major or minor arterial: Twenty five (25) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Major collector: Twenty (20) feet from the property
line.



         c.   All other streets: Fifteen (15) feet from the
property line. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      4.   Rear.   



         a.   Major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Major collector: Forty (40) feet from the property
line.



         c.   All other streets: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line.  (Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   F.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will–so long as they meet the
following performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage
includes the area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water
storage, and other impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to thirty percent (30%) lot coverage by
right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an additional 5% for an
accessory structure.  A minimum of sixty-five percent (65%) of the lot shall
be green space.  An additional 3% lot coverage allowance is provided for
single family homes with side-loaded garages (38% by right/ 62% green space).



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the lot shall
be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade when it can
demonstrate the permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) of the
lot shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Premium grade when it
can demonstrate the permanent installation of at least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows up to seventy percent (70%) lot
coverage by right to non-residential land uses.  A minimum of thirty percent
(30%) of the lot shall be green space.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08; Ord.4574 - 7/6/10; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Height.  No structure may exceed thirty feet (30) to the mean
height of the roof.  If the distance between the subject building and
existing adjacent buildings is less than fifteen (15) feet, then the mean
height of the subject building shall not exceed the mean height of adjacent
buildings by more than ten (10) feet.



SECTION 6-204.   R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  The R-3 Residential District is established to
promote and maintain the development of single-family detached and attached
housing and limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with
the surrounding residential neighborhood.  The district therefore provides
housing opportunities similar in scale to single family detached dwellings
but encouraging clustering in order to promote establishing on-site amenities
at a slightly higher density of development than that of the R-2 District.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the R-3 District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 5-101 through 5-104:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



         a.   Garages for two (2) vehicles facing a public street
or side-loaded;



         b.   Garages for three (3) vehicles facing a public
street on the primary front yard provided that:



            i.   The bay for the third vehicle is setback a
minimum of three (3) feet from the primary garage;



            ii.   The three (3) vehicle garage width
constitutes less than 55% of the total building width; and



            iii.   Driveways widths are less than 25-feet at
the point where it crosses a sidewalk.



         c.   Garages for three (3) vehicles facing a public
street on the side yard of a corner lot provided that: The bay for the third
vehicle is offset a minimum of one (1) foot from the primary garage;



         d.   Garages for three (3) or four (4) vehicles if it is
side-loaded and not facing a public street.



(Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16)



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      3.   Day Care Home; (Ord.2860 - 3/18/96)



      4.   Public parks and recreational areas;



      5.   Single family detached dwellings; (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



      6.   Small residential-care homes with 1-5 residents, provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 450 feet to any
other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



(Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the R-3 District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Cemeteries; (Ord. 2420 7/6/93)



      2.   Congregate Elderly Housing, provided that the use is
located no closer than 1,000 feet to any other congregate elderly housing
facility or residential care home.  (Ord. 4664 - 8/16/11)



      3.   Convents, monasteries and schools, limited to public and
private not-for-profit preschools, elementary and secondary schools and
colleges/universities with day and boarding programs, provided that:  (Ord.
3672 - 8/5/02)



         a.   The use is located on a lot at least five (5) acres
in area; and



         b.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line; and



         c.   The use is no closer than 1,000 feet to any other
educational institutions.



      4.   Day care centers and day care homes, provided that:



(Ord. 3070-10/20/97)



         a.   The use is licensed by or registered with the
Illinois Department of Children        and Family Services in accordance
with the Child Care Act of 1969.  (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch 23, par. 2211 et
seq.).  (Ord. 3070-10/20/97)



         b.   The use is located on a parcel of no less than five
(5) acres in size.  (Ord. 3070-10/20/97)



      5.   Governmental uses;  (Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      6.   Large residential-care homes (over 8 residents), provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 1,000 feet to
any other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



(Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



      7.   Medium-sized residential-care homes with 6, 7 or 8
residents, provided that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 660 feet to any
other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



      8.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter for
up to eight (8) adults;



      9.   Planned Developments that include a site that is or is
intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal use, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.



         a.   Residential planned development provided that:



            1.   Private open space is provided as follows:



               a.   Single family detached units shall have
at least 450 square feet of usable, private green space adjacent to each unit
with some separation from neighbors' space and with direct access from the
unit.



               b.   Townhouses and multi-family units shall
have at least two hundred (200) square feet of private open space per unit. 
Such open space can be located on a patio, deck, balcony, or next to the
building or combination thereof.



            2.   Common Open Space.  At least twenty-five
(25) percent of the area of the development shall be maintained as common
open space.



            3.   Thirty (30) percent less side or rear
setbacks may be permitted for every ten (10) percent of private open space
more than the minimum required, provided that the required distance between
buildings is maintained and provided that the windows in adjacent buildings
are not aligned so as to ensure privacy of the residents;  (Amd. Ord. 5312
– 7/16/18)



            4.   Twenty (20) percent less required private
open space may be permitted for every twenty (20) percent of common open
space provided beyond the minimum;  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



            5.   Density and Bonuses.  Except as otherwise
provided in this Subsection, the density for dwellings shall not exceed 2.5
dwellings per acre.  Density may be increased up to four (4) dwelling units
per acre according to the following:



               a.   one (1) unit per acre for every twenty
(20) percent (minimum) of common open space is provided in addition to the
minimum required; or



               b.   one (1) unit per acre for every 1200
(minimum) linear feet of boulevard treatment of a street; or



               c.   one (1) unit per acre if all other
optional bonuses in Subsection (6) are provided.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



            6.   Optional Bonuses.  Additional density
bonuses may be permitted, provided that the applicant provides the following
for the proposed development:  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



               a.   Boulevard treatment of a street,
including a wide landscaped median strip or island in the middle of a street;



               b.   Orientation of buildings that provide
views of common open space, forests, valleys, ponds, wetlands and hills;



               c.   Buildings oriented for solar heating;



               d.   Less than fifty (50) percent of garage
doors facing the street or common courtyard;



               e.   Garbage enclosures and places for
recreational vehicles hidden from view from the street; and



               f.   Attractive non-standard, but
consistent, style for lampposts and signs, varied pavement treatments, tiles,
stones, bricks and mosaics.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      10.   Public utility structures other than electrical
generating facilities, provided that:



(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed and operated to comply
with all applicable local, state and federal regulations;



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within three hundred (300) feet of any stream or other body of water or any
existing or proposed dwelling; and 



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      11.   Wireless Communication Facilities located on
institutional parcels per Code Section 6-311.  (Ord. 4442 - 12/15/08)



   D.   Minimum Lot Size.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no single family dwelling in the R-3 District shall be permitted on a lot
less than 10,000 square feet in area and a width (see definition) of less
than eighty (80) feet adding 10% for a corner lot width, and a depth of less
than one hundred twenty five (125) feet, adding at least 20 feet if the rear
of the lot is adjacent to a collector or arterial road.  Lots fronting
cul-de-sac bulbs shall have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet at the
right-of-way line and meet zoning district lot width at the front setback.
(Ord. 3070-10/20/97 & Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   E.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
R-3 District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be
considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall therefore be considered to be the "corner side" setback.



      1.   Front.



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45)
feet from the property line.  Where the width of a lot varies, the average
of the lot width at the front setback line and the rear setback line shall be
used to make the 10% calculation; however no side yard shall be less than 8
feet.  (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.  For irregular lots, not less than 8 feet on each side of
the principal building to the side lot line. (Ord. 2959  11/18/96 & Ord.
3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other streets: Twenty-five (25) feet
from the property line.



            (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16)



         d.   Front porches may have a reduced setback of five
(5) additional  feet.  (Ord. 3281  8/16/99)



      2.   Side.



         All streets: Not less than ten (10) percent of the width of
the lot on each side of the principal building to the side lot line.  Where
the width of a lot varies, the average of the lot width at the front setback
line and the rear setback line shall be used to make the 10% calculation;
however no side yard shall be less than 8 feet.  (Ord. 3070  10/20/97)



         a.   Side yards with side loading garages shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet and the driveway must be a minimum of three (3)
feet from the nearest side property line. (Ord. 3199  11/16/98; Ord. 4738 
6/18/12)



      3.   Corner Side. 



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial:  Twenty five
(25) feet from the property line. (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Twenty (20) feet from
the property.  (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other streets: Fifteen (15) feet from
the property line.  (Ord. 2586 – 6/6/94 & Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord.
5061  1/18/16)



      4.   Rear.



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45)
feet from the property line.  (Ord. 3070 – 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.  (Ord. 3070 – 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other lots: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line. (Ord. 2746 – 6/5/95 & Ord. 3070 – 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126
- 9/19/16)



   F.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will–so long as they meet the
following performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage
includes the area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water
storage, and other impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to thirty-five percent (35%) lot
coverage by right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an
additional 5% for an accessory structure. A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of
the lot shall be green space.  An additional 3% lot coverage allowance is
provided for single family homes with side-loaded garages (43% by right /57%
green space).



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) of the lot
shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade when it can
demonstrate the permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the lot
shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Premium grade when it can
demonstrate the permanent installation of at least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1 inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows seventy percent (70%) lot coverage by
right to non-residential land uses.  A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of
the lot shall be green space.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Height.  No structure may exceed a maximum of thirty (30) feet
to the mean height of the roof.  If adjacent buildings are less than 30-feet
from the subject building, the mean height of the subject building shall not
exceed the mean height of adjacent buildings by more than 10-feet.  (Ord.
4210 - 12/18/06)



SECTION 6-204.5.   R-3A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



(Entire Section Ord. 4217 - 2/5/07)



   A.   Purpose.  To bring existing lots into conformance with zoning
standards and facilitate remodeling and additions.  The R-3A Residential
District shall not apply to lots recorded after January 1, 2006.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the R-3A District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 5-101 through 5-104:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;  (Ord.
4374 - 6/2/08)



         a.   Garages for two (2) vehicles facing a public street
or side-loaded;



         b.   Garages for three (3) vehicles facing a public
street on the primary front yard provided that:



            i.   The bay for the third vehicle is setback a
minimum of three (3) feet from the primary garage;



            ii.   The three (3) vehicle garage width
constitutes less than 55% of the total building width; and



            iii.   Driveways widths are less than 25-feet at
the point where it crosses a sidewalk.



         c.   Garages for three (3) vehicles facing a public
street on the side yard of a corner lot provided that:  The bay for the
third vehicle is offset a minimum of one (1) foot from the primary garage;



         d.   Garages for three (3) or four (4) vehicles if it is
side-loaded and not facing a public street.



(Amd. Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      3.   Day Care Home;



      4.   Public parks and recreational areas;



      5.   Single family detached dwellings;



      6.   Small residential-care homes with 1-5 residents provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 450 feet to any
other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility. 



(Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the R-3A District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Cemeteries;



      2.   Congregate Elderly Housing, provided that the use is
located no closer than 1,000 feet to any other congregate elderly housing
facility or residential care home.  (Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



      3.   Convents, monasteries and schools, limited to public and
private not-for-profit preschools, elementary and secondary schools and
colleges/universities with day and boarding programs, provided that: 



         a.   The use is located on a lot at least five (5) acres
in area; and



         b.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line; and



         c.   The use is no closer than 1,000 feet to any other
educational institutions.



      4.   Day care centers and day care homes, provided that:



         a.   The use is licensed by or registered with the
Illinois Department of Children and Family Services in accordance with the
Child Care Act of 1969.  (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch 23, par. 2211 et seq.). 



         b.   The use is located on a parcel of no less than five
(5) acres in size. 



      5.   Governmental uses;



      6.   Large residential-care homes (over 8 residents), provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 1,000 feet to
any other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



(Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



      7.   Medium-sized residential-care homes with 6, 7 or 8
residents, provided that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 660 feet to any
other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



      8.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter for
up to eight (8) adults;



      9.   Planned Developments that include a site that is or is
intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal use, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.



         a.   Residential planned development provided that:



            1.   Private open space is provided as follows:



               a.   Single family detached units shall have
at least 450 square feet of usable, private green space adjacent to each unit
with some separation from neighbors' space and with direct access from the
unit.



               b.   Townhouses and multi-family units shall
have at least two hundred (200) square feet of private open space per unit. 
Such open space can be located on a patio, deck, balcony, or next to the
building or combination thereof.



            2.   Common Open Space.  At least twenty-five
(25) percent of the area of the development shall be maintained as common
open space.



            3.   Thirty (30) percent less side or rear
setbacks may be permitted for every ten (10) percent of private open space
more than the minimum required, provided that the required distance between
buildings is maintained and provided that the windows in adjacent buildings
are not aligned so as to ensure privacy of the residents;  (Amd. Ord. 5312
– 7/16/18)



            4.   Twenty (20) percent less required private
open space may be permitted for every twenty (20) percent of common open
space provided beyond the minimum;  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



            5.   Density and Bonuses.  Except as otherwise
provided in this Subsection, the density for dwellings shall not exceed 2.5
dwellings per acre.  Density may be increased up to four (4) dwelling units
per acre according to the following:



               a.   one (1) unit per acre for every twenty
(20) percent (minimum) of common open space is provided in addition to the
minimum required; or



               b.   one (1) unit per acre for every 1200
(minimum) linear feet of boulevard treatment of a street; or



               c.   one (1) unit per acre if all other
optional bonuses in Subsection (6) are provided.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



            6.   Optional Bonuses.  Additional density
bonuses may be permitted, provided that the applicant provides the following
for the proposed development:  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



               a.   Boulevard treatment of a street,
including a wide landscaped median strip or island in the middle of a street;



               b.   Orientation of buildings that provide
views of common open space, forests, valleys, ponds, wetlands and hills;



               c.   Buildings oriented for solar heating;



               d.   Less than fifty (50) percent of garage
doors facing the street or common courtyard;



               e.   Garbage enclosures and places for
recreational vehicles hidden from view from the street; and



               f.   Attractive non-standard, but
consistent, style for lampposts and signs, varied pavement treatments, tiles,
stones, bricks and mosaics.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      10.   Public utility structures other than electrical
generating facilities, provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed and operated to comply
with all applicable local, state and federal regulations;



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within three hundred (300) feet of any stream or other body of water or any
existing or proposed dwelling; and



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 - 6/2/08)



      11.   Wireless Communication Facilities located on
institutional parcels per Code Section 6-311.  (Ord. 4442 - 12/15/08)



   D.   Minimum Lot Size.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no single family dwelling in the R-3A District shall be permitted on a lot
less than 7,000 square feet  in area and a width (see definition) of less
than sixty (60) feet adding 10% for a corner lot width, and a depth of less
than one hundred fifteen (115) feet.  Lots fronting cul-de-sac bulbs shall
have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet at the right-of-way line and meet
zoning district lot width at the front setback.



   E.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
R-3A District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall therefore
be considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall be considered to be the "corner side" setback.



      1.   Front.



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45)
feet from the property line.  Where the width of a lot varies, the average
of the lot width at the front setback line and the rear setback line shall be
used to make the 10% calculation; however no side yard shall be less than 8
feet.  (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.  For irregular lots, not less than 8 feet on each side of
the principal building to the side lot line. (Ord. 2959  11/18/96 & Ord.
3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other streets: Twenty-five (25) feet
from the property line.



            (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16)



         d.   Front porches may have a reduced setback of five
(5) additional  feet.  (Ord. 3281  8/16/99)



      2.   Side.   



         All streets: Not less than ten (10) percent of the width of
the lot on each side of the principal building to the side lot line.  Where
the width of a lot varies, the average of the lot width at the front setback
line and the rear setback line shall be used to make the 10% calculation;
however no side yard shall be less than 8 feet.  (Ord. 3070  10/20/97)



         a.   Side yards with side loading garages shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet and the driveway must be a minimum of three (3)
feet from the nearest side property line. (Ord. 3199  11/16/98; Ord. 4738 
6/18/12)



      3.   Corner Side. 



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial:  Twenty five
(25) feet from the property line. (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Twenty (20) feet from
the property.  (Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other streets: Fifteen (15) feet from
the property line.  (Ord. 2586 – 6/6/94 & Ord. 3070  10/20/97; Amd. Ord.
5061  1/18/16)



      4.   Rear.



         a.   Abutting a major or minor arterial: Forty-five (45)
feet from the property line.  (Ord. 3070 – 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16)



         b.   Abutting a major collector: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.  (Ord. 3070 – 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         c.   Abutting all other lots: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line. (Ord. 2746 – 6/5/95 & Ord. 3070 – 10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5126
- 9/19/16)



   F.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will–so long as they meet the
following performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage
includes the area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water
storage, and other impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to thirty-five percent (35%) lot
coverage by right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an
additional 5% for an accessory structure. A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of
the lot shall be green space.  An additional 3% lot coverage allowance is
provided for single family homes with side-loaded garages (43% by right /57%
green space).



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit.  Fifty-five percent (55%) of the lot shall be green
space.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade when it can demonstrate the
permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the lot
shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Premium grade when it can
demonstrate the permanent installation of at least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows seventy percent (70%) lot coverage by
right to non-residential land uses.  Thirty percent (30%) of the lot shall
be green space.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G   Height.  No structure may exceed thirty feet (30) to the mean
height of the roof.  If the distance between the subject building and
existing adjacent buildings is less than fifteen (15) feet, then the mean
height of the subject building shall not exceed the mean height of adjacent
buildings by more than ten (10) feet. 



SECTION 6-205.   R-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



(Entire Section Amended - Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



   A.   Purpose.  The R-4 Residential District is established to
provide residential opportunities at a slightly higher density than that of
the R-3 District.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the R-4 District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 5-101 through 5-104:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



      3.   Public parks and recreational areas; and



      4.   Single family detached, townhouse and multi-family
dwellings;



      5.   Small residential-care homes with 1-5 residents provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 450 feet to any
other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the R-4 District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Bus terminals;



      2.   Cemeteries;



      3.   Convents, monasteries and schools, limited to public and
private not-for-profit preschools, elementary and secondary schools and
colleges/universities with day and boarding programs, provided that: 



         a.   The use is located on at least five (5) acres in
area; and



         b.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line; and



         c.   The use is located no closer than 1,000 feet to any
other educational institutions.



      4.   Congregate elderly housing, provided that the use is
located no closer than 1,000 feet to any other congregate elderly housing
facility or residential care home.



      5.   Day care centers and day care homes, provided that the
use is licensed by or registered with the Illinois Department of Children and
Family Services in accordance with the Child Care Act of 1969. (225 ILCS 10/1
et seq.).



      6.   Governmental uses; 



      7.   Medium-sized residential-care homes with 6, 7 or 8
residents, provided that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 660 feet to any
other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



      8.   Large residential-care homes (over 8 residents), provided
that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 1,000 feet to
any other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



      9.   Public transportation facilities;



      10.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter
for up to eight (8) adults;



      11.   Planned Developments that include a site that is or is
intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal use, or one
principal building for two or more principal uses.



         a.   Residential planned development, provided that:



            1.   Private open space is provided as follows:



               a.   Single family detached units shall have
at least 450 square feet of usable, private green space adjacent to each unit
with some separation from neighbors' space and with direct access from the
unit.



               b.   Townhouses and multi-family units shall
have at least  two hundred (200) square feet of private open space per
unit.  Such open space can be located on a patio, deck, balcony, or next to
the building or combination thereof.



            2.   Common Open Space: At least twenty (20)
percent of the area of the development shall be maintained as common open
space.



            3.   Thirty (30) percent less side or rear setback
may be permitted for every ten (10) percent of private open space more than
the minimum required, provided that the required distance between buildings
is maintained and provided that the windows in adjacent buildings are not
aligned so as to ensure privacy of the residents;  (Amd. Ord. 5312 –
7/16/18)



            4.   Twenty (20) percent less required private
open space may be permitted for every twenty (20) percent of common open
space provided beyond the minimum;  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



            5.   Density for dwellings shall not exceed six
(6) units per acre, and the higher end of this limit shall only be considered
provided that:



               a.   one (1) unit per acre for every twenty
(20) percent (minimum) of common open space provided in addition to the
minimum required; or



               b.   one (1) unit per acre for every 1200
(minimum) linear feet of boulevard treatment of a street; or



               c.   one (1) unit per acre if all other
optional bonuses set forth in Subsection (6) are provided.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



            6.   Optional Bonuses.  Additional density
bonuses may be permitted, provided that the applicant provides the following
in the proposed development:



               a.   Boulevard treatment of a street,
including a wide landscaped medium strip or island in the middle of a street;



               b.   Orientation of buildings that provide
views of common open space, forests, valleys, ponds, wetlands and hills;



               c.   Buildings oriented for solar heating;



               d.   Less than fifty (50) percent of garage
doors facing the street or common courtyard;



               e.   Garbage enclosures and places for
recreational vehicles hidden from view from the street; and



               f.   Attractive non-standard, but
consistent, style for lampposts and signs, varied pavement treatments, tiles,
stones, bricks and mosaics.



      12.   Utility substations. Public utility structures other
than electrical generating facilities, provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed and operated to comply
with all applicable local, state and federal regulations;



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within three hundred (300) feet of any stream or other body of water or any
existing or proposed dwelling; and



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



      13.   Wireless Communication Facilities located on
institutional parcels per Code Section 6-311.



   D.   Minimum Lot Size.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no principal use in the R-4 District shall be permitted on a lot less than
8,500 square feet in area and a width (see definition) of not less than
seventy (70) feet adding 10% for a corner lot width.  Lots fronting
cul-de-sac bulbs shall have a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet at the
right-of-way line and meet zoning district lot width at the front setback.



   E.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
R-4 District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be
considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall therefore be considered to be the "corner side" setback. 



      1.   Single-Family Detached Residential Building Setbacks. 
(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         a.   Front Setbacks.



            1.   Major or Minor Arterial: Forty-five (45) feet
from the property line.



            2.   Major Collector: Forty (40) feet from the
property line.



            3.   All Other Streets: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line.



         b.   Side Setbacks.



            1.   Not less than ten (10%) percent of the width
of the lot on each side of a principal single family building to the side lot
line. Where the width of a lot varies, the average of the lot width at the
front setback line and the rear setback line shall be used to make the ten
(10%) percent calculation; however no setback shall be less than seven and a
half (7.5) feet.



            2.   Side yards with side loading garages shall be
a minimum of twenty (20) feet. The driveway must be a minimum of three (3)
feet from the nearest side property line.  (Ord. 4738 – 6/18/12)



         c.   Corner-side Setbacks.



            1.   Major or Minor Arterial: Thirty-five (35)
feet from the property line.



            2.   Major Collector: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line.



            3.   All Other Streets: Twenty-five (25) feet from
the property line.



         d.   Rear Setbacks.



            1.   Major or Minor Arterial: Forty-five (45) feet
from the property line.



            2.   Major Collector: Forty (40) feet from the
property line.



            3.   All Other Streets and Lots. Thirty (30) feet
from the property line.



      2.   Single-Family Attached and Multi-Family Building
Setbacks.  (Amd. Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         a.   Front Setbacks.



            1.   Major or Minor Arterial: Thirty-five (35)
feet from the property line.



            2.   Major or Minor Collector: Thirty (30) feet
from the property line.



            3.   All Other Streets: Twenty (20) feet from the
property line.



         b.   Side Setbacks.



            1.   Major or Minor Arterial: Thirty-five (35)
feet from the property line.



            2.   Major or Minor Collector: Thirty (30) feet
from the property line.



            3.   All Other Streets: Twenty (20) feet from the
property line.  (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



            4.   Setbacks that do not abut a street: All
single-family attached and multi-family buildings shall maintain a minimum
distance of twenty-five (25) feet between the side of the building and any
neighboring buildings or property lines.  (Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         c.   Rear Setbacks.



            1.   Major or Minor Arterial: Thirty-five (35)
feet from the property line.



            2.   All other Streets: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line.



            3.   Setbacks that do not abut a street: All
single-family attached and multi-family buildings shall maintain a minimum
distance of thirty (30) feet between the rear of the building and any
neighboring buildings or property lines.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   F.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will–so long as they meet the
following performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage
includes the area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water
storage, and other impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to forty percent (40%) lot coverage by
right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an additional 5% for an
accessory structure. A minimum of fifty-five percent (55%) of the lot shall
be green space.  For single family attached and multi-family residential
uses, sixty percent (60%) lot coverage is allowed by right.  A minimum of
forty percent (40%) of such lots shall be green space.



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the lot shall
be green space.  For single family attached and multi-family residential
uses, Plus grade is not an option.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade
when it can demonstrate the permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of forty-five percent (45%) of the
lot shall be green space.  For single family attached and multi-family
residential uses, Premium grade is not an option.  A lot shall be permitted
at Premium grade when it can demonstrate the permanent installation of at
least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows up to seventy percent (70%) lot
coverage by right to non-residential land uses.  A minimum of thirty percent
(30%) of the lot shall be green space.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Height.  No structure may exceed fifty (50) feet in height to
the highest point except for single family attached and detached which shall
be thirty (30) feet to the mean height of the roof, and be more than fourteen
(14) feet higher than an adjacent structure.



(Entire Section 6-205 Amended by Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



SECTION 6-205.1.   LSPD LARGE SCALE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  Large Scale Planned Developments possess
characteristics of unique and special form with such a large impact on the
entire community that each development must be considered individually.  The
following use will be permitted only upon presentation of a concept plan of
development to the Director of Development Services and final approval by the
Board of Trustees.  The Large Scale Planned Development District is
established to provide mixed uses including residential opportunities at a
higher density than that of the R-4 District and appropriate commercial
uses.  The minimum property size that may be zoned LSPD is 1,000 acres of
property under single ownership or unified control.  To the extent this
Section conflicts or is inconsistent with other provisions of the Land
Development Code, this Section shall control.  All land uses must conform to
the approved Spring Creek Concept Plan or be approved as a special use
amendment.  (Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   B.   Permitted Uses. 



      1.   All permitted uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RSB, and
BIZ Districts, as set forth in this Land Development Code. (Ord. 3199 -
11/16/98)



      2.   Grocery/food/pharmacy store with a ground floor area not
exceeding 40,000 square feet.



      3.   Restaurants, with or without drive-through windows,
provided each is approved as a separate special use by the procedures set
forth in this Land Development Code.



(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



      4.   Such other special uses as may be approved by the Village
Board in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Land Development
Code.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   C.   Special Use.  A Large Scale Planned Development may be
established as a special use only in the LSPD District, in accordance with
the terms and conditions set forth in Section 5-105.I.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



   D.   Minimum Lot Size.  Except as provided by special use permit,
no principal residential single-family detached dwelling in the LSPD District
shall be permitted on a lot less than 8,000 square feet in area and a width
(see definition) of not less than seventy (70) feet adding 10% for a corner
lot width.  (Ord.2959-11/18/96)



   E.   Setbacks. 



      1.   Building Setbacks from Street Right-Of-Ways



         The following setback standards shall apply in the LSPD
District. 



         a.   Single-family attached and detached dwellings
including duplexes and townhomes, and condominium and cooperative buildings.
For residential developments with square corner lots, the "front" setback
shall be considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other
yard shall therefore be considered to be the "side" setback.



            1.   Front.



               i.   Major or Minor Arterial: Forty-five
(45) feet from the property line.



               ii.   Major Collector: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.



               iii.   All other streets: Twenty-five (25)
feet from the property line.



            2.   Side.All streets: Not less than fifteen (15)
percent of the width of the lot on each side of the principal multi-family
building to the side lot line, with a minimum setback width of fifteen (15)
feet on each side; or no less than ten (10%) percent of the width of the lot
o each side of a principal single family detached building to the side lot
line, with a minimum setback width of seven and one-half (7.5) feet on each
side. Where the width of a lot varies, the average of the lot width at the
front setback line and the rear setback line shall be used to make the
calculation.



            3.   Rear. All streets: Twenty-five (25) feet from
the property line. (Amd. Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16)



         b.   Non-residential and mixed use buildings (commercial
and residential uses), and multifamily dwellings, including condominium and
cooperative buildings (if the block on which they are located includes
commercial uses).  Setbacks between the street right-of-way and the building
facade facing the street shall follow the minimum requirements set in Table
6-205.1.E.1.ii(A) (below). The setback width is related to the width and
character of the street.



TABLE 6-205.1.E.1.ii(A)



 

STREET NAME
 
MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK FROM STREET
 
PURPOSE OF THE SETBACK AREA




All streets, except as below
 
25 feet
 
For streets carrying moderate to high regional and local traffic, a setback
area of 25 feet will be required. This will allow commercial buildings to
maintain high visibility from the streets, and also provide a significant
landscaped area along the street.


Exceptions:


LaGrange Road
 
35 feet
 
LaGrange Road is proposed to be widened to a six lane arterial with a
landscaped median. A larger setback area is being proposed for this street to
distinguish it from other arterials. The wider setback will allow substantial
landscaping that will add a sense of scale, safety and enclosure to this high
speed corridor, and help create a unique look for the street.


147th Street
 
15 feet
 
For pedestrian oriented streets that also carry moderate local traffic, a
setback area of 15 feet is required. This will encourage building entrances
to connect directly to the sidewalk, while allowing landscaping with low
plantings along the street.


Ravinia Avenue


West Avenue


144th Place


149th Street


157th Street
 
0 to 15 feet
 
These special pedestrian oriented streets shall be defined by buildings with
active street fronts, multiple entrances and well articulated street facades,
and by parkway trees along the sidewalk. Buildings shall be allowed to be
placed at the lot line or set back up to 15 feet to strengthen the pedestrian
character of the street.


142nd Street


Ravinia extension (north of 143rd Street and south of 159th Street)


161st Street


160th Street


95th Avenue




 



(Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



      2.   Building Setbacks from rear and side lot lines that do
not abut a street



         All buildings must maintain a minimum of 30 feet of setback
area from the rear lot line and a minimum of 15 feet of setback area from the
side lot lines that do not abut a street.



      3.   Permitted Uses in Building Setback Areas along Streets



         Setback areas will be primarily used for landscaping and
other pedestrian oriented uses including:



         a.   Widened sidewalks and entranceways;



         b.   Plazas, outdoor gardens, patios and outdoor seating
areas;



         c.   Water features, including bioswales or other
stormwater management elements;



         d.   Public art or outdoor architectural features like
clock towers, pergolas etc.;



         e.   Pergolas and/or arbor structures;



         f.   Benches and complementary site furniture.



         The setback area can be expanded to accommodate the above
pedestrian oriented uses if needed. Architectural features that help to
create a stronger pedestrian scale can extend into the setback area up to 10
feet, including:



         g.   Canopies, marquees and other projections that
create shaded and protected entrances;



         h.   Extended roofs and eaves;



         i.   Awnings and canopies over windows;



         j.   Projecting blade signs that comply with the
Village's sign ordinance;



         k.   Tensile Canopies that project over outdoor
congregation areas.  (Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      4.   Uses not Permitted in Building Setbacks along Streets.



         Parking lots or structures (exception cited below),
drive-through facilities, loading facilities or trash enclosures are not
allowed within the setback area between the building facade and the street.



         Drive through facilities in the setback area shall be
allowed via Special Use modification only, when there are no reasonable
alternatives. In order to qualify for a Special Use Modification, the drive
through facility must meet all of the following conditions:



         a.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum width of 14' and a minimum turning radius of 20' from the
centerline of the drive aisle.



         b.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of 10' from
all property lines.



         c.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be
constructed with decorative pavement or pervious pavers.  (Ord. 4610 -
12/20/10)



         d.   Any order windows and menu boxes must be designed
to integrate into the architecture of the building and appear 'hidden' from
vehicular and pedestrian view.  All efforts should be made to keep the order
windows and menu boxes out of the setback between the building and the
street. 



            1.   Menu boxes must include masonry architectural
details, matching the materials and design of the building.



            2.   Menu boxes must be screened with landscaping
and/or masonry walls so they are not visible from the street.



            3.   Order windows must be designed with trim and
detail so they appear similar in appearance to other windows on the building.



         e.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be screened
with a combination of masonry walls and/or decorative landscaping in order to
provide a solid buffer at a minimum height of 36".



         f.   The drop off area or drive aisle shall not obstruct
any direct connections between the sidewalk along the street and the
entrances to the building and shall include crosswalks connection pedestrian
routes.



(Ord. 4535  1/18/10; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      5.   Parking Lot Setbacks



         A minimum of a 10-foot landscaped setback must be provided
between the parking lot and the primary street right-of-way.



(Ord. 4015 - 5/2/05)



   F.   Lot Coverage. No more than forty-five (45) percent of the area
of the parcel may be covered with building, pavement and storm water storage,
leaving at least fifty-five percent (55%) of total parcel area in green
space. (See Section 2-102 Definitions "Green Space"). Impervious coverage
will be allowed up to 50% when Best Management Practices (BMP) such as porous
pavements and green roofs are used. Up to 40% of the BMPs will be considered
pervious, provided that the design standards outlined in the code for BMPs
are met.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



   G.   Height.



      No single-family residential structure may exceed 2-1/2 stores or
thirty (30) feet in height to the mean height of the roof, whichever is
higher.  No multi-family residential structure may exceed four (4)
stories.  (Ord. 2514 - 1/17/94; Amd. Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03)



SECTION 6-206.   RSB RESIDENTIAL AND SUPPORTING BUSINESS DISTRICT.



(Entire Section Amended by Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



   A.   Purpose.  The RSB Residential and Supporting Business District
is established to provide for residential and nonresidential uses meeting the
day to day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in the
district and adjacent residential areas.  This District is intended to
provide uses that are on a more intimate, pedestrian-oriented scale than
those uses located in the BIZ District.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the RSB District, in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Sections 5-101 through 5-104, provided that all other applicable
regulations are met:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;



      2.   Bus stop shelters maintained by the Village, provided
that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



      3.   Existing single family detached units. 



      4.   Financial institutions;



      5.   Governmental uses;



      6.   Public Parks and Recreation Areas; and



      7.   Townhouse and multi-family dwellings. (Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the RSB District in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105(I):



      1.   Animal Services;



      2.   Community centers;



      3.   Congregate elderly housing, provided:



         a.   The use is located no closer than 1,000 feet to any
other congregate elderly housing facility or residential-care home.



      4.    Funeral Parlors;



      5.   Places of worship with overnight shelter for up to eight
(8) adults;



      6.   Private Parks and recreation areas;



      7.   Residential planned development provided that:



         a.   No more than thirty (30) percent of the total
dwelling units within the development will be single family detached;



         b.   Private open space is provided as follows:



            1.   Single family detached units shall have at
least 450 square feet of usable, private green space adjacent to each unit
with some separation from neighbors' space and with direct access from the
unit.



            2.   Townhouses and multi-family attached units
shall have at least 200 square feet of private open space per unit.  Such
open space can be located on a patio, deck, balcony, or next to the building
or combination thereof.



         c.   Common Open Space: At least twenty (20) percent of
the net area of the development shall be maintained as common open space.



         d.   Thirty (30) percent less side or rear setback may
be permitted for every ten (10) percent of private open space more than the
minimum required, provided that the required distance between buildings is
maintained and provided that the windows in adjacent buildings are not
aligned so as to ensure privacy of the residents;  (Amd. Ord. 5312 –
7/16/18)



         e.   Twenty (20) percent less required private open
space may be permitted for every twenty (20) percent of common open space
provided beyond the minimum;  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         f.   Density and Bonuses.  Except as otherwise provided
in this Subsection, the density for dwellings shall not exceed four (4) units
per acre.  Density may be increased up to eight (8) units per acre provided
that:



            1.   one (1) unit per acre for every twenty (20)
percent (minimum) of common open space provided in addition to the minimum
required;



            2.   one (1) unit per acre for every 1200
(minimum) linear feet of boulevard treatment of a street;



            3.   one (1) unit per acre if all other optional
bonuses in Subsection (g) are provided;



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         g.   Optional Bonuses.  Additional density bonuses may
be permitted, provided that the applicant provides the following in the
proposed development:



            1.   Boulevard treatment of a street, including a
wide landscaped median strip or island in the middle of a street;



            2.   Orientation of buildings that provide views
of common open space, forests, valleys, ponds, wetlands and hills;



            3.   Buildings oriented for solar heating;



            4.   Less than fifty (50) percent of garage doors
facing the street or common courtyard;



            5.   Garbage enclosures and places for
recreational vehicles hidden from view from the street; and



            6.   Attractive non-standard, but consistent,
style for lampposts and signs, varied pavement treatments, tiles, stones,
bricks and mosaics.



      8.   Utility substations, provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed according to design
guidelines and is operated to comply with all applicable local, state and
federal regulations; and



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within three hundred (300) feet of any stream or other body of water or any
existing or proposed dwelling. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   D.   Floor Area Ratio.  Not to exceed 0.6 for residential dwelling
units and 1.0 for nonresidential and mixed uses.



   E.   Lot Area.  The lot area for each business establishment or
residential dwelling unit shall not be less than five thousand (5,000) square
feet with a minimum width (see definition) of forty (40) feet adding 10% for
a corner lot width.



   F.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply in the
RSB District.  For square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be
considered to be the yard where the main door is located; the other yard
shall therefore be considered to be the "side" setback.



      1.   Residential.



         a.   Front.   All streets:  Thirty (30) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Side.   All streets:  Eight (8) feet from the
property line.



         c.   Rear.   All streets:  Twenty-five (25) feet
from the property line. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      2.   Nonresidential and Mixed Use.



         a.   Front.   All streets:  Fifteen (15) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Side.   All streets:  No minimum setback.  The
maximum setback shall be fifteen (15) feet from the property line.



         c.   Rear.   All streets: Twenty-five (25) feet from
the property line.



      3.   Permitted Uses in Building Setback Areas along Streets



         Setback areas will be primarily used for landscaping and
other pedestrian oriented uses including:



         a.   Widened sidewalks and entranceways;



         b.   Plazas, outdoor gardens, patios and outdoor seating
areas;



         c.   Water features, including bioswales or other
stormwater management elements;



         d.   Public art or outdoor architectural features like
clock towers, pergolas etc.;



         e.   Pergolas and/or arbor structures;



         f.   Benches and complementary site furniture.



         The setback area can be expanded to accommodate the above
pedestrian oriented uses if needed. Architectural features that help to
create a stronger pedestrian scale can extend into the setback area up to 10
feet, including:



         g.   Canopies, marquees and other projections that
create shaded and protected entrances;



         h.   Extended roofs and eaves;



   RSB Residential and Supporting Business District



         i.   Awnings and canopies over windows;



         j.   Projecting blade signs that comply with the
Village's sign ordinance.



(Amd. Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



      4.   Uses Not Permitted In Building Setbacks Along Streets



         Parking lots or structures (exception cited below),
drive-through facilities, loading facilities or trash enclosures are not
allowed within the setback area between the building facade and the street.



         Drive through facilities in the setback area shall be
allowed via Special Use modification only, when there are no reasonable
alternatives. In order to qualify for a Special Use Modification, the drive
through facility must meet all of the following conditions:



         a.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum width of 14' and a minimum turning radius of 20' from the
centerline of the drive aisle.



         b.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of 10' from
all property lines.



         c.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be
constructed with decorative pavement or pervious pavers. 



         d.   Any order windows and menu boxes must be designed
to integrate into the architecture of the building and appear 'hidden' from
vehicular and pedestrian view.  All efforts should be made to keep the order
windows and menu boxes out of the setback between the building and the
street. 



            1.   Menu boxes must include masonry architectural
details, matching the materials and design of the building.



            2.   Menu boxes must be screened with landscaping
and/or masonry walls so they are not visible from the street.



            3.   Order windows must be designed with trim and
detail so they appear similar in appearance to other windows on the building.



         e.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be screened
with a combination of masonry walls and/or decorative landscaping in order to
provide a solid buffer at a minimum height of 36".



         f.   The drop off area or drive aisle shall not obstruct
any direct connections between the sidewalk along the street and the
entrances to the building and shall include crosswalks connecting pedestrian
routes.



         g.   The architectural design of the building elevations
facing the street should have the appearance of a primary façade and include
transparency in the form of full or clerestory windows.



      5.   Parking Lot Setbacks



         A minimum of a 10-foot landscaped setback must be provided
between the parking lot and the primary street right-of-way.



   G.   Lot Coverage.  There are three (3) grades of residential lot
coverage: Base, Plus, and Premium.  A fourth grade, Special, is reserved for
non-residential uses such as places of worship and/or institutional uses. 
The following regulations shall permit lots to move between grades–to
increase or decrease lot coverage at will–so long as they meet the
following performance criteria associated with each grade.  Lot coverage
includes the area of a lot covered by building, pavement, storm water
storage, and other impervious elements.



      1.   Base.  Allows up to sixty percent (60%) lot coverage by
right for the principal structures and pavement, plus an additional 5% for an
accessory structure. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the lot shall
be green space.



      2.   Plus.  Allows an additional five percent (5%) from base
lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot shall
be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Plus grade when it can
demonstrate the permanent installation of one of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   Five percent (5%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         c.   Five percent (5%) impervious pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      3.   Premium.  Allows an additional ten percent (10%) from
base lot coverage by permit.  A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the
lot shall be green space.  A lot shall be permitted at Premium grade when it
can demonstrate the permanent installation of at least two of the following:



         a.   A rain sensor system for lawn irrigation (if
applicable);



         b.   The installation of one type of renewable energy
system that supplements at least 10% of household power consumption and
installed in compliance with Section 6-314 of these regulations;



         c.   One (1) dry well per Section 6-302.H.1.k of these
regulations that can capture at least 50% of site storm water generation. The
capacity of dry well shall be at least 50% of impervious area times 1-inch
(50% impervious area x 1inch);



         d.   Ten percent (10%) turf grass reduction and
replacement with an equal percentage in rain garden area or naturalized
landscape area (see Section 6-305.F.2.c);



         e.   Ten percent (10%) pavement reduction and
replacement with approved pervious pavement surface area.



      4.   Special.  Allows eighty percent (80%) lot coverage by
right to non-residential land uses and mixed-uses.  Twenty percent (20%) of
the lot shall be green space.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   H.   Height.  No structure may exceed three (3) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet whichever is higher.



(Entire Section 6-206 Amended by Ord. 4664 - 8/1/11)



SECTION 6-207.   BIZ GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  The BIZ General Business district is established to
provide a location for higher-volume and higher intensity commercial uses
than the RSB district, including establishments involving heavy equipment,
and the processing and distribution of goods, which provide employment and
revenues for the Village.  Due to the higher volume of these uses, and the
automobile and truck traffic they typically generate, it is intended that the
BIZ District be located only along major and minor collectors and arterials
in order to ensure that the traffic generated by such uses does not adversely
impact nearby residential neighborhoods.  Recognizing the impacts such uses
may have on adjacent residential areas and the overall character of the
Village, the development standards for the BIZ District are designed to
buffer the BIZ District from nearby residential properties and to maintain
the general appearance of major thoroughfares through the Village.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the BIZ District in buildings up to 50,000 square feet
unless otherwise limited below, in accordance with the procedures established
in Sections 5-101 through 5-104:



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;



      2.   Building material sales;  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



      3.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      4.   Clinics and medical or dental offices; Medical offices
may require an entrance canopy.



      5.   Commercial retail establishments not exceeding 50,000
square feet of floor area;



      6.   Contractors or construction offices, but not including
storage yards;



      7.   Convenience stores;



      8.   Day care centers, day care homes, and adult day care
centers, provided they are licensed/registered with the appropriate state
agencies. (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      9.   Drycleaning and laundry processing stations, provided
that they have all necessary  State approvals for handling and disposing of
toxic substances used at the station; (Ord. 2462  - 10/18/93)



      10.   Financial institutions;  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      11.   Food concession associated with a primary use;  (Ord.
4374 – 6/2/08)



      12.   Governmental uses;



      13.   Indoor recreation areas;



      14.   Medical rehabilitation centers;



      15.   Nurseries and greenhouses;



      16.   Offices;



      17.   Overnight accommodations, provided that rooms are not
rented for a period of more than thirty (30) days.



      18.   Personal service establishments; (Ord. 2959 –
11/18/1996; Amd. Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      19.   Public parks and recreation areas; (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



      20.   Schools - arts or vocational;



      21.   Restaurants, and outdoor seating for restaurants,
greater than 300 feet of a residential parcel. Outdoor seating shall have
aisle widths of thirty-six (36) inches or more, and any fence, wall,
landscaping or similar barrier installed in or around the outdoor seating
areas shall be not less than 24 inches in height and not greater than 48
inches in height. The service of liquor will require conformance with the
provisions outlined in Section 6-310 Fences, as well as the requirements of
the Village Code, as amended.  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4664 –
8/1/11; Amd. Ord. 4738 – 6/18/12; Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12; Amd. Ord.
4839 – 9/16/13; Amd. Ord. 5017 - 8/17/15; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the BIZ District, in accordance in the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Adult Uses, provided that:



         a.   Any such use is not located within 1000 feet of:



            1.    A place of worship;



            2.    A school or day care center;



            3.    A public park;



            4.    A boundary of any residential District or
Dwelling or;



            5.    Another Adult Use.



         b.   A license is secured by the petitioner in
accordance with Village ordinances.



         c.   That the use must constitute at least 15% of the
business.



      2.   Animal Services;  (Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



      3.   Clubs and lodges;



      4.   Commercial retail establishments with a floor area of
50,000 square feet or greater;



      5.   Community centers;



      6.   Congregate elderly housing, provided that the use is
located no closer than 1,000 feet to any other congregate elderly housing
facility or residential care home.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99; Amd. Ord. 4475 –
4/20/09; Amd. Ord, 4664 – 8/1/11)



      7.   Drive-in service windows, provided that:



         a.   The principal use is an office, retail
establishment, financial institution or restaurant located on the same lot;



         b.   Stacking spaces are provided per Code requirements
as indicated in Section 6-306, Off Street Parking; and



         c.   The amount of stacking space and circulation
patterns on the lot is adequate to keep traffic from backing up into the
street, based upon documentation of similar circumstances.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08; Amd. Ord, 4535 – 1/18/10)



      8.   Funeral parlors  (Ord. 4647 – 5/16/11)



      9.   Health clubs and fitness centers;



      10.   Hospitals;



      11.   Motor vehicle sales or rental; (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      12.   Motor Vehicle Services;  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10; Amd.
Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



      13.   Museums, civic and cultural centers; (Ord. 4374 –
6/2/08)



      14.   Outside, open markets; (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      15.   Private parks and recreational areas; (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



      16.   Pawn shops/ Pawnbrokers subject to licensing by the
Village and State (per 205 ILCS 510/ Pawnbroker Regulation Act) and provided
that the building or unit in building is not closer than 1,000 feet to
another pawn shop/ pawnbroker building/unit or to the property line of a
school, child care facility or park;  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      17.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter
for up to eight (8) adults;



      18.   Planned Developments, provided that:



         a.   Common open space: At least twenty (20) percent of
the net area of the development shall be maintained as common open space;



         b.   Twenty (20) percent less required private open
space may be permitted for every twenty (20) percent of common open space
provided beyond the minimum; (Ord. 4015 – 5/2/05)



         c.   Optional Bonuses.  Addition al building square
footage bonuses may be permitted, provided that the applicant provides the
following in the proposed development: (Ord. 4015 – 5/2/05)



            1.   Boulevard treatment of a street, including a
wide landscaped median strip.



            2.   Orientation of buildings that provide views
of common open space, forests, valleys, ponds, wetlands and hills;



            3.   Buildings are oriented for solar heating;



            4.   Less than fifty (50) percent of garage doors
facing the street or common courtyard;



            5.   Garbage enclosures hidden from view from the
street;



            6.   Attractive, nonstandard, but consistent,
style for lampposts and  signs, varied pavement treatments, tiles, stones,
bricks and mosaics. (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93)



      19.   Public transportation facilities;



      20.   Restaurants, and outdoor seating for restaurants, within
300 feet of a residential parcel. Outdoor seating shall have aisle widths of
thirty-six (36) inches or more, and any fence, wall, landscaping or similar
barrier installed in or around the outdoor seating areas shall be not less
than 24 inches in height and not greater than 48 inches in height. The
service of liquor will require conformance with the provisions outlined in
Section 6-310 Fences, as well as the requirements of the Village Code, as
amended.  (Ord. 3354 – 4/17/00; Amd. Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4738
– 6/18/12; Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12; Amd. Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13; Amd.
Ord. 5017 - 8/17/15)



      21.   Sale of building materials with outdoor storage if
surrounded by solid, six (6)-foot high fence.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      22.   Tattoo/ body piercing shops subject to licensing by the
Village and registering with  the State (per 410 ILCS 54/ Tattoo and Body
Piercing Establishment Registration  Act) and provided that the building or
unit in building is not closer than 1,000 feet to another tattoo/body
piercing establishment building/ unit or to the property line of a school,
child care facility or park;  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      23.   Theaters, except open-air, drive-in;



      24.   Public utility structures and utility substations,
provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed according to design
guidelines and is operated to comply with all applicable local, state and
federal regulations; and



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within 300 feet of any stream or other body of water or any existing or
proposed dwelling.



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      25.   Wireless communication facilities.  (Ord. 3672 –
8/5/02)



   D.   Floor Area Ratio.  Not to exceed 1.0.



   E.   Lot Area.  The lot area for each business establishment shall
not be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet with a minimum lot width
(see definition) of eighty (80) feet.



   F.   Setbacks



      1.   Building Setbacks from Street Right-Of-Ways



         Setbacks between the street right-of-way and the building
facade facing the street shall follow the minimum requirements set in Table
6-207.F.1 (A) (below). The setback width is related to the width and
character of the street. (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



TABLE 6-207.F.1 (A)



 

STREET NAME
 
MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK FROM STREET
 
PURPOSE OF THE SETBACK AREA




All streets, except as below
 
25 feet
 
For streets carrying moderate to high regional and local traffic, a setback
area of 25 feet will be required. This will allow commercial buildings to
maintain high visibility from the streets, and also provide a significant
landscaped area along the street.


Exceptions:


LaGrange Road
 
25 feet
 
LaGrange Road is proposed to be widened to a six lane arterial with a
landscaped median. This setback area will distinguish it from other arterials
as the main commercial area of the Village. The setback will allow
landscaping that will add a sense of scale, safety and enclosure to the
corridor, and help create a unique look for the street. (Amd. Ord. 4996 –
6/15/15)


147th Street
 
15 feet
 
For pedestrian oriented streets that also carry moderate local traffic, a
setback area of 15 feet is required. This will encourage building entrances
to connect directly to the sidewalk, while allowing landscaping with low
plantings along the street.


Ravinia Avenue


West Avenue


144th Place


149th Street


151st Street, between Ravinia Avenue and West Avenue (Ord. 3990 – 2/21/05)


157th Street
 
0 to 15 feet
 
These special pedestrian oriented streets shall be defined by buildings with
active street fronts, multiple entrances and well articulated street facades,
and by parkway trees along the sidewalk. Buildings shall be allowed to be
placed at the lot line or set back up to 15 feet to strengthen the pedestrian
character of the street.


142nd Street


Ravinia extension (north of 143rd Street and south of 159th Street)


161st Street


160th Street


95th Avenue




 



      2.   Building Setbacks from rear and side lot lines that do
not abut a street



      All buildings must maintain a minimum of 30 feet of setback area
from the rear lot line and a minimum of 15 feet of setback area from the side
lot lines that do not abut a street.



      3.   Permitted Uses in Building Setback Areas along Streets



         Setback areas will be primarily used for landscaping and
other pedestrian oriented uses including:



         a.   Widened sidewalks and entranceways;



         b.   Plazas, outdoor gardens, patios and outdoor seating
areas;



         c.   Water features, including bioswales or other
stormwater management elements;



         d.   Public art or outdoor architectural features like
clock towers, pergolas etc.;



         e.   Pergolas and/or arbor structures;



         f.   Benches and complementary site furniture.



         The setback area can be expanded to accommodate the above
pedestrian oriented uses if needed. Architectural features that help to
create a stronger pedestrian scale can extend into the setback area up to 10
feet, including:



         g.   Canopies, marquees and other projections that
create shaded and protected entrances;



         h.   Extended roofs and eaves;



         i.   Awnings and canopies over windows;



         j.   Projecting blade signs that comply with the
Village’s sign ordinance;



         k.   Tensile Canopies that project over outdoor
congregation areas.



         (Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      4.   Uses Not Permitted In Building Setbacks Along Streets



         Parking lots or structures (exception cited below),
drive-through facilities, loading facilities or trash enclosures are not
allowed within the setback area between the building facade and the street.



         Drive through facilities in the setback area shall be
allowed via Special Use modification only, when there are no reasonable
alternatives. In order to qualify for a Special Use Modification, the drive
through facility must meet all of the following conditions:



         a.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum width of 14' and a minimum turning radius of 20' from the
centerline of the drive aisle.



         b.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of 10' from
all property lines.



         c.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be
constructed with decorative pavement or pervious pavers.  (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



         d.   Any order windows and menu boxes must be designed
to integrate into the architecture of the building and appear ‘hidden' from
vehicular and pedestrian view.  All efforts should be made to keep the order
windows and menu boxes out of the setback between the building and the
street. 



            1.   Menu boxes must include masonry architectural
details, matching the materials and design of the building.



            2.   Menu boxes must be screened with landscaping
and/or masonry walls so they are not visible from the street.



            3.   Order windows must be designed with trim and
detail so they appear similar in appearance to other windows on the building.



         e.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be screened
with a combination of masonry walls and/or decorative landscaping in order to
provide a solid buffer at a minimum height of 36".



         f.   The drop off area or drive aisle shall not obstruct
any direct connections between the sidewalk along the street and the
entrances to the building and shall include crosswalks connection pedestrian
routes.



(Ord. 4535 – 1/18/10; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      5.   Parking Lot Setbacks



         A minimum landscaped setback must be provided between the
parking lot and the primary street right-of-way that accommodates the
required landscape bufferyard area per Section 6-305.



(Ord. 4015 – 5/2/05; Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



   G.   Lot Coverage. No more than seventy-five (75) percent of the
area of the parcel proposed for development shall be covered with building,
pavement and storm water storage, leaving at least twenty-five percent (25%)
of total parcel area in green space. (See Section 2-102 Definitions "Green
Space"). Impervious coverage will be allowed up to 80% when Best Management
Practices (BMP) such as porous pavements and green roofs are used. Up to 40%
of the BMPs will be considered pervious, provided that the design standards
outlined in the code for BMPs are met.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 4374
– 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   H.   Height.  No structure may exceed four (4) stories or fifty
(50) feet, whichever is higher, nor cast a shadow on adjacent residential
buildings.



SECTION 6-208.   MFG MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of the MFG Manufacturing District is to
create and protect areas for industrial uses, manufacturing, assembling,
processing, servicing and storing of parts and products, and distribution of
products at wholesale.  Whenever possible, this district should be separated
from residential districts by natural or structural boundaries such as
drainage channels, sharp breaks in topography, strips of vegetation, traffic
arteries and similar features.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the MFG District in buildings up to 50,000 square feet
unless otherwise limited below, in accordance with the procedures established
in Sections 5-101 through 5-104 and the conditions of subsection H of this
regulation:  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;



         a.   Accessory garages for more than three (3)
vehicles;  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



         b.   Outside Storage of off-site vehicles. (Ord. 5017 -
8/17/15)



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties;



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      3.   Carpet cleaning establishments;



      4.   Dry cleaning processing stations; (Ord. 2420 - 7/6/93)



      5.   Food concession associated with a primary use;  (Ord.
4374 – 6/2/08)



      6.   Governmental uses;



      7.   Indoor recreation areas less than 5,000 square feet; 
(Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



      8.   Light Industrial; (Ord. 2420 - 7/6/93)



      9.   Monument sales;  (Ord. 3762 – 8/5/02)



      10.   Motor vehicle services; (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10; Amd. Ord,
4664 – 8/1/11)



      11.    Offices, subject to meeting office parking
requirements; (Ord. 3130 - 5/18/98)



      Medical offices may require an entrance canopy. (Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16)



      12.   Outside Storage, when the storage area does not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot, is located at the rear of the
principal building, is screened on all sides, and the height of the stored
materials, equipment or vehicles does not exceed the height of the screening.
(See Section 6-308.J Screening and Section 6-302 Accessory Structures and
Uses).  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      13.   Printing, publishing or photography plants;



      14.   Public parks and recreation areas; (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



      15.   Public transportation facilities; (Ord. 4042 – 7/5/05)



      16.   Schools - arts or vocational;



      17.   Warehouses or distribution establishments.  (Ord. 3837
– 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



      18.   Wholesale establishments.



      19.   Wineries and Microbreweries under 12,000 square feet,
and Distilleries under 5,000 square feet, provided they are located at least
300 feet from a residential district or use as measured from the area of
activity.



(Ord. 4418 – 9/15/08; Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



   C.   Special Uses.  The following uses may be established as
special uses in the MFG District, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in Section 5-105 and the conditions of subsection H of
this regulation:  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      1.   Animal Services;  (Ord. 3183 – 9/18/06; Amd. Ord. 4664
– 8/1/11)



      2.   Composting facilities;



      3.   Drive-in service windows, provided that:



         a.   The principal use is an office, retail
establishment, financial institution or restaurant located on the same lot;



         b.   Stacking spaces are provided per Code requirements
as indicated in Section 6-306, Off Street Parking; and



         c.   The amount of stacking space and circulation
patterns on the lot is adequate to keep traffic from backing up into the
street, based upon documentation of similar circumstances.



      4.   Equipment and motor vehicle rental; (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      5.   Excavating and recycling services, provided they are
located at least 1,000 feet from a residential use or district;



      6.   Food processing plants, provided they are located at
least 1,000 feet from a residential use or district;



      7.   Indoor recreation areas equal to or greater than 5,000
square feet;  (Ord. 3199 – 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4610 – 12/20/10; Amd.
Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      8.   Light Industrial Facilities handling or processing
hazardous and/or toxic material, as defined by the IEPA, provided they are
located at least 1,000 feet from a residential use or district;



      9.   Outside Storage, for a storage area that does not meet
the requirements of Section 6-208.B.  (See Section 6-308.J Screening and
Section 6-302 Accessory Structures and Uses) (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



      10.   Private parks and recreational areas; (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



      11.   Petroleum storage facilities, provided they are located
at least 1,000 feet from a residential use or district;



      12.   Planned Manufacturing Developments that include a site
that is or is intended for two or more buildings, or one or more principal
use, or one principal building for two or more principal uses;  (Ord. 4574
– 7/6/10)



      13.   Public utility structures and utility substations,
provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed according to design
guidelines and is operated to comply with all applicable local, state and
federal regulations; and



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within 300 feet of any stream or other body of water or any existing or
proposed dwelling.



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      14.   Sites or site plans with total building area greater
than 50,000 square feet. This special use is in conjunction with any
principal special use; (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      15.   Self-service storage facilities, provided that they are
wholly contained within a building with access to the individual units
provided through the building interior. (Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



      16.   Wineries and Microbreweries over 12,000 square feet, and
Distilleries over 5,000 square feet, or within 300 feet from a residential
use or district as measured from the area of activity. (Ord 4418 – 9/15/08;
Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



      17.   Wireless communication antennae on the required minimum
lot of 20,000 square feet;   (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99; Amd. Ord. 3642 – 8/5/02)



      18.   Wireless communication facilities. (Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02)



(Ord. 4535 – 1/18/10; Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



   D.   Floor Area Ratio.  Not to exceed 1.5.



   E.   Lot Area.  The minimum lot area established for uses in this
district shall be 20,000 square feet with a minimum lot width (see
definition) of one hundred (100) feet.



   F.   Setbacks.  The following setback standards shall apply to
property in the MFG District.  For square corner lots, where neither side is
narrower to determine the front setback, the "front" setback shall be
considered based on the location of the building's main door; the non-entry
side of the building shall therefore be considered as the "side" setback.



      1.   Front.  The front setback from the right-of-way shall be
the following:



         a.   Arterials: Thirty-five (35) feet;



         b.   All Other Streets: Twenty-five (25) feet;



      2.   Side.  The side setback from the right-of-way and from
the side lot line that does not abut a right-of-way shall be the following:



         a.   All Streets: No minimum setback. The maximum
setback shall be twenty (20) feet;



         b.   Non-Streets: Fifteen (15) feet;



      3.   Rear.  The rear setback from an abutting right-of-way
shall conform to the same setback standards outlined in subsection 6-208.F.1
above, titled "Front".  The rear setback from the rear lot line that does
not abut a right-of-way shall be twenty (20) feet.



(Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



      4.   USES NOT PERMITTED IN BUILDING SETBACKS ALONG STREETS



         Parking lots or structures (exception cited below),
drive-through facilities, loading facilities or trash enclosures are not
allowed within the setback area between the building facade and the street.



         Drive through facilities in the setback area shall be
allowed via Special Use modification only, when there are no reasonable
alternatives. In order to qualify for a Special Use Modification, the drive
through facility must meet all of the following conditions:



         a.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum width of 14' and a minimum turning radius of 20' from the
centerline of the drive aisle.



         b.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of 10' from
all property lines.



         c.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be
constructed with decorative pavement or pervious pavers.  (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



         d.   Any order windows and menu boxes must be designed
to integrate into the architecture of the building and appear ‘hidden' from
vehicular and pedestrian view.  All efforts should be made to keep the order
windows and menu boxes out of the setback between the building and the
street. 



            1.   Menu boxes must include masonry architectural
details, matching the materials and design of the building.



            2.   Menu boxes must be screened with landscaping
and/or masonry walls so they are not visible from the street.



            3.   Order windows must be designed with trim and
detail so they appear similar in appearance to other windows on the building.



         e.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be screened
with a combination of masonry walls and/or decorative landscaping in order to
provide a solid buffer at a minimum height of 36".



         f.   The drop off area or drive aisle shall not obstruct
any direct connections between the sidewalk along the street and the
entrances to the building and shall include crosswalks connection pedestrian
routes.



(Ord. 4535 – 1/18/10; Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Height.  No structure may exceed three (3) stories or forty
(40) feet, whichever is higher.



   H.   Required Conditions.  All permitted and special uses in the
MFG District shall meet the following conditions:



      1.   All production, fabricating, servicing, assembling,
testing, repair, processing and outdoor storage, including all accessory uses
and structures, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building or
behind a uniform solid fence eight (8) feet in height, as provided for in
Section 6-208.B.11 Permitted Uses and Section 6-310 Fences.



      2.   Where a railroad right-of-way separates the district from
a residential district, buildings and storage may be located within one
hundred and fifty (150) feet from the centerline of the railroad
right-of-way, provided that suitable landscaping or fencing is provided in
accordance with 6-305 Landscape and Tree Preservation and 6-310 Fences of
these regulations.



      3.   A minimum of a 10-foot landscaped setback must be
provided between the parking lot and the primary street right-of-way, in
addition to any other landscape or buffer requirement.



      (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5126
– 9/19/16)



   I.   Lot Coverage. No more than eighty percent (80%) of the area of
the parcel may be covered with building, pavement and storm water storage,
leaving at least twenty percent (20%) of total parcel area in green space.
(See Section 2-102 Definitions "Green Space"). Impervious coverage will be
allowed up to 85% when Best Management Practices (BMP) such as porous
pavements and green roofs are used. Up to 40% of the BMPs will be considered
pervious, provided that the design standards outlined in the code for BMPs
are met.  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



SECTION 6-209: Old Orland Historic District



(Entire Section Amended by Ord. 4131, 4/17/06)



Vision



The Old Orland Historic District is Orland Park's oldest neighborhood and the
historic heart of the Village. It has a picturesque turn-of-the-century
collection of small shops, historic churches and attractive houses. The
Village Center, McGinnis Slough, Humphrey Woods and the train station are
within close walking distance. To ensure that Old Orland retains its unique
character and special sense of place, the Village offers the following vision
for the area:



   New development will respect the established character of this historic
neighborhood - narrow tree lined streets, small walkable blocks, buildings on
small lots, and gardens and outdoor spaces for people to enjoy. Contributing
buildings will be preserved for future generations. Historic churches,
museums and other civic buildings will continue to be places where the
community comes to gather, learn and celebrate. The area will attract small
businesses and unique local stores, and also be a great place to live. Trails
will connect the area to woods and forest nearby.







Orland Park circa 1938



 



            



Historic images of the district from the 1900's



MAP 1: OOH District Boundary Map with Contributing Structures







 



List of Contributing Structures with Photos



1.   Orland Park School, 9960 W. 143rd Street. The center two-story brick
portion of the school was built in 1922 and the gymnasium to the west was
added in 1940. The distinctive stone walls of the gymnasium are made of
Joliet limestone. This is the most substantial of buildings in the Old Orland
area.



2.   Former Christ Lutheran Church, 9999 W. 143rd Street. Erected in 1898,
this simple wood frame building is typical of many Gothic Revival rural
churches of the period. It has not been altered significantly. The small
building south of the church was built in 1922 as a school house.



3.   Former Residence, 9953 W. 143rd Street. This small, simple frame
building was built around 1890. The original materials and building elements
have been unaltered. This is a fine example of a National style building with
Folk Victorian detailing in the district.



4.   Former Residence, 9925 W. 143rd Street. This two-story Italianate
structure from the 1880's has some nice decorative elements. Except for later
residing, this building appears to have had no significant alterations.



5.   Orland Park Library, 9917 W. 143rd Street. This commercial building
with Tudor styling was built in 1937 and once served as Orland Park's first
public library.



6.   Orland Park Hotel, 14306-10 Union Avenue. This frame commercial
building was originally the Orland Park Hotel. The ornate Italianate trim
dates to the early 1880's. Although the building has been resided and the
fenestration of the first floor has been rebuilt, it is still the most ornate
early structure in Orland Park.



7.   Loebe Bros. General Store, 14314 Union Avenue. This was the first
general store in Orland Park. The building appears to be a series of
buildings that were added onto each other. Most of them appear to date from
the early 1880's to mid 1890's. The front is particularly well preserved.



8.   Loebe House, 9952 W. 144th Street. This large residence from about
1895 is an excellent example of the Queen Anne style. The house shows typical
features of Queen Anne houses in the use of bay windows, patterned shingles
along the sides and gables, and a tower to break the flat wall surfaces.



9.   Twin Towers Sanctuary, 9967 144th Street. Designed by Chicago
architect William Arthur Bennet and constructed in 1898, the twin octagonal
towers make this the most imposing and visible landmark in Old Orland. This
building was substantially renovated by the Old Orland Heritage Foundation.
In 1987, the building was added to the National Register of Historic Places.



10.   Orland State Bank, 14316 Beacon Avenue. Built in 1910, this well
preserved brick building is a good example of Italianate commercial buildings
once common in the Midwest.



11.   Commercial Emporium, 14320-24 Beacon Avenue. Built approximately in
1885, this is an unusual combination of Commercial, Italianate and National
building style.



12.   Former Residence, 14330 Beacon Avenue. This well preserved frame
building was likely constructed in the late 1880's or early 1890's. The
wealth of Queen Anne decorations have survived since the house was built.



13.   Former Residence, 14315 Beacon Avenue. This two story Folk Victorian
building dates back to the 1880's and is typical of many residences
constructed during this period in Old Orland.



14.   Residence, 14339 Beacon Avenue. This single story residence in the
National style was built in 1890. Many of the original building features have
been restored.



15.   Residence, 14420 Second Avenue. Constructed in 1880, this house is
believed to be the first residence built in Orland Park. The front bay
windows and the roof that joins them were later additions at the turn of the
20th Century. The porch and garage building along Second Avenue were
additions at the turn of the 21st Century.



16.   John Humphrey House, 9830 W. 144th Place. This stately two story
Italianate frame residence was built in 1881 by the late Sir John Humphrey, a
prominent early resident of the Orland area and Orland Park's first Mayor.
The interior has been restored with authentic furnishings and is maintained
by the Orland Historical Society. This building was added to the National
Register of Historic Places in 2005.



More detailed information about these buildings is available from the Village
of Orland Park.







Old Orland looking east, early 20th century;



         



Historic perspectives of the district from the 1900's;



 




1. 9960 W. 143rd Street
 
2. 9999 W. 143rd Street
 
3. 9953 W. 143rd Street



 



 




4. 9925 W. 143rd Street
 
5. 9917 W. 143rd Street
 
6. 14306-10 Union Avenue
 
7. 14314 Union Avenue



 



 




8. 9952 W. 144th  Street
 
9. 9967 W. 144th Street (NRHP)
 
10. 14316 Beacon Avenue
 
11. 14320-24 Beacon Avenue



 



 




12. 14330 Beacon Avenue
 
13. 14315 Beacon Avenue
 
14. 14339 Beacon Avenue
 
15. 14420 Second Avenue



 



 




16. 9830 W. 144th Place (NRHP)



 



Historic Architectural Styles in the District



The Old Orland Historic District has a collection of modest homes in a
variety of styles, including National, Folk Victorian, Commercial and
Commercial Italianate, Craftsman, Queen Anne, Gothic and Tudor Revival. The
early buildings of the historic district were made of wood frame with wood
siding and trim. Some later commercial buildings are of brick. The various
architectural styles of buildings in the Historic District are described with
examples below. While some buildings have elements of many other
architectural styles, they were classified under the predominant style.



National (1835-1895)



National is the term given to indigenous forms of building construction. Some
refer to National buildings as Vernacular style. Although buildings continued
to be constructed according to the earlier traditional folk forms, the
increased availability of lumber (mill-sawn lumber was available after 1850)
led to some new shape innovations. Folk form, or vernacular buildings are
typically of frame construction and covered with wood siding. Some may have
details taken from high styles such as Greek Revival or Colonial Revival;
others may have later high style modifications. Some of the many variants of
the vernacular identified in the survey area are:



Four-over-Four: A side gable, two story, center entry house, two rooms deep
and two rooms wide.







Example: 9830 W. 144th Place (top left)



Gable-Front: During the Greek Revival movement in the period between 1830 and
1850, the front-gabled shape was commonly used to echo the pedimented façade
of typical Greek temples. This form was particularly common in New England
and its popularity expanded along the with the expansion of the railroad
network and remained a dominant folk form until well into the 20th century.
Part of its staying power reflected the fact that gable-front houses were
well suited for narrow urban lots, which were found in many rapidly
developing cities.







Examples: 14438 Second Avenue (left), 9953 W. 143rd Street, 14329 Beacon
Avenue, 14420 First Avenue and 9856 W. 144th Place



Gabled L: This house form also descended from styled Greek Revival houses and
the gable-front form. This variant shows an additional side-gabled wing added
at right angles to the gable-front plan to give a compound,
gable-front-and-wing shape with uniform roof height. A shed-roofed porch was
typically placed within the L made by the two wings. This form is also
commonly known as Gable-Front-and-Wing.







Example: 9833 W. 144th Place



Hipped: Massed-plan folk house of nearly square plan are commonly built with
hipped or pyramidal roofs. It may be one or two stories high. Hipped folk
houses differ principally in roof pitch and in the size and placement of
porches. Many one story houses have full or partial integral porches included
under the principal roof.







Examples: 9999 W. 143rd Street at West Avenue and 9853 W. 144th Place (right)



Side Gable: This house form, with a side gable and massed-plan (more than one
room deep) was very popular after lightweight lumber became widely available
by the railroads. Simpler methods of light roof framing led to these
massed-plan houses which had larger and more flexible interior plans,
therefore, eventually replacing the traditional one room deep Hall-and-Parlor
and I-House forms.







Example: 14420 Second Avenue (right)



Upright-and-Wing: This house form is similar to the Gabled L. It is usually a
one and a half to two story front gable house with a one-to-one and a half
story wing at right angles of lesser height. A porch was often placed in the
area formed by the gable front and wing. Some Upright-and-Wing houses may
have started out as a Front Gable to which a wing was added.







Examples: 9855 W. 144th Street and 9976 w. 144th Street (the latter is shown
at right)



Craftsman (1905-1930)



Craftsman was the dominant style for smaller houses built across the country
during the period between 1905 through the mid-1920's. By the end of the
1920's, the style was fading from popularity and few were built after 1930.
Common characteristics include low-pitched, gabled or hipped roof with wide,
unenclosed eave overhang; exposed roof rafters; decorative beams or knee
braces under gables; porches, full or partial width, with roof supported by
tapered square columns, often of brick or stone material; dormers often with
exposed rafter ends and knee braces; usually shed or gable roof; windows
designed with a horizontal emphasis.







Examples: 14407 Beacon Avenue (shown at right) and 9955 W. 144th Street



Commercial Vernacular or Commercial/ Storefront (1880-1900)



Early vernacular commercial buildings are referred to as Commercial
Vernacular. These buildings are identified by their form, not their
architectural style, although they may have some decorative features taken
from architectural styles, often Italianate or Classical. These buildings are
typically found in main street areas. Common characteristics include street
facades abutting one another and sited at the lot line; false fronts visible
at the roof line of the typically gable roof; buildings in relative scale
with adjacent commercial vernacular buildings; typical three part facades:
storefront, upper stories, and cornice or parapet; most often of wood with
transoms above storefronts, and decorative cornices.







Examples: 14300 Beacon Avenue, 14320 Beacon Avenue, 14306 Union Avenue
(right) and 14314 Union Avenue



20th Century Commercial (1900- )



Later Commercial Vernacular buildings are referred to as 20th Century
Commercial Style. These buildings are identified by their form and materials,
not their architectural style, although they may have some decorative
features taken from architectural styles. Common characteristics include
facades of brick or stone with contrasting masonry ornament; street facades
abutting one another and sited at the lot line; buildings in relative scale
with adjacent commercial vernacular buildings.







Examples: 14316 Beacon Avenue (right) and 9875 W. 143rd Street



Folk Victorian (1870-1910)



This style is defined by the presence of Victorian decorative detailing on
simple folk house forms, and generally much less elaborated than the
Victorian styles that they attempt to mimic. The details are usually of
either Italianate or Queen Anne inspiration. The primary areas for the
application of this detailing are the porch and cornice line. Common
characteristics include porches with spindle-work detailing or flat, jig-saw
cut trim; turned balusters used both in porch railings and in friezes
suspended from the porch ceiling; roof-wall junction may be either boxed or
open; simple window surrounds with simple pediment above.







Examples: 14315 Beacon Avenue, 14330 Beacon Avenue (bottom right), 14339
Beacon Avenue and 9852 W. 144th Place



Georgian Revival (1880-1955)



The Georgian Revival style is more commonly grouped under the Colonial
Revival style, which includes Georgian, Adam and Dutch. Colonial Revival
refers to the entire rebirth of interest in the early English and Dutch
houses of the Atlantic seaboard. The Georgian and Adam styles form the
backbone of the Revival, with secondary influences from post medieval English
or Dutch Colonial prototypes. The principal areas of elaboration are
entrances, cornices and windows. Common characteristics include an
accentuated front door, normally with a decorative pediment supported by
pilasters, or extended forward and supported by slender columns to form the
entry porch; doors, commonly with overhead fanlights or sidelights; a façade
normally showing symmetrically balanced windows and center door; windows with
double-hung sashes, usually with multi-pane glazing in one or both sashes,
and frequently in adjacent pairs.







Example: 9960 W. 143rd Street (left)



Gothic Revival (1840-1880)



The Gothic Revival style, based on English precedents, was promoted as an
ideal picturesque rural style, suitable for residential use. The style was
loosing popularity for residential designs by the late 1860's, but resurgence
during the 1870's occurred when the style was applied to public and religious
buildings. Common characteristics include a steeply pitched roof, usually
with steep cross gables; roofs often topped with pinnacles; gables, commonly
with decorated vergeboards; wall surfaces extend into a gable without a
break; windows commonly extended into a gable, frequently having pointed-arch
shape (Gothic arch); doors often with pointed-arch and/or heavy hood ornament.







Example: 9999 W. 143rd Street (left)



Italianate (1840-1885)



A popular 19th century style, the Italianate was derived from the
architecture of Italian villas and originated in England at the start of the
Picturesque Movement. This style with its wide overhanging bracketed eaves
was typically found on two and three story buildings. Often this style
included a cupola. Common characteristics include vertical proportions; wide
eaves and intricate cornices; large brackets, sometimes paired; tall, curved
or arched topped windows and doors with hooded molds; porches, both small
entry and full width, of single story height; paired and single doors,
commonly with large-pane glazing in the door itself.







Examples: 9925 W. 143rd Street (left) and 14306 Union Avenue.



Prairie (1900-1925)



An American style of architecture that originated with the Prairie School,
popular in the Midwest from about 1900 to 1930. Characteristics include
broad, low-pitched roof, and hipped eaves usually with a very wide overhang;
light colored stucco exterior walls, brick or concrete block; contrasting
wood trim between stories; Sullivanesque  ornamentation such as friezes
and/or door surrounds; ribbon windows below roof overhang, emphasizing the
horizontal plane.







Example: 9960 W. 143rd Street (top right)



Queen Anne (1880-1910)



The very popular style of the 1880's and 1890's has asymmetrical shapes
characterized by projecting bays and prominent, compound roof shapes. A one
story porch along the front sometimes wraps around the side. These buildings
were clad in a variety of materials and with multiple textures including
patterned shingles. Common characteristics include an abundance of
decoration; varied and rich contrasting materials, shapes and textures;
expansive, encircling porches; turrets or conical towers; pressed metal bays;
irregular roofline with many dormers and chimneys; some may have
half-timbering with windows grouped three or more.







 







Examples: 9952 W. 144th Street (sketch at right) and 9967 W. 144th Street
(middle right)



Tudor Revival (1890-1940)



A popular romantic revival style from the first half of the 20th century,
Tudor Revival was a romantic inspiration based on English medieval buildings.
The style is recognized by the use of a steeply pitched side gable or hipped
roof, with one or more front facing, asymmetrically placed gables. Common
characteristics include walls of masonry, brick, stucco and half-timbering
most commonly used in a mixture; mullions, transoms, and trim of stone are
typical, as are rounded Tudor arch door openings; tall, narrow windows,
double-hung or casement, often with leaded glass; multiple and overlapping
dormers; multi-colored slate on the roof; massive chimneys, often stone or
stucco with stone ornament.







Example: 9917 W. 143rd Street (bottom right)



A.   Purpose.



   The purpose of the Old Orland Historic District (OOH) is to retain the
commercial and residential character of the original core of Orland Park. It
is also the purpose of this district to encourage the restoration and
preservation of historically and architecturally significant structures that
are an important part of the Village's heritage. To maintain the historic,
semi-residential character of the district, commercial development is limited
to certain streets: 143rd Street, Beacon Avenue between 143rd Street and
144th Place, Union Avenue between 143rd Street and Brook Avenue, and in the
existing commercial portion of West Avenue between 143rd Street and 143rd
Place. Uses within this area are therefore restricted to small retail
businesses, offices and residential dwellings, all of which must be
compatible in scale and ambiance with the district (see Map 1). The
Certificate of Appropriateness review process was designed to ensure all
development in the district meets these objectives.



B.   Uses.



   The following uses may be established in the OOH District in accordance
with the procedures and standards set forth in Section 5-101 through 5-104
for permitted uses and Section 5-105 for special uses in the Land Development
Code. Although certain uses are listed as "permitted uses" within the
district, a Certificate of Appropriateness must still be obtained, as
described later in this section, and any other required development approval
from the Village prior to construction, alteration or demolition. "Special
Uses" must obtain a special use permit as well as any other required
development approvals from the Village.



   The following applies to redevelopment in the Old Orland Historic
District:



   In the non-commercial areas, existing residential buildings cannot be
converted to mixed use buildings, or be used for office or commercial uses;



   In the commercial areas, mixed use and single use commercial/ office
buildings can replace existing residential buildings via a tear-down when a
parcel is redeveloped, but require a special use permit.



   In the commercial areas, mixed use and single use commercial/ office
uses are permitted in existing residential buildings as a permitted use.



 

Table of Uses
 

 




 
PERMITTED/ SPECIAL USE
 
GEOGRAPHY




1.  Accessory Uses: see Section 6-302
 
 
 
Any Area


2. Residential Uses:
 

 



Multi-family residences without commercial;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Overnight accommodations up to 6 rental units, 30 day occupancy;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Residential units above retail or commercial establishments;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Single-family detached dwelling;
 
Permitted
 
Any Area


Small residential care homes up to 6 residents;
 
Permitted
 
Residential Areas


3. Commercial Uses:
 

 



(The maximum permitted square footage of commercial uses in Old Orland is
5,000 square feet.)
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Clinics and medical or dental offices; Medical offices may require an
entrance canopy.
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Commercial retail establishments;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Day care homes;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Financial institutions;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Food concession;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Offices;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Personal service establishments;
 
Permitted
 
Commercial Areas


Restaurants and outdoor seating for restaurants*;
 
Special Use
 
Commercial Areas


*When located within 300 feet of a residential use;
 

 



4. Civic and Institutional Uses:
 

 



Community centers, clubs and lodges;
 
Special Use
 
Any Area


Government uses, including office, recreational uses, public parks and
playgrounds;
 
Permitted
 
Any Area


Museums, civic and cultural centers;
 
Special Use
 
Any Area


Places of worship;
 
Special Use
 
Any Area


Public schools;
 
Special Use
 
Any Area


5. Transportation and Utilities:
 

 



Public transportation facilities such as bus shelters;
 
Special Use
 
Commercial Areas


Utility substations;
 
Special Use
 
Commercial Areas




 



(Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



C.   Bulk Requirements.



   The following requirements apply to all properties in the OOH District.



   1.   Lot Area and Width.



   The minimum lot area for each residential dwelling unit shall be 2,500
square feet. The minimum front lot width shall be twenty-five (25) feet,
adding ten (10) feet for a corner lot, to a maximum of 50 feet for new
construction. The minimum lot area for each nonresidential or mixed use
development shall be 5,000 square feet. The minimum front lot width shall be
fifty (50) feet, adding ten (10) feet for a corner lot, to a maximum of 125
feet for new construction.



   2.   Height.



   The maximum building height in the Historic District is 37 feet to the
top of the structure.



   3.   Lot Coverage.



   For all residential developments, no more than 80% of the area of the
lot may be impervious. The remaining 20% must be maintained as green space.
For all non-residential or mixed use developments, at least 10% of the site
shall be maintained as green space.



   4.   Building Setbacks.



   The following setback standards shall apply in the OOH District. For
square corner lots, the "front" setback shall be considered to be the yard
where the main door is located; the other yard shall therefore be considered
to be the "side" setback.



      a.   Residential:



         1.   Front:   Eight (8) foot minimum and fifteen (15)
foot maximum.  The minimum may be reduced to the average of the front
setback of the two adjacent lots if one or both of  the setbacks of adjacent
lots are smaller.



         2.   Side:   Five (5) foot minimum and fifteen (15)
foot maximum.



         3.   Corner Side:   Ten (10) foot minimum and no
maximum.



         4.   Rear:   Thirty (30) foot minimum and no maximum.



      b.   Non-Residential and Mixed Use:



         1.   Front:   No minimum and five (5) foot maximum.



         2.   Side:   No minimum and five (5) foot maximum.



         3.   Corner Side:   Ten (10) foot minimum and no
maximum.



         4.   Rear:   Twenty (20) foot minimum and no maximum.



D.   Other Regulations.



   1.   Permitted Uses in the Right-of-Way and Setback Areas.



      Pedestrian oriented uses are allowed within the public
right-of-way and in setback areas, including sidewalks, canopies, marquees,
benches, projecting signs and landscaped gardens. No parking shall be
permitted in the front setback for any use located in the OOH District.



   2.   Parking Lot Setbacks.



      For existing lots, if there is insufficient area to provide a
landscape buffer between the parking lot and sidewalk, a three (3) foot high
decorative fence or a two (2) foot high masonry seating wall should be
provided to separate the sidewalk from the parking area.



   3.   Parking Requirements.



      All parking regulations apply as outlined in Section 6-306 of the
Land Development Code. If there is insufficient area for Historic District
businesses in new or existing buildings to provide required parking on-site,
parking opportunities demonstrated to exist either on-street or via shared
parking nearby may be applied to meet the requirement. (Ord. 4738, 6/18/12)



   4.   Loading.



      All loading regulations apply as outlined in Section 6-306 of the
Land Development Code. For businesses in the Historic District that do not
have sufficient land area on site to provide a designated loading space,
loading may occur from a side street, from an alleyway or in a parking lot
drive aisle, provided loading activities do not disrupt traffic flow for
other uses.



   5.   Landscaping.



      Buffer landscaping between like uses and between commercial uses
and the street is not required in the Old Orland Historic District. All other
landscaping regulations apply as outlined in Section 6-305 of the Land
Development Code. If there is insufficient area to provide required
landscaping on-site, petitioners are encouraged to provide landscape
improvements in areas visible from the street, including movable benches,
decorative planter boxes, hanging baskets et cetera. It is the responsibility
of the property owner to maintain these improvements.



   6.   Tree Preservation.



      Tree preservation requirements outlined in Section 6-305
Landscape and Tree Preservation of the Land Development Code for preserving
and/or removing trees 4-inches in caliper and above apply to the OOH
District. All healthy mature trees that contribute to the character of the
Historic District should be maintained. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



   7.   Fences.



      For front yards and yards abutting a street, fences shall not
exceed a height of 4-feet, must be 50% open, and be of picket construction.
All other fences shall not exceed a height of 5-feet. Chain link fences are
not permitted. Fences on property with contributing structures shall be of
wood construction. Fencing on property with non-contributing structures or
new construction can be vinyl. (Ord. 4738, 6/18/12)



   8.   Garages.



      New construction should continue the tradition of locating the
garage at the rear of the lot, behind the principal building. Garages should
be compatible in design, materials and roof form of the principal building.
The maximum height permitted for a garage is sixteen (16) feet to the top of
the structure. Additional height may be permitted for a specific roof form
that reflects the principal building. Attached garages are allowed only on
corner lots and only when mitigating for natural features such as topography
or heritage trees.  No living space is allowed above an attached garage. 
Attached garages must be built to a similar scale as detached garages,
located at the rear of the principal building and maintain ornamental
overhead doors when facing the right-of-way.  Garages may have a maximum of
two overhead doors or, when located on corner lots, three overhead doors and
they must be ornamental doors when facing the right-of-way.  (Amd. Ord.
4839, 9/16/13)



E.   Signage.



   Signs in the OOH District shall be compatible with the architecture,
scale and design of the building of which it is a part. Signs should not
obscure or overwhelm architectural details. Building directories are
encouraged for multi-tenanted buildings.



   1.   Flat Wall Signs.



   Only one (1) sign shall be permitted per lot frontage on a public
right-of-way. The maximum sign area shall be 7.5% of the area of the first
two (2) stories of building elevation on which it is placed, or for a
multi-tenant retail commercial building, each tenant may have a sign area not
to exceed 7.5% of the area of its leased exterior storefront. Wall signs may
not cover any part of a window or extend above the roof line.



   2.   Canopies or Awnings.



   Canopies or awnings are considered to be wall signs and must be opaque
and made of fabric. Lettering should be confined to the area of the awning
perpendicular to the sidewalk. Avoid lettering on slants and curves.
Lettering must not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total canopy or awning
area, subject to the other wall sign limitations, and be limited to placement
above windows and doors.



   3.   Projecting Signs.



   Projecting signs cannot extend more than 3-feet into the public
right-of-way. The bottom of the sign must be at least 7-feet from the ground.
The maximum size of such sign shall be ten (10) square feet. Such signs shall
not be internally illuminated.



   4.   Window Signs.



   Window signs may cover no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the window
area and lettering shall be painted. Sign area shall be calculated by drawing
a box around each word.



   5.   Freestanding Signs.



   Permanent freestanding signs shall only be permitted on lots forty (40)
or more feet in width. The maximum sign face area shall be twenty (20) square
feet with a maximum height of five (5) feet. Message boards are not permitted.







Wall and Window Signs







Signage Examples:



1. Window Signs



2. Wall Signs



3. Canopy Signs



4. Projection Signs







Freestanding Sign



F.   Architectural Design Standards.



   1.   Applicability.



   There are sixteen (16) buildings designated as "Contributing
Structures" in Old Orland, two of which are listed on the National Register
of Historic Places. These buildings are identified in Map 1 of this section.
(While not in the District, Building 1 is considered a contributing structure
and should be protected). Remaining buildings in the OOH District are
classified as "Non-Contributing" or "New Construction".



      a.   Buildings on the National Register of Historic Places.
Buildings listed on the  National Register of Historic Places must comply
with the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation and design standards  outlined in this section to maintain
and improve the accuracy and integrity of the interior and exterior of the
building. These are eligible for matching funds from the Façade Improvement
Program.



      b.   All Contributing Structures and Additions to Contributing
Structures. All  Contributing structures and additions to Contributing
Structures must comply with the Design Standards outlined in this section in
order to maintain and improve the accuracy and integrity of the exterior of
the building only. These are  eligible for matching funds from the Façade
Improvement Program.



      c.   All Non-Contributing Structures, Additions to
Non-Contributing Structures  and New Construction. All Non-Contributing
Structures, additions to Non- Contributing Structures and New Construction
are strongly encouraged to follow the Design Standards outlined in this
section. If the Design Standards are met, these structures may be eligible
for Low Interest Loans and matching funds from the Façade Improvement
Program.



   2.   General Design Standards.



      The following are based both on the United States Secretary of
the Interior's Standardsfor Rehabilitation and on local preservation
objectives for the OOH District. These standards will be used to evaluate
applications for Certificates of Appropriateness.



      a.   Compatible Use with Minimal Alterations. Every reasonable
effort shall be made to use a property for its originally intended purpose or
to provide a compatible use for a property which requires minimal alteration
of the building, structure, or site and its environment.



      b.   Relationship to Streets and Open Spaces. The unique
character of streets and open spaces in the Historic District shall be
retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alterations of
features and spaces that characterize a property and contribute to the
character of the Historic District should be avoided.



      c.   Distinctive Architectural Features. The distinguishing
original qualities or character of the District including buildings,
structures or sites and their environment shall not be destroyed. Avoid the
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural
features. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be preserved.



      d.   Historic Appropriateness. All buildings, structures and
sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Avoid alterations
that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance.



      e.   Past Alterations. Changes that have taken place in the
course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building,
structure or site and its  environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized
and respected.



      f.   Deteriorated Architectural Features. These shall be
repaired rather than replaced. If the severity of deterioration requires
replacement, new material should match the historic material being replaced
in composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or
replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate
duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial
evidence than on conjectural designs or availability or architectural
elements on other buildings or structures.



      g.   Chemical of Physical Treatment. Chemical or physical
treatment, such as  sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials
shall not be used. Surface cleaning or structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.



      h.   Archaeological Resources. Every reasonable effort shall
be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by or
adjacent to any project.



      i.   Contemporary Design. Contemporary design for alterations
and additions to existing buildings and construction of new buildings within
the District shall not be discouraged when such alterations and new
construction do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural
material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color,
material, and character of the property and the District.



      j.   Structural Integrity. Wherever possible, new additions or
alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that if such
additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired.



      k.   Replacement of Existing Features. Architectural elements
shall be repaired with original materials rather than replaced. Replacement
should be considered only when features have severely deteriorated. New
material should match the existing material. If the material being replaced
is not original to the structure, original materials shall be used to improve
the overall integrity of the structure.



      l.   Additions and New Construction. Appropriate locations of
an addition are at the rear or sides of the building. These should be
connected to the property in a way that does not alter, obscure, damage, or
destroy any significant features, and has a minimal impact on the exterior
walls. Additions should complement the original building in size, scale,
massing and design. These should not be taller or wider than the original
building. Design features including the roof shape, materials, color,
location of windows and doors, cornice heights et cetera should be consistent
with the original building.



   New construction should be compatible with the architectural styles of
the District. Replication of a specific architectural style can create a
false historic appearance and should be avoided. Contemporary designs are
acceptable when compatible in size, scale, color, material , and character of
the District.



   Building additions and new construction are encouraged to be compatible
with the proportions predominant in the District: rectangular, vertically
oriented massing with gable ends facing the street.



   3.   Specific Design Standards.



      a.   Windows.



         1.   Replacement Windows. Use wood windows, specifically
on the front facades. Metal windows can be used for secondary facades if they
are painted to match wood windows. Retain the location and size of original
window openings. Retain or simplify divisions of glass, and retain transoms.



         2.   New Windows. Simple double-hung wood windows with
vertical proportions are appropriate for the District. Wood is preferred; if
metal is used, it should be painted to match any existing windows



         3.   Storm Windows and/or Screens. Painted wood is
preferred. Painted metal may be used for additions. The division in the storm
window should align with the divisions of the window.



         4.   Shutters. Avoid using shutters unless they were
original to the building. If shutters are used, they should be half the width
of the window opening and be hinged rather than screwed to the siding.



         5.   Sashes. Wood sashes are preferred. Clad wood and
painted metal may be used for additions. Sash can have either single light or
multiple divided lights. Storm windows and screens of wood or painted metal
with divisions in alignment of the divisions of the window.



         6.   Not Permitted.



            i.   Dividing each sash into more than six lights;



            ii.   Synthetic trim to cover existing trim and
synthetic siding which conceals the original wood window frame;



            iii.   Glass block windows;



            iv.   Horizontally proportioned windows;



            v.   Snap-in-muntins and applied muntins;



            vi.   High-gloss metal finishes;



            vii.   Unique contemporary shapes or casements;



            viii.   Mirrored, reflective or tinted glass.



Predominant Style



Wood, double hung sash windows, with both single and multiple divided lights
are common in the historic buildings. The most common light configuration is
a simple one-over-one.



Some buildings have ornamental Queen Anne windows with large lower sash and
leaded or stained glass fixed sash above. Queen Anne windows have been
identified in Folk Victorian, Queen Anne and National style houses.







 



      b.   Exterior Doors.



         1.   Replacement Doors. Use wood doors, specifically on
the front facades. Metal doors can be used for secondary facades if they are
painted to match wood doors.



         2.   New Doors. Doors should be wood with the
appropriate paneling to the architectural style with transoms or lights in
the door as appropriate.



         3.   Storm Doors or Screen Doors. Should be wood with
full size screen or glass, or paneled lower half with screen or rectangular
glass light above. Any metal should be painted.



         4.   Not Permitted.



            i.   Metal doors with embossed paneling;



            ii.   Doors with large oval glass light;



            iii.   Six panel Colonial style doors and
contemporary flush doors;



            iv.   High-gloss metal storm doors and storm doors
with a flush  lower panel;



            v.   Sidelights are generally not typical on
residential buildings.



Predominant Style



Typically the historic houses in the District had wood doors of four or five
panels.



Large glass lights in doors are not typical in the District.



There are examples of wood paneled doors with vertically oriented, divided
lights in the upper panels of the door.



Sidelights on residential buildings are not typical for the District but are
seen on a few commercial buildings.



Transoms above front doors are seen throughout the District, although many
have been obscured with plywood or siding.







 



      c.   Porches and Door Overhangs.



      Wood porches and door overhangs are very common in the District.
These add greatly to the pedestrian scale and character of the street
facades, and are strongly encouraged for all new construction.



         1.   Existing Porches and Overhangs. Existing porches
and overhangs should be maintained. If replacement is necessary, wood
components and wood siding closely matching the original style should be used.



         2.   New Porches and Door Overhangs. New porches and
over hangs are encouraged for all additions and new buildings. Wood
components and wood siding are appropriate and should be painted. Porches on
additions or new construction are encouraged to be open and of a compatible
scale and material. If new porches are enclosed, these should be screened or
have double-hung windows. Front door overhangs with wall braces are
appropriate.



         3.   Not Permitted.



            i.   Enclosing an existing porch detracts from the
character of the main facades. Original porches have to remain open and
should not be enclosed;



            ii.   Removing or concealing distinctive porch
features when installing screens or windows;



            iii.   Re-cladding porches with synthetic siding;



            iv.   Eliminating significant detailing on porches;



            v.   Two story porches or overhangs, mansard roof



            Elements, and overhangs without vertical supports.



Predominant Style



Porches and door overhangs are typical of many of the existing buildings in
the District.



Existing porches are of wood, with stone or brick piers or foundations.



Detailing for the porches vary with architectural style.



Front door overhangs are also seen in the District, which are typically
supported by wall braces.







 



      d.   Exterior Stairs.



         As the uses of buildings have changed, several buildings
have been modified to add exterior stairs to the upper floor. Exterior stairs
are inconsistent with the character of the District and are generally
discouraged in the District.



         For existing buildings or additions, if exterior stairs to
the upper floor have to be provided, these should be:



         1.   Located to the rear of the building where possible.



         2.   Painted to match the color of the building and
screened from view.



         3.   For new construction, exterior stairs are not
allowed.



Predominant Style



Exterior stairs are not part of the typical historic vocabulary of the
District, and are more common with later additions or modifications.



      e.   Roofs, Skylights, Gutters and Chimneys.



         Replacement roofing, gutters and chimneys should match the
historic in the existing building in material and configuration, or should be
compatible.



         1.   Roofs, Skylights, Gutters and Chimneys. New or
replacement roofs of wood or asphalt shingles are appropriate. Wood shingles
should be machine cut. Asphalt shingles should be simple, flat and smooth,
and in an appropriate color. Painted metal roofs in terne coated steel is
allowed.



         Skylights are not permitted on Contributing Structures as
they are historically inappropriate. Skylights are acceptable on
non-contributing structures provided that these have the appropriate scale;
however, skylights with convex or bubble shapes, or other unusual
contemporary shapes should be avoided.



         Gutters were typically half round in profile. Gutters
should be of a compatible profile; compatible material includes painted metal.



         For new or replacement chimneys, brick chimneys with a
simple profile should be used. Brick and original profiles should be matched
if possible for replacements.



         2.   Not Permitted.



            i.   For new and replacement roofs, the following
should be avoided: hand split wood shakes, asphalt shingles with rough, thick
texture made to replicate shakes, clay or synthetic tile, slate, synthetic
slate and asphalt shingles in the color of new wood.



            ii.   Existing brick chimneys should not be clad
in siding or stucco.



Predominant Style



Original roofs were covered in wood shingles or painted tin sheathing.



Today, many of these roofs have been replaced with asphalt shingles.



Gutters were typically half round in profile on the original buildings.



Most buildings in the District have simple brick chimneys.



      f.   Siding, Brick and Trim.



         Narrow wood clapboard siding with painted wood trim is
appropriate for the District. Brick is not typical and can be found in some
commercial buildings. Original siding should be uncovered where possible and
restored.



         For replacements or additions, materials for siding, brick
and trim should match and be compatible in character, color and texture with
the original.



         1.   Siding. Narrow wood clapboard siding with 4-inch
exposure or wide wood clapboard siding with 8-inch exposure is appropriate
for the District. Light paint colors should be used for the siding that will
not conceal the shadow lines of the narrow clapboards and the decorative
trim. (Amd. Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13)



         2.   Brick. There are some examples of contributing
commercial  buildings with brick facades. These brick buildings often have
sills, lintels and upper level ornament of brick or limestone. Brick should
be used in limited amounts for replacement or additions to masonry buildings.
Where used, this should match the original in size, texture, color and
variation.



         3.   Trim. Painted wood trim is preferred, with simple
flat trim for doors and windows.



         4.   Not Permitted.



            i.   Synthetic sidings on Contributing Structures
as they are not historically appropriate. For non-contributing structures,
synthetic siding such as aluminum or vinyl are discouraged;



            ii.   Re-pointing with mortar matched to the brick
rather than to the original mortar;



            iii.   Applying mortar beyond the joints onto the
face of the brick or stone itself;



            iv.   Stucco facades;



            v.   Concealing decorative trim with synthetic
siding and trim;



            vi.   Removing original decorative trim elements
or replacing them with profiles of another style;



            vii.   Detailing with trim inappropriate to the
historic style of the building;



            viii.   Sandblasting or abrasive treatments;



            ix.   Stone facing materials and concrete blocks.



Predominant Style



The wood frame buildings were typically sided with horizontal wood clapboard.



Many of these buildings are now sided with composition board, asbestos board,
rough sawn plywood siding, or synthetic (aluminum or vinyl) siding.



Wood trim is generally found on the cornices, porches, door and window frames.



Except for early 20th Century commercial buildings, brick facades are not
typical of most of the older buildings in the District.



      g.   Storefronts.



      Storefronts are a significant architectural feature of historic
commercial buildings and their preservation is an important strategy for
retaining and preserving the character of commercial buildings in the
District.



      General design guidelines for windows, doors, roofs, chimneys,
gutters, porches, materials et cetera as outlined in previous sections will
apply to storefront designs in the District. The following specific
guidelines for storefronts will also apply.



         1.   All Storefronts. All storefronts should be
compatible in design, size, scale, color, material and character of the
historic elements of each building. Changes should reflect the building's
architecture based on evidence of the original. Important elements of
storefronts include: display windows and transoms, entrance and awning.



         2.   For a Commercial Building with an Existing
Storefront. For a storefront that is original or typical of the time period,
it should be retained and restored if needed. For a storefront that is
non-original or non-typical of the time period, rehabilitation is
recommended. If no historic evidence exists, storefront features shall be
compatible with other original storefronts in the District.



         3.   For New Commercial Buildings with Storefronts.
Incorporate a design compatible with the size and scale of the existing
storefronts.



         4.   For Conversions from Residential to Commercial. The
original windows should be retained without modifying openings. All work on
these buildings should refer to the design  guidelines in this section.



         5.   Storefront Windows and Entrances. Entrances should
be located based on historic precedent and recessed from the storefront.
Storefront windows should be of clear and transparent glass. If a lower
ceiling is desired in the interior, the  dropped ceiling should maintain at
least a 24-inch setback from the façade of the storefront to maintain the
visual integrity of the display windows and transoms.



         6.   Not Permitted.



            i.   Removal of original storefronts;



            ii.   Introduction of contemporary storefronts
with large expanses of glass, glass block, or high-gloss metal frames.



            iii.   Imitations of earlier historical styles
with mansard roofs, wood shakes, inoperable shutters, coach lanterns or
Colonial type multiple lights.



            iv.   Construction that includes interior dropped
ceilings that block the storefront windows or door.







 



Predominant Style



The Old Orland Historic District has three commercial building types:
Commercial Vernacular or Storefront, 20th Century Commercial, and residential
buildings converted to commercial uses.



The Storefront type is characterized by a false front façade, which is a
front wall that extends above the roof and/or beyond the sides of the
building to create a more imposing façade. The typically gabled roof can be
seen behind the cornice of the false front. In the District, these buildings
are of wood. The facades are sited at the lot line and are composed of a
storefront at ground level, and an upper story that is topped with a cornice
or parapet. These buildings often have decorative features in the Italianate
style.







 







 



20th Century Commercial buildings are also defined by their form but are
typically masonry with storefront at  ground level and an upper story that
is topped with a cornice. These buildings may also have decorative features
of other architectural styles. In the District, these buildings are of brick
with stone decorative details and have a flat roof typically hidden behind a
low parapet wall.



Commercial buildings converted from an original residential use should
respect the design, character and scale of the original buildings.



Good Examples of Storefront Designs in Old Orland



 


 



14330 Beacon Avenue
 
14316 Beacon Avenue



 



 


 



14314 Union Avenue
 
9911-19 Union Avenue



 



 


 



14319 Beacon Avenue
 
14320 Beacon Avenue



 



   G.   Review Process for Certificate of Appropriateness.



   The Certificate of Appropriateness review process is designed to
protect historic properties from insensitive or non-conforming alterations
and to ensure new buildings are compatible in design with older buildings in
the Old Orland Historic District.  The process for Certificates or
Appropriateness is outlined in Section 5-101 of the Land Development Code
(5-101.C and 5-101.D) and shall follow the requirements outlined in Section
5-110 of the Land Development Code pertaining to Landmarks.  (Ord. 5312 –
7/16/18)



   The tables below outline the Certificate of Appropriateness review and
approval process for the three categories of buildings in the OOH District
and landmarks and are followed by descriptions of the terms used. Once the
required review and approval is obtained, building permits must be procured
from the Village before the proposed work begins.



 

Table 6-209.G.1:  Review and Approval Process for Contributing Structures
and Landmarks



 

Public Hearing

 

Plan Commission

 

Committee of Trustees

 

Board of Trustees

 

Administrative Review



Major Change (All)
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 





Minor Change (Landmarks)
 



 

X

 

X

 

X

 





Minor Change (Contributing Structures)
 



 



 



 



 

X



Routine Maintenance
 



 



 



 



 

X



COA for Demolition
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 






 



 

Table 6-209.G.2:  Review and Approval Process for Non-Contributing
Structures and New Construction



 

Public Hearing

 

Plan Commission

 

Committee of Trustees

 

Board of Trustees

 

Administrative Review



Major Change (All)
 



 



 



 



 

X



Minor Change (All)
 



 



 



 



 

X



Routine Maintenance
 



 



 



 



 

X



COA for Demolition (All)
 



 



 



 



 

Not Required



New Construction (Freestanding Residential)
 



 



 



 



 

X




 



   1.   Contributing Structures.



      Any building that reinforces the historic, cultural or
architectural significance of the Historic District, and retains a
significant portion of its architectural or design integrity. Contributing
Structures in the Old Orland Historic District are identified in Map 1 of
this section.



   2.   Landmarks .



      Any building listed on the Local Register of Significant Places
in Section 5-110 of the Land Development Code, which reinforces the historic,
cultural or architectural significance of Orland Park.



   3.   Non-Contributing Structure.



      Any building that does not reinforce the historic, cultural or
architectural significance of the Historic District.



   4.   New Construction.



      The construction of a freestanding structure on any developable
lot, including new construction that involves additions to existing buildings.



   5.   Major Change.



      Substantial change to the exterior appearance of a structure, or
any change to the impervious coverage on the site, including but not limited
to: New Construction or additions, including new decks visible from the
right-of-way, porches, driveways etc.; Demolition of any contributing
structure or any part of a contributing structure; Relocation of buildings;
Significant alteration/ removal of historical or architectural features.
(Amd. Ord. 4738, 6/18/12)



      All changes considered “Major” by the Development Services
Department shall require a Public Notice prior to the Plan Commission
meeting, as defined in the following tables.



   6.   Minor Change.



      Changes that do not have a substantial impact on the exterior
appearance of the structure or site, including alteration, addition or
removal of exterior architectural elements such as doors, windows, fences,
skylights, siding, exterior stairs, roofs, tuck-pointing etc.



   7.   Routine Maintenance.



      Includes repair or replacement of exterior elements where there
is no change in the design, materials, or appearance of the structure or
property such as gutters and downspouts, driveways etc. Landscape changes for
gardens, planting beds, new trees, outdoor lighting for single family homes
etc. will be considered as routine maintenance.



   8.   Determination of Type of Change.



      Any proposed changes to existing buildings and sites in the Old
Orland Historic District will be considered a Major Change, a Minor Change or
Routine Maintenance per the determination of the Development Services
Department on a case by case basis, applying the above definitions.



(Amd. Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14)



   9.   Pre-Concept Meeting and Historic Preservation Resident Handbook.



      Prior to applying for a Certificate of Appropriateness, an owner
in the Historic District or of a landmark building must meet with the
Development Services Department to discuss project scope, the appropriateness
of any changes to a site or a building and the impending application of a
petition. Development Services Department staff will provide new petitioners
with a copy of the Historic Preservation Resident Handbook and a general
overview of the requirements and polices related to the Old Orland Historic
District and to Landmark Buildings.  (Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   10.   Compliance.



      Failure to comply with the codes, requirements and policies of
the Village may result in the removal of any inappropriate materials, designs
or other changes made during the course of an approved project at the
petitioner's expense. The Development Services Department shall notify a
petitioner via certified mail when work is non-compliant and upon
notification the petitioner shall have one (1) week to remove non-compliant
materials, designs or other changes. Upon the discretion of the Development
Services Department, if the non-compliance is not rectified within five (5)
business days, a citation may be issued to the petitioner, who shall be fined
not less than $100 and not more than $500 per day of non-compliance.  (Ord.
5312 – 7/16/18)



H.   Demolition Standards and Permits.



   1.   Criteria for Demolition.



      A demolition permit from the Village is required for any proposal
to demolish, partially demolish, or relocate any landmark or contributing
structure within the Old Orland Historic District.



      a.   For Contributing Structures and Landmarks .



         A Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolitions must be
granted prior to the issuance of the demolition permit. The process for
obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition is outlined in -
and shall follow - Sections 5-101 and 5-110 of the Land Development Code.



      b.   For Non-Contributing Structures .



         A Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolitions is not
required, and petitioners may apply directly to the Development Services
Department for a demolition permit.



      c.   Exceptions .



         The petitioner may procure a demolition permit directly
from the Village for landmarks or contributing structures if the following
conditions apply:



         1.   The building is an immediate danger to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupants or that of the general public; and/ or



         2.   The building is structurally unstable and cannot be
safely occupied.



         Both conditions must be confirmed by the Development
Services Department prior to the issuance of the permit.



   2.   Demolition Standards .



      a.   For All Proposals Requiring a Certificate of
Appropriateness for Demolition .




         The petitioner must respond in writing to all of the
following Demolition Standards and submit to the Development Services
Department with the completed Certificate of Appropriateness application:




         1.   That the building or structure is not structurally
sound;



         2.   That the property in question cannot yield a
reasonable return if the building or structure were retained; and



         3.   That the cost of repair of the building or
structure exceeds the value of the land and the building, thus creating an
economic hardship for the owner.



         4.   That a historic landmark survey has been conducted
and documents the historical and architectural significant of the building or
site per Section 5-110.E.2.c.



      b.   The Petitioner is Responsible .



         The petitioner is responsible for submitting adequate
documentation for each of the responses, as determined by the Development
Services Department.



(Amd. Ord. 4940 - 11/3/14; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



SECTION 6-210.   COR MIXED USE DISTRICT.



   A.   Purpose.  The COR Mixed Use District is established to
encourage and promote a mix of commercial, office and residential uses and to
create a Village core.  It is the purpose of this district to permit the
clustering of relatively dense development in an effort to create an
integrated setting and reduce automobile dependency. The district therefore
provides for flexibility in the design of pedestrian-oriented development and
in the location of employment and retail centers in proximity to higher
density housing. The district is also designed to provide for the development
of a variety of retail and commercial services that may change over time in
response to market conditions. The location and design of such development is
intended to provide efficiently located and diverse shopping and service
opportunities.



   B.   Permitted Uses. The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the COR Mixed Use District in buildings up to 50,000 square
feet unless otherwise limited below in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Sections 5-101 through 5-104, provided that all other applicable
regulations are met:  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;



         a.   Accessory garages for more than three (3) vehicles;
(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



      3.   Clinics and medical or dental offices and medical
rehabilitation centers; Medical offices may require an entrance canopy.



      (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      4.   Commercial retail establishments, up to a floor area of
50,000 square feet; (Ord. 4610 – 12/20/10)



      5.   Convenience stores with a floor area of less than 5,000
square feet;



      6.   Day care centers,  day care homes, and adult day care
centers, provided they are licensed/registered with the appropriate state
agencies.  (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      7.   Financial institutions; (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      8.   Food concession associated with the principal use; (Ord.
4374 – 6/2/08)



      9.   Governmental uses;



      10.   Indoor recreation areas; (Ord. 4610 – 12/20/10)



      11.   Offices;



      12.   Overnight accommodations, provided that rooms are not
rented for a period of more than thirty (30) days;



      13.   Personal service establishments; (Ord. 2959-11/18/96;
Amd. Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      14.   Public parks and recreation areas; (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



      15.   Restaurants, and outdoor seating for restaurants,
greater than 300 feet of a residential parcel. Outdoor seating shall have
aisle widths of thirty-six (36) inches or more, and any fence, wall,
landscaping or similar barrier installed in or around the outdoor seating
areas shall be not less than 24 inches in height and not greater than 48
inches in height. The service of liquor will require conformance with the
provisions outlined in Section 6-310 Fences, as well as the requirements of
the Village Code, as amended. (Ord. 2420 7/6/93;  Amd. Ord. 4044 – 7/5/05;
Amd. Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11; Ord. 4738 – 6/18/12; Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12;
Amd. Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13; Amd. Ord. 5017 - 8/17/15)



      16.   Schools - arts or vocational.



(Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



   C.   Special Uses. The following uses may be established as special
uses in the COR District, in accordance with the procedures and standards set
forth in Section 5-105:



      1.   Animal Services;  (Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



      2.   Attached dwellings, provided that:



         a.   No dwelling units are located on the street level
unless the dwelling units are part of a mixed use development. (Ord. 3837 –
12/1/03)



         b.   If the dwelling units are part of a larger mixed
use development that is over 100,000 square feet in floor area, no more than
forty (40) percent of the square footage is devoted to residential uses.
(Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      3.   Bus terminals;



      4.   Clubs and lodges;



      5.   Colleges and universities;



      6.   Community centers;



      7.   Commercial retail establishments with a floor area of
50,000 square feet or greater; (Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



      8.   Congregate elderly housing, provided that the use is
located no closer than 1,000 feet to any other congregate elderly housing
facility or residential care home;



(Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99; Amd. Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



      9.     Drive-in service windows, provided that:



         a.   The principal use is an office, retail
establishment, financial institution or restaurant located on the same lot;



         b.   Stacking spaces are provided per Code requirements
as indicated in Section 6-306, Off Street Parking; and



         c.   The amount of stacking space and circulation
patterns on the lot is adequate to keep traffic from backing up into the
street, based upon documentation of similar circumstances.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4535 – 1/18/10)



      10.    Funeral parlor; (Ord. 4647 – 5/16/11)



      11.   Health clubs and fitness centers;



      12.   Large residential-care homes (over 8 residents),
provided that:



         a.   The use is licensed by the applicable State agency;
and



         b.   The home is located no closer than 1,000 feet to
any other residential-care home or congregate elderly housing facility.



(Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



      13.   Light industry and assembly; (Ord. 2420 - 7/6/93)



      14.   Museums, civic and cultural centers;  (Ord. 4374 –
6/2/08)



      15.   Outside, open markets;  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      16.   Pawn shops/ Pawnbrokers subject to licensing by the
Village and State (per 205 ILCS 510/ Pawnbroker Regulation Act) and provided
that the building or unit in building is not closer than 1,000 feet to
another pawn shop/ pawnbroker building/unit or to the property line of a
school, child care facility or park; (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      17.   Private parks and recreational areas; (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



      18.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter
for up to eight (8) adults;



      19.   Planned Developments, provided that:



         a.   At least twenty (20) percent of the net area of the
development shall be maintained as common open space;



         b.   Twenty (20) percent less required private open
space may be permitted for every twenty (20) percent of common open space
provided beyond the minimum;    (Ord. 2746  6/5/95; Amd. Ord. 4015 –
5/2/05)



         c.   Optional Bonuses.  Additional building square
footage bonuses may be permitted, provided that the applicant provides the
following in the proposed development:  (Ord. 4015 – 5/2/05)



            1.   Boulevard treatment of a street, including a
wide landscaped median strip.



            2.   Orientation of buildings that provide views
of common open space, forests, valleys, ponds, wetlands and hills;



            3.   Orientation of buildings for solar heating;



            4.   Less than fifty (50) percent of garage doors
facing the street or common courtyard;



            5.   Garbage enclosures hidden from view from the
street;



            6.   Attractive, nonstandard, but consistent,
style for lampposts and signs, varied pavement treatments, tiles, stones,
bricks and mosaics.  (Ord.2746  6/5/95)



      20.   Public Transportation facilities;



      21.   Restaurants, and outdoor seating for restaurants, within
300 feet of a residential parcel. Outdoor seating shall have aisle widths of
thirty-six (36) inches or more, and any fence, wall, landscaping or similar
barrier installed in or around the outdoor seating areas shall be not less
than 24 inches in height and not greater than 48 inches in height. The
service of liquor will require conformance with the provisions outlined in
Section 6-310 Fences, as well as the requirements of the Village Code, as
amended. (Ord. 3354 – 4/17/00; Amd. Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4044
– 7/5/05; Ord. 4738 – 6/18/12; Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12; Amd. Ord. 4839
– 9/16/13; Amd. Ord. 5017 – 8/17/15; Amd. 5061 – 1/18/16)



      22.   Self-service storage facilities, provided that they are
wholly contained within a building with access to the individual units
provided through the building interior.  (Ord. 3199  11/16/98)



      23.   Sites or site plans with total building area greater
than 50,000 square feet. This special use is in conjunction with any
principal special use; (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      24.   Stadia, auditoria and arenas; and



      25.   Tattoo/ body piercing shops subject to licensing by the
Village and registering with the State (per 410 ILCS 54/ Tattoo and Body
Piercing Establishment Registration  Act) and provided that the building or
unit in building is not closer than 1,000 feet to  another tattoo/body
piercing establishment building/ unit or to the property line of a school,
child care facility or park;  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      26.   Theaters, except open-air drive-in.



      27.   Public utility structures and utility substations,
provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed according to design
guidelines and is operated to comply with all applicable local, state and
federal regulations; and



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within 300 feet of any stream or other body of water or any existing or
proposed dwelling.



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      28.   Vehicle rental. (Ord.2959  11/18/96)



      29.   Wireless communication facilities.    (Ord. 3672 –
8/5/02)



(Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13; Amd. Ord. 4880  2/3/14; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   D.   Floor Area Ratio.  The nonresidential density allowed in this
district shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 1.0.  However, greater
density (up to a floor area ratio of 2.0) may be permitted if:



      1.   Residential and non-residential uses are integrated in
either the same building or in the immediately adjacent area in a
pedestrian-oriented environment; and



      2.   At least twenty-five (25) percent of the development is
residential; and



      3.   Additional public amenities such as plazas, fountains,
public art or additional landscaping are provided.



   E.   Lot Area.  The minimum lot area for each residential dwelling
unit shall not be less than 4,356 square feet.  The minimum lot area for
each nonresidential establishment shall not be less than 10,000 square feet
with a minimum lot width (see definition) of eighty (80) feet. 



(Ord. 2537 - 3/21/94)



   F.   Setbacks.



      1.   Building Setbacks from Property Line



   The following setback standards shall apply in the COR District. 



         a.   Residential, excluding mixed use buildings
(commercial and residential uses)  For residential developments with square
corner lots, the "front" setback shall be considered to be the yard where the
main door is located; the other yard shall therefore be considered to be the
"side" setback.



         (1)   Front.



               (a)   Major or Minor Arterial: Forty-five
(45) feet from the property line.



               (b)   Major Collector: Forty (40) feet from
the property line.



               (c)   All other streets: Thirty (30) feet
from the property line. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         (2)   Side. All Streets:  Not less than fifteen (15)
percent of the width of the lot on each side of the principal building to the
side lot line, with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet.



         (3)   Corner Side. 



            (a)   Major or Minor Arterial: Fifty (50) feet
from the property line.



            (b)   Collectors: Forty (40) feet from the
property line.



            (c)   All other streets: Thirty (30) feet from the
property line.



         (4)   Rear. All Streets:  Thirty-five (35) feet from
the property line.



         b.   Non-residential and mixed use buildings (commercial
and residential uses). Setbacks between the street right-of-way and the
building facade facing the street shall follow the minimum requirements set
in Table 6-210. F.1.b (A) (below). The setback width is related to the width
and character of the street.  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



   TABLE 6-210.F.1.b(A)



 

STREET NAME
 
MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK FROM STREET
 
PURPOSE OF THE SETBACK AREA




All streets, except as below
 
25 feet
 
For streets carrying moderate to high regional and local traffic, a setback
area of 25 feet will be required. This will allow commercial buildings to
maintain high visibility from the streets, and also provide a significant
landscaped area along the street.


Exceptions:
 
 
 
 


LaGrange Road
 
25 feet
 
LaGrange Road is proposed to be widened to a six lane arterial with a
landscaped median. This setback area will distinguish it from other arterials
as the main commercial area of the Village. The setback will allow
landscaping that will add a sense of scale, safety and enclosure to the
corridor, and help create a unique look for the street. (Amd. Ord. 4996 –
6/15/15)


147th Street
 
15 feet
 
For pedestrian oriented streets that also carry moderate local traffic, a
setback area of 15 feet is required. This will encourage building entrances
to connect directly to the sidewalk, while allowing landscaping with low
plantings along the street.


Ravinia Avenue


West Avenue


144th Place


149th Street


157th Street
 
0 to 15 feet
 
These special pedestrian oriented streets shall be defined by buildings with
active street fronts, multiple entrances and well articulated street facades,
and by parkway trees along the sidewalk. Buildings shall be allowed to be
placed at the lot line or set back up to 15 feet to strengthen the pedestrian
character of the street.


142nd Street


Ravinia extension (north of 143rd Street and south of 159th Street)


161st Street


160th Street


95th Avenue




 



      2.   Building Setbacks from rear and side lot lines that do
not abut a street. All buildings must maintain a minimum of 30 feet of
setback area from the rear lot line and a minimum of 15 feet of setback area
from the side lot lines that do not abut a street.



      3.   Permitted Uses in Building Setback Areas along Streets.
Setback areas will be primarily used for landscaping and other pedestrian
oriented uses including:



         a.   Widened sidewalks and entranceways;



         b.   Plazas, outdoor gardens, patios and outdoor seating
areas;



         c.   Water features, including bioswales or other
stormwater management elements;



         d.   Public art or outdoor architectural features like
clock towers, pergolas etc.;



         e.   Pergolas and/or arbor structures;



         f.   Benches and complementary site furniture.



         The setback area can be expanded to accommodate the above
pedestrian oriented uses if needed. Architectural features that help to
create a stronger pedestrian scale can extend into the setback area up to 10
feet, including:



         g.   Canopies, marquees and other projections that
create shaded and protected entrances;



         h.   Extended roofs and eaves;



         i.   Awnings and canopies over windows;



         j.   Projecting blade signs that comply with the
Village's sign ordinance;



         k.   Tensile Canopies that project over outdoor
congregation areas.



(Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      4.   Uses not Permitted in Building Setbacks along Streets.



         Parking lots or structures (exception cited below),
drive-through facilities, loading facilities or trash enclosures are not
allowed within the setback area between the building facade and the street.



         Drive through facilities in the setback area shall be
allowed via Special Use modification only, when there are no reasonable
alternatives. In order to qualify for a Special Use Modification, the drive
through facility must meet all of the following conditions:



         a.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum width of 14' and a minimum turning radius of 20' from the
centerline of the drive aisle.



         b.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of 10' from
all property lines.



         c.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be
constructed with decorative pavement or pervious pavers.  (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



         d.   Any order windows and menu boxes must be designed
to integrate into the architecture of the building and appear ‘hidden' from
vehicular and pedestrian view.  All efforts should be made to keep the order
windows and menu boxes out of the setback between the building and the
street. 



            1.   Menu boxes must include masonry architectural
details, matching the materials and design of the building.



            2.   Menu boxes must be screened with landscaping
and/or masonry walls so they are not visible from the street.



            3.   Order windows must be designed with trim and
detail so they appear similar in appearance to other windows on the building.



         e.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be screened
with a combination of masonry walls and/or decorative landscaping in order to
provide a solid buffer at a minimum height of 36".



         f.   The drop off area or drive aisle shall not obstruct
any direct connections between the sidewalk along the street and the
entrances to the building and shall include crosswalks connection pedestrian
routes.



(Ord. 4535 – 1/18/10; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      5.   Parking Lot Setbacks.  A minimum landscaped setback must
be provided between the parking lot and the primary street right-of-way that
accommodates the required landscape bufferyard area per Section 6-305.



(Ord. 4015 – 5/2/05; Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



   G.   Lot Coverage. No more than seventy-five (75) percent of the
area of the parcel may be covered with building, pavement and storm water
storage, leaving at least twenty-five percent (25%) of total parcel area in
green space. (See Section 2-102 Definitions "Green Space"). Impervious
coverage will be allowed up to 80% when Best Management Practices (BMP) such
as porous pavements and green roofs are used. Up to 40% of the BMPs will be
considered pervious, provided that the design standards outlined in the code
for BMPs are met.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   H.   Height. No structure may exceed six (6) stories or seventy-five
(75) feet, whichever is lower, and must be located 50 feet from adjacent
residential buildings for every story over three (3) stories.  (Ord.
3070-10/20/97)



SECTION 6-211. ORI Mixed Use District.



   A.   Purpose.  The ORI Mixed Use District is established to provide
locations for a wide range of employment-generating office, institutional,
research and light manufacturing uses along I-80, as indicated on the Village
Zoning District Map.  The standards of this district are designed to ensure
that such uses are developed in a manner that is compatible with the use and
enjoyment of nearby properties, and to minimize potential nuisances or damage
to the environment.  In addition, this district is intended to accommodate a
variety of uses, whereby the developer can establish different combinations
of uses on a site over time, as the market dictates, as long as all uses and
development conform to the standards established by the Village to protect
adjacent land uses and the natural environment.



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the ORI Mixed Use District in buildings up to 50,000 square
feet unless otherwise limited below in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Sections 5-101 through 5-104, provided that all other applicable
regulations are met:  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      1.   Accessory uses, as provided in Section 6-302;



         a.   Accessory garages for more than three (3) vehicles;



      2.   Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village,
provided that:



         a.   No bus stop shelter is located within thirty-five
(35) feet of a street intersection or within a clear sight triangle
identified in Section 6-301(E); and



         b.   The design of the bus shelter is compatible with
development of nearby properties.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      3.   Clinics and medical or dental offices; Medical offices
may require an entrance canopy.



      4.   Convenience stores with a floor area of less than 5,000
square feet;



      5.   Day care centers and day care homes, provided that the
use is licensed by or registered with the Illinois Department of Children and
Family Services in accordance with the Child Care Act of 1969. (Ill. Rev.
Stat. ch. 23, par. 2211, et seq.)



      6.   Financial institutions; (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      7.   Food concession associated with a primary use;  (Ord.
4374 – 6/2/08)



      8.   Governmental uses;



      9.   Indoor recreation areas less than 5,000 square feet; 
(Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



      10.   Light industry and assembly;



      11.   Medical rehabilitation centers;



      12.   Offices;



      13.   Outside Storage, when the storage area does not exceed
25% of the area of the lot, is located at the rear of the principal building,
is screened on all sides, and the height of the stored materials, equipment
or vehicles does not exceed the height of the screening.  (See Section
6-308.J Screening and Section 6-302 Accessory Structures and Uses)  (Ord.
3837 – 12/1/03)



      14.   Overnight accommodations, provided that rooms are not
rented for a period of more than thirty (30) days;



      15.   Personal service establishments up to 10,000 square
feet;  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      16.   Printing, publishing or photography plants;



      17.   Public parks and recreation areas; (Ord. 4610 –
12/20/10)



      18.   Restaurants, and outdoor seating for restaurants,
greater than 300 feet of a residential parcel. Outdoor seating shall have
aisle widths of thirty-six (36) inches or more, and any fence, wall,
landscaping or similar barrier installed in or around the outdoor seating
areas shall be not less than twenty-four (24) inches in height and not
greater than forty-eight (48) inches in height. The service of liquor will
require conformance with the provisions outlined in Section 6-310 Fences, as
well as the requirements of the Village Code, as amended.  (Ord. 4044 –
7/5/05; Amd. Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11; Amd. Ord. 5017 - 8/17/15; Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



      19.   Retail, as an ancillary use, whose primary purpose is to
serve the work force within the district;



      20.   Schools - arts or vocational;



      21.   Warehouses or distribution establishments.  (Ord. 3837
– 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



      22.   Wineries and Microbreweries under 12,000 square feet,
and Distilleries under 5,000 square feet, provided they are located at least
300 feet from a residential district or use as measured from the area of
activity.



(Ord. 4418 – 9/15/08; Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



      23.   Wholesale establishments.



   C.   Special Uses. The following uses may be established as special
uses in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Section
5-105:



      1.   Animal Services;  (Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



      2.   Drive-in service windows, provided that:



         a.   The principal use is an office, retail
establishment, financial institution or restaurant located on the same lot;



         b.   Stacking spaces are provided per Code requirements
as indicated in Section 6-306, Off Street Parking; and



         c.   The amount of stacking space and circulation
patterns on the lot is adequate to keep traffic from backing up into the
street, based upon documentation of similar circumstances.



(Ord. 4535 – 1/18/20)



      3.   Food processing plants; provided they are located at
least 1,000 feet from a residential use or district;  (Ord. 4738 –6/18/12)



      4.   Hospitals;



      5.   Indoor recreation areas equal to or greater than 5,000
square feet; (Ord. 4610 –12/20/10; Amd. Ord. 5061  1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5167
– 2/20/17)



      6.   Motor Vehicle Services;  (Ord. 4664 – 8/1/11)



      7.   Outside Storage, for a storage area that does not meet
the requirements of Section 6-208.B.  (See Section 6-308.J Screening and
Section 6-302 Accessory Structures and Uses)  (Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



      8.   Outside, open markets; (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      9.   Private parks and recreational areas; (Ord. 4610
–12/20/10)



      10.   Places of worship which may include overnight shelter
for up to eight (8) adults;



      11.   Planned Office/ Research/ Institutional Developments
that include a site that is or is intended for two or more buildings, or one
or more principal use, or one principal building for two or more principal
uses;  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      12.   Public transportation facilities;



      13.   Public utility structures and utility substations,
provided that:



         a.   No building is located within twenty-five (25) feet
of a side lot line;



         b.   The facility is constructed according to design
guidelines and is operated to comply with all applicable local, state and
federal regulations; and



         c.   No above-ground structure for the treatment or
disposal of wastewater and no surface disposal of wastewater is located
within 300 feet of any stream or other body of water or any existing or
proposed dwelling.



         d.   The standards of Section 6-311 are met for the
applicable structures/ utilities.



(Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      14.   Restaurants, and outdoor seating for restaurants, less
than or equal to 300 feet of a residential parcel. Outdoor seating shall have
aisle widths of thirty-six (36) inches or more, and any fence, wall,
landscaping or similar barrier installed in or around the outdoor seating
areas shall be not less than twenty-four (24) inches in height and not
greater than forty-eight (48) inches in height. The service of liquor will
require conformance with the provisions outlined in Section 6-310 Fences, as
well as the requirements of the Village Code, as amended.  (Ord. 3354 –
4/17/00; Amd. Ord. 4044 – 7/5/05; Amd. Ord. 5017 - 8/17/15; Amd. Ord. 5221
– 9/18/17)



      15.   Self-service storage facilities, provided that they are
wholly contained within a building with access to the individual units
provided through the building interior. (Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



      16.   Sites or site plans with total building area greater
than 50,000 square feet. This special use is in conjunction with any other
special use;  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08)



      17.   Stadia, auditoria and arenas.



      18.   Wineries and Microbreweries over 12,000 square feet, and
Distilleries over 5,000 square feet, or within 300 feet from a residential
use or district as measured from the area of activity.  (Ord. 4418 –
9/15/08; Amd. Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



      19.   Wireless communication facilities.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



(Amd. Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



   D.   Floor Area Ratio.  The nonresidential density allowed in this
district shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 2.0.



   E.   Lot Area.  The minimum lot area for industrial uses shall not
be less than 20,000 square feet with a minimum lot width (see definition) of
one hundred (100) feet.  The minimum lot area for commercial, office and
mixed uses shall not be less than 10,000 square feet with a minimum lot width
(see definition) of eighty (80) feet.



   F.   Setbacks.  Setbacks between the street right-of-way and the
building façade facing the street shall follow the minimum requirements set
below. The setback width is related to the width and character of the street.



      1.   Building Setbacks from the Street Right-of-Way. The
following setback standards shall apply to properties in the ORI District.
For square corner lots, where neither side is narrower to determine the front
setback, the "front" setback shall be considered based on the location of the
building's main door; the non-entry side of the building shall therefore be
considered as the "side" setback.



         a.   Front. The front setback from the right-of-way
shall be the following:



            (1)   Wolf Road: Thirty-five (35) feet;



            (2)   All Streets: Twenty-five (25) feet.



         b.   Side. The side setback from the right-of-way and
from the side lot line that does not abut a right-of-way shall be the
following:



            (1)   All Streets: No minimum setback. The maximum
setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet;



            (2)   Non-streets: Fifteen (15) feet.



         c.   Rear. The rear setback from an abutting
right-of-way shall conform to the same setback standards outlined in
subsection 6-211.F.1.a above, titled "Front". The rear setback from the rear
lot line that does not abut a right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet.



      2.   Permitted Uses in Building Setback Areas along Streets.
Setback areas will be primarily used for landscaping and other pedestrian
oriented uses including:



         a.   Widened sidewalks and entranceways;



         b.   Plazas, outdoor gardens, patios and outdoor seating
areas;



         c.   Water features, including bioswales or other
stormwater management elements;



         d.   Public art or outdoor architectural features like
clock towers, pergolas etc.;



         e.   Pergolas and/or arbor structures;



         f.   Benches and complementary site furniture.



         The setback area can be expanded to accommodate the above
pedestrian oriented uses if needed. Architectural features that help to
create a stronger pedestrian scale can extend into the setback area up to ten
(10) feet, including:



         g.   Canopies, marquees and other projections that
create shaded and protected entrances;



         h.   Extended roofs and eaves;



         i.   Awnings and canopies over windows;



         j.   Projecting blade signs that comply with the
Village's sign ordinance.



(Amd. Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



      3.   Uses Not Permitted in Building Setbacks Along Streets.
Parking lots or structures (exception cited below), drive-through facilities,
loading facilities or trash enclosures are not allowed within the setback
area between the building facade and the street. Drive through facilities in
the setback area shall be allowed via Special Use modification only, when
there are no reasonable alternatives. In order to qualify for a Special Use
Modification, the drive through facility must meet all of the following
conditions:



         a.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum width of 14' and a minimum turning radius of 20' from the
centerline of the drive aisle.



         b.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of 10' from
all property lines.



         c.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be
constructed with decorative pavement or pervious pavers.



         d.   Any order windows and menu boxes must be designed
to integrate into the architecture of the building and appear ‘hidden' from
vehicular and pedestrian view. All efforts should be made to keep the order
windows and menu boxes out of the setback between the building and the street.



            (1)   Menu boxes must include masonry
architectural details, matching the materials and design of the building.



            (2)   Menu boxes must be screened with landscaping
and/or masonry walls so they are not visible from the street.



            (3)   Order windows must be designed with trim and
detail so they appear similar in appearance to other windows on the building.



         e.   The drop off area or drive aisle must be screened
with a combination of masonry walls and/or decorative landscaping in order to
provide a solid buffer at a minimum height of 36".



         f.   The drop off area or drive aisle shall not obstruct
any direct connections between the sidewalk along the street and the
entrances to the building and shall include crosswalks connection pedestrian
routes.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      4.   Parking Lot Setbacks. A minimum of a 10-foot landscaped
setback must be provided between the parking lot and the primary street
right-of-way.



(Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



   G.   Lot Coverage. No more than seventy-five (75) percent of the
area of the parcel may be covered with building, pavement and storm water
storage, leaving at least twenty-five percent (25%) of total parcel area in
green space. (See Section 2-102 Definitions "Green Space").



      Impervious coverage will be allowed up to 80% when Best
Management Practices (BMP) such as porous pavements and green roofs are used.
Up to 40% of the BMPs will be considered pervious, provided that the design
standards outlined in the code for BMPs are met.  (Ord. 4374 – 6/2/08;
Amd. Ord. 4574 7/6/10)



   H.   Height. No building or structure may exceed six (6) stories or
seventy-five (75) feet, whichever is lower, except as provided as follows: 
Where a building is located within two hundred (200) feet of a residential
zoning district, the height of the building shall not exceed  1 ½  times
the average height of all buildings within the residential zoning district
which are located within two hundred (200) feet of the building. Where a
building is located more than six hundred (600) feet from a residential
zoning district, the height of a building or structure may be increased up to
twelve (12) stories through approval of a special use, upon consideration of
the impact on adjacent residential lots due to factors that include sunlight,
shade and privacy.



SECTION 6-212: VILLAGE CENTER DISTRICT (VCD)



(Entire Section Amended by Ord. 4137, 5/15/06)



   A.    Purpose and Vision.



   The mayor and the Village Board envision the Village Center District to
be the Downtown and Civic Core of Orland Park. From the Main Street Triangle
area around the 142nd Street train station to the Village Center Complex
along Ravinia Avenue, this unique district offers great potential to create
mixed use walkable neighborhoods in the heart of the Village. To ensure that
the district will create a unique pedestrian scale and civic character, the
Village offers the following vision for the area:



   The VCD District will offer a diverse mix of uses along intimate
pedestrian scaled streets and buildings within compact, walkable blocks.
Small-scale commercial uses will serve the district, and more residents will
be attracted to live within walking distance of the 142nd Street train
station. A fine grid of streets will connect the Village Center, the Downtown
area around the train station, the Orland Crossing area, the Public Library,
McGinnis Slough, Humphrey Woods, and the Old Orland Historic District. New
development on infill or vacant sites will strengthen the intimate character
of the area, and civic buildings and open spaces will continue to be key
focal points in the district.



      



 







 



Civic uses like the Metra Station, Library and Village Hall are the focal
points of the Village Center District.



   Map 1: Village Center District (VCD) Map Boundary







 



   B.    Development Principles.



   Land Development Codes for the Village Center District are based on the
following principles:



   • Establish the Village Center District as the Downtown for the
Village by enhancing the prominence and setting of civic structures and
public open spaces;



   • Continue the tradition established by the Village Center Complex by
encouraging buildings with strong architectural identities;



   • Promote mixed-use buildings with ground floor retail and office or
residential uses above;



   • Create attractive street facades with street level uses scaled and
oriented toward pedestrians;



   • Create smaller walkable blocks that allow safe and attractive
pedestrian connections through the district;



   • Create open space amenities as focal points of developments;



   • Encourage continuous building frontage along the streets to reduce
the visual impacts of parking lots;



   • Place parking lots at the rear of buildings away from pedestrian
oriented streets;



   • Encourage alternative parking options, including on-street parking,
shared parking, parking below buildings, underground parking and parking
structures;



   • Encourage buildings to provide dual entrances, allowing patrons to
enter both from the sidewalk along the street and the parking area at the
rear or side of buildings;



   • Promote sustainable and environmentally responsible design;







   A wide variety of uses in a small scale setting is one of the major
assets of the Village Center District.



   C.   Uses.



      1.   Introduction.



         Uses as outlined in Table 6-212.C.1 of this section may be
established in the Village Center District, in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 5-101 through Section 5-104 for permitted uses and
Section 5-105 for special uses in the Land Development Code. Unless otherwise
noted in the table, the following applies:



         a.   A "Special Use" will be required for certain uses
only if a lot line of the subject property is within 300 feet of an existing
or approved single family detached residential lot line.



         b.   To protect the existing residential uses in the
district, the following applies to the areas in orange on Map 2 (below):



            1.   Mixed-use and single use commercial buildings
are not permitted on Ravinia Place and the east side of John Humphrey Drive
(north of 142nd Street).



            2.   Existing multi-family residential buildings
cannot be converted to mixed-use buildings, or be used for office or
commercial uses.



            3.   Mixed-use and single use commercial/ office
buildings can replace existing multi-family residential buildings via a
tear-down when a parcel is redeveloped, but require a Special Use Permit.



      



 



   Map 2: Single use residential areas in the district will not be allowed
where single use commercial developments exist.



 

Table 6-212.C.1: Allowable Uses in the Village Center District



 
Lot line 300 feet or more from single family detached residential lot line
 
Lot line within 300 feet of single family detached residential lot line




2. Accessory Uses: see Section 6-302
 
 
 
 


3. Residential Uses
 

 



Congregate elderly housing
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Dwellings, detached (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Dwellings, attached (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Residential care homes: 1 to 6 residents
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Residential care homes: over 6 residents
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


Residential units above non-residential uses
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


4. Commercial Uses
 

 



Animal services
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


Parking structures— non-accessory
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Retail, up to 50,000 sq. ft.
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Retail, in excess of 50,000 sq. ft. (Ord. 4769, 12/3/12)
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Day care centers and day care homes
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Drive through facilities (7 car stacking) (Ord. 4210, 12/18/06)
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Dry cleaning and laundry processing stations
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


Financial institutions
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Food concession associated with a primary use
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Funeral parlors
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Health clubs, fitness centers and indoor recreational uses, maximum of 50,000
sq. ft. per floor
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Nurseries and greenhouses
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Offices; Medical offices may require an entrance canopy
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Overnight accommodation and extended stay: under 6 units
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Overnight accommodation and extended stay: 6 or more units
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


Personal service establishments
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Restaurants, outdoor seating for restaurants, and banquet halls (Ord. 5017,
8/17/15)
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


Theatres, including live theatres and movie theatres
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


5. Civic and Institutional Uses
 

 



Boarding schools, seminaries and convents
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Colleges and universities
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


Community centers, clubs and lodges
 
Permitted Use
 
Special Use


Government uses, including office, recreational uses, research  facilities,
public parks and playgrounds
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Museums, civic and cultural centers
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Places of worship, which may include overnight shelter for up to 8 adults
(Ord. 4738, 6/18/12)
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Instructional facilities for arts, athletics and vocational training
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Public and private schools (primary/ elementary, secondary/ high schools)
 
Special Use
 
Special Use




 



 

Table 6-212.C.1: Allowable Uses in the Village Center District (continued)


 
 
Lot line 300 feet or more from single family detached residential lot line
 
Lot line within 300 feet of single family detached residential lot line




6. Transportation and Utilities
 

 



Bus stop shelters owned and maintained by the Village
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Public transportation facilities
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Public utility structures and utility substations
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Wireless communication facilities
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


Wireless communication facility co-locations
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


7. Building Area
 

 



Sites or site plans with total building area up to 50,000 sq. ft.
 
Permitted Use
 
Permitted Use


Sites or site plans with total building area greater than 50,000 sq. ft.
 
Special Use
 
Special Use


8. Planned Developments
 

 



Site that is or is intended for two or more buildings, or one or more
principal use, or one principal building for two or more principal uses (Ord.
4574, 7/6/10)
 
Special Use
 
Special Use




 



(Amd. Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



   D.   Bulk Requirements.



      1.   Lot Coverage.



   No more than seventy-five (75) percent of the area of the parcel may be
covered with building, pavement and storm water storage, leaving at least
twenty-five (25) percent of total parcel area in green space. (See Section
2-102 Definitions "Green Space"). Impervious coverage will be allowed up to
80% when Best Management Practices (BMP) such as porous pavements and green
roofs are used. Up to 40% of the BMPs will be considered pervious, provided
that the design standards outlined in the code for BMPs are met. (Ord. 4574,
7/6/10)



      2.   Lot Area and Lot Width.



   For detached dwelling units, minimum lot area shall be 2,500 square
feet, with a minimum lot width of 25 feet and a maximum lot width of 50 feet.
For commercial uses, the minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet, with a
minimum lot width of 80 feet.



      3.   Height.



      No building may exceed 3 stories, up to a maximum height of 40
feet, with the following exceptions:



         a.   Building footprints within 600 feet of the 142nd
Street train station may be up to 6 stories to a maximum height of 70 feet.



         b.   At intersections of public streets, or private
streets that are designed to public street standards with sidewalks and
parkways, corner buildings may be up to 4 stories tall to a maximum height of
55 feet.



         c.   Buildings cannot be more than two stories taller
than adjacent existing single family homes.



      4.   Land Use Intensity.



      Allowable square footage for all developments, including single
use commercial and single use residential, as well as mixed-use projects,
shall be measured by the Floor Area Ratio (FAR). All developments with
residential uses will be regulated on the basis of FAR compliance rather than
the number of residential units. The maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) will be
3.0 for developments within 1,000 feet of a mass transit facility and 1.0 for
developments outside of 1,000 feet of a mass transit facility. FAR will be
calculated by dividing the overall gross floor area by the gross site area.
Gross floor area includes all building residential square footage. Accessory
parking or transit facility parking is not included in the Gross Floor Area
for FAR calculations.



      5.   Parking.



      Large surface parking lots are not appropriate to the scale and
character of this district. To promote smaller lots, shared parking,
on-street parking and the shared use of public parking facilities, and
mixed-use developments will be allowed to reduce the on-site parking
requirements outlined in Section 6-306.B by up to 25%.



      6.   Setbacks.



         a.   Purpose of the setback requirements:



            1.   To create attractive and pedestrian oriented
streets with buildings and landscaping along the sidewalks; and



            2.   To minimize the visual impacts of surface
parking lots and drive-through facilities along streets by locating these to
the rear (preferred) or sides of buildings. If parking lots are located in
the side-yard, an enhanced landscaping buffer with pedestrian accommodation
and amenities must be provided. (Ord. 4210, 12/18/06)



         b.   Types of setbacks required:



            1.   Building setbacks from streets;



            2.   Building setbacks from lot lines not abutting
a street;



            3.   Parking lot setbacks from all lot lines;



         c.   Building setbacks from street right-of-ways:



   Setbacks between the street right-of-way and the building facade facing
the street shall follow the minimum requirements set in Table 6-212.D.6.c
below. The setback width is related to the width and character of the street.



 

Table 6-212.D.6.c: Building Setbacks from Street Right-of-Ways


STREET NAME
 
BUILDING SETBACK FROM STREET
 
PURPOSE OF THE SETBACK AREA


All streets carrying moderate to high auto traffic:
La Grange Road
143rd Street
John Humphrey Drive Ravinia Avenue (south of 143rd Street)
151st Street
Southwest Highway
 
15 feet minimum, provided that a 5 foot sidewalk and an 8 foot parkway is
maintained in the right-of-way;

For La Grange Road, 25 feet minimum from the future right-of-way south of
143rd Street;
 
For streets carrying moderate to high regional and local traffic, a setback
area of 15 feet will be required. This will allow commercial buildings to
maintain high visibility from the street, and also provide a significant
landscaped area along the street.


All other pedestrian oriented streets, including:
142nd Street
144th Place
147th Street
149th Place
Ravinia Avenue extension (north of 143rd Street)
West Avenue and
Any new internal street in the district
 
5-15 feet, provided that a 5 foot sidewalk and an 8 foot parkway is
maintained in the right-of-way; 0 (zero) lot line buildings will be allowed
without a parkway when the sidewalk is at least 10 feet wide, with room for
trees in grates;
 
These pedestrian oriented streets shall be defined by buildings with active
street fronts, multiple entrances and well articulated street facades, and by
parkway trees along the sidewalk. Buildings shall be allowed to be placed at
the lot line or set back up to 15 feet to strengthen the pedestrian character
of the street.



 



         d.   Building setbacks from rear and side lot lines that
do not abut a street:



         All buildings must maintain a minimum of 30 feet of setback
area from the rear lot line and a minimum of 15 feet of setback area from the
side lot lines that do not abut a street.



         e.   Parking lot setbacks:



         A minimum landscaped setback must be provided between the
parking lot and the primary street right-of-way that accommodates the
required landscape bufferyard area per Section 6-305. (Ord. 4792 – 2/4/13)



   E.   Design Standards.



      1.   Permitted Uses in Building Setback Areas along Streets.



      Setback areas will be primarily used for landscaping and other
pedestrian oriented uses including:



         a.   Widened sidewalks and entrance-ways;



         b.   Plazas, outdoor gardens, patios and outdoor seating
areas;



         c.   Water features, including bioswales or other
stormwater management elements;



         d.   Public art or outdoor architectural features like
clock towers, pergolas etc.



         e.   Pergolas and/or arbor structures;



         f.   Benches and complementary site furniture.



         The setback area can be expanded to accommodate the above
pedestrian oriented uses if needed. Architectural features that help to
create a stronger pedestrian scale can extend into the minimum required
setback area no closer than 5 feet from the right-of-way, including: (Ord.
4880 – 2/3/14)



         g.   Canopies, marquees and other projections that
create shaded and protected entrances;



         h.   Extended roofs and eaves, and awnings and canopies
over windows;



         i.   Projecting blade signs that comply with the
Village's sign ordinance;



         j.   Tensile Canopies that project over outdoor
congregation areas.



(Amd. Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      2.   Uses Not Permitted in Building Setback Areas along
Streets.



      Parking lots or structures, drive-through facilities, loading
facilities or trash enclosures are not allowed within the setback area
between the building facade and the street. Drive-through facilities located
in the side-yard must provide an enhanced landscaping buffer with pedestrian
accommodation and amenities.



         Drop-off areas or drive-aisles are prohibited in the
setback between the building facade and the street. Drop-off areas or drive
aisles in the setback area are strongly



         discouraged and shall be allowed within the setback area
with a Variance only when there are no reasonable alternatives. The following
conditions shall be met if these uses are proposed in the setback area:



         a.   That these do not obstruct any direct connections
between the sidewalk along the street and the entrances to the building; and



         b.   That these are designed with special paving to
appear to be extensions of the sidewalk and instead of curbs, the drive-aisle
is differentiated with bollards, pavers etc. (Ord. 4210 – 12/18/06)



         c.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum with of 14' and a minimum turning radius of 20' from the
centerline of the drive aisle.



         d.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of 10' from
all property lines.



         e.   The drop-off area or drive aisle must be
constructed with decorative pavement or pervious pavers.



         f.   Any order windows and menu boxes must be designed
to integrate into the architecture of the building and appear ‘hidden' from
vehicular and pedestrian view.  All efforts should be made to keep the order
windows and menu boxes out of the setback between the building and the
street. 



            1.   Menu boxes must include masonry architectural
details, matching the materials and design of the building.



            2.   Menu boxes must be screened with landscaping
and/or masonry walls so they are not visible from the street.



            3.   Order windows must be designed with trim and
detail so they appear similar in appearance to other windows on the building.



         g.   The drop-off area or drive aisle must be screened
with a combination of masonry walls and/or decorative landscaping in order to
provide a solid buffer at a minimum height of 36".



         h.   The drop-off area or drive aisle shall not obstruct
any direct connections between the sidewalk along the street and the
entrances to the building and shall include crosswalks connection pedestrian
routes.



(Amd. Ord. 5126  9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      3.   Street Facing Building Facades.



         The addition of windows along building facades are
attractive, allow pedestrian views and daylight to the inside of the
building, especially on street facing building facades.



         a.   Each street facing non-residential building façade
on the ground floor shall be at least 35% transparent between four (4) feet
and eight (8) feet from adjacent grade.  Each façade shall be calculated
independently.



         b.   The bottom of any window used to satisfy these
transparency requirements may not be more than four (4) feet above adjacent
grade.



         c.   Adjacent grade shall be measured from within two
(2) feet of the facade.



         d.   Upper levels are also strongly encouraged to
maximize windows wherever possible.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      4.   Materials.



         a.   All buildings must be primarily of brick, or other
quality materials like stone, metal and glass on all sides.



         b.   Cinder or concrete blocks, plywood, vinyl siding,
and unfinished precast concrete are not permitted.



         c.   Decorative split face block, smooth or textured
synthetic plaster, and wood trim shall only be used for decorative accents,
and be limited in their use on street facing facades.



         d.   All new and replacement parking lot lighting shall
be ornamental (see below) subject to the provisions of Section 6-407.1. (Ord.
4769 – 12/3/12)



      5.   Entrances and Corner Features.



      Vertically articulated corner and entry features are strongly
encouraged for all buildings. Multiple entrances from the sidewalk and
parking areas are also strongly encouraged for pedestrian convenience.



   Examples of ornamental lighting in parking lots at Orland Crossing







      6.   Outdoor Seating.



         Outdoor seating shall have aisle widths of 36 inches or
more, and any fence, wall, landscaping or similar barrier installed in or
around the outdoor seating areas shall be not less than 24 inches in height
and not greater than 48 inches in height. The service of liquor will also
require conformance with the provisions outlined in Section 6-310 Fences, as
well as the requirements of the Village Code, as amended.  (Ord. 5017 -
8/17/15)



SECTION 6-213.   OPEN LANDS DISTRICT



(Entire Section Ord. 4217 - 2/5/07)



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of the Open Lands District is to protect
the Village's parks, natural areas, retention ponds, detention basins and
open land corridor connections.  It is also to ensure permanent access to
outdoor recreation and natural areas for residents in all neighborhoods and
to enhance the value of nearby properties. 



   B.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses may be established as
permitted uses in the OL District , in accordance with the procedures
established in Sections 5-101 through 5-104: 



      1.   Public recreational facilities including playgrounds,
public swimming pools, playing fields, trails, sports activities, outdoor
amphitheaters, camping areas, picnicking areas, boating areas, fishing
activities, golf courses and accessory uses such as related parking,
washrooms, storage, etc.       



      2.   Natural areas and passive parks for the purpose of
preservation of native flora and fauna and establishing wildlife corridors



      3.   Agricultural uses including cropfields, orchards,
vineyards, grazing and     



community gardens



      4.   Retention ponds and detention basins



      5.   ComEd transmission towers and lines, substations and
related facilities (including co-located wireless communication facilities)
within established easements on privately and publicly owned land.  (Ord.
4574 - 7/6/10)



      6.   Cemeteries including mausoleums, sepulchers, and related
structures on privately owned land only



   C.   Prohibited Uses.  The following uses are prohibited as they
would conflict with the purpose of protecting parks and natural areas:



      1.   Any private development of structures or facilities; the
exception is cemetery and ComEd facilities as stated above;



      2.   Any public facilities unrelated to the operation or
protection of parks, natural areas, and retention/detention facilities.



   D.   Minimum Lot Size.  There is no minimum lot size.



   E.   Setbacks.  Accessory buildings and structures cannot be placed
closer than five (5) feet from an adjacent property line.



SECTION 6-214.  REGIONAL MIXED-USE CAMPUS.



(Entire Section Ord. 5168 – 2/20/17)



   A.   Intent.



      These regulations for the Regional Mixed-Use Campus (RMC) are
intended to guide the development of a high-intensity, interrelated live /
work / learn / play district along Interstate 80 that emphasizes the
pedestrian experience and public gathering spaces, promotes the clustering of
various knowledge-based industries, respects the natural environment, and
establishes a physical form that engages visitors, employees and residents.



   B.   Applicability.



      The RMC District includes properties within the area loosely
bordered by LaGrange Road on the east, Interstate 80 to the south, 107th
Avenue to the west, and certain parcels on the north side of Orland Parkway.







   C.   Guiding Principles.



      1.   Places for People.



         For places to be well-used and well-loved, they must be
safe, comfortable, varied, and attractive for people.



      2.   Promote a Positive Image.



         Walkable mixed-use developments are attractive and
distinctive places that create a positive image for businesses, investors,
and residents. Developments within the RMC District shall strengthen this
positive image by shaping the public and private realm based upon the
overarching themes of innovation, accessibility, continuity, cooperation,
pedestrian amenities, and sustainability.



      3.   Cultivate the Public Realm.



         Plaza areas, entrances to buildings, and other gathering
places shall mark the origin and destination points of walking and bicycling
trips, and collectively define the shape and extent of a multi-modal
circulation system. Consistent landscaping, streetscape treatments, and
signage shall provide visual continuity throughout the District.



      4.   Lead with Sustainability.



         Compact mixed-use developments concentrate development
where the road, transit, and utility infrastructure can support it. Because
of its planned concentrated character, the RMC District shall be much more
energy efficient than the same amount of development built in a typical one-
and two-story, car-oriented style. Thus sustainability shall start at the
scale of the District - leveraging existing natural assets - and trickle down
and inform green tactics among the individual buildings. A system to award
the inclusion of such techniques should be considered.



      5.   Target Diverse Users of Varying Scales.



         Encourage and enable mixed-use, cluster development to
create active nodes of residential, office, retail, entertainment, advanced
manufacturing and other compatible uses. The aim is to foster a variety of
activity throughout the day and strengthen economic and knowledge spillover
among users of various scales and interests - ranging from established
corporations to start-ups. 



      6.   Promote Quality Urban Design & Architecture.



         Successful communities apply urban design principles to
orchestrate numerous physical and non-physical elements to create dynamic,
attractive places. This District shall use urban design methodologies to
enhance the inter-relationships between blocks, streets, open space, and
landscaping, and weave together different building forms and uses. Buildings
shall display a coherent and memorable aesthetic with coordinated design
details that create a consistent, attractive and welcoming built environment.



      7.   Incentivize Code Conformance.



         The Village shall reward those who strive to meet its
standards and regulations. Therefore, the length of review time and number of
meetings required to obtain project approval shall be based upon the degree
of conformance to this Code, with precise conformance resulting in a
relatively quick review process.



   D.   Development Objectives.



      1.   Interconnected Site Planning.



         Buildings shall be (1) located at the street edge and
clustered together with (2) shared parking facilities and (3) common amenity
space, including (4) regional stormwater detention facilities.



      2.   Life Between Buildings.



         The defining quality and character of the District shall be
the campus feel created through a network of (5) public plazas and open space
areas. The spaces between buildings shall flow together and provide visual
and physical connections for pedestrians.



      3.   Pedestrian Experience.



         Sidewalks and pathways are required to (6) connect the
street frontage to all front building entrances, parking areas, plazas, and
any other destination that generates pedestrian traffic.



      4.   Mix of Development Intensity.



         The vast majority of the District shall have no height
limit, thereby encouraging more intense development (7) appropriate next to
an interstate. Development of (8) low- and (9) medium-intensity structures
will be encouraged to co-locate and share common areas.



      5.   Target Knowledge-Based Industries.



         A broad spectrum of users are encouraged to congregate
within the District - office, retail, multi-family, entertainment, and
recreation - with a special emphasis on knowledge-intens ive sectors, such as
Class A office, research labs, advanced manufacturing (3D printing), and
business incubator facilities.











   E.   Process Overview.



      The following provides a concise overview of the general review
process.  The intent of this code is to reward those who strive to meet its
standards and regulations.  Therefore, the length of review time and number
of meetings required to obtain project approval shall be based upon the
degree of conformance to this Code, as determined by the Director of
Development Services.



      1.   Precise Conformance (Board Only).



         Site plan matches the development and redevelopment goals
of the Code, including use, site plan, massing, and architectural details. 
Proposal requires no variances and needs no special approvals. 



      2.   Moderate Conformance (Committee & Board Only).



         Site plan matches the spirit and intent of the Code, but
there are some qualitative differences that do not require a variance and
needs no special approvals.



      3.   Non-Conformance & Special Approvals (Full Process).



         Site plan does not meet the spirit or intent of the Code,
and/or requires a special approval, such as a Special Use Permit, map
amendment, and/or a variance.



   F.   Uses.



      1.   Permitted Uses.



         a.   Office, Research & Manufacturing.



            Offices



            Business incubator facilities



            Laboratories for research, development, testing, and
related production activities



            Medical research and manufacturing facilities,
including but not limited to pharmaceuticals, biomedical technologies,
medical instruments and supplies



            Printing, publishing, lithographing or similar



            Advanced manufacturing and assembly



         b.   Commercial.



            Commercial retail establishments - not exceeding
30,000 square feet of floor area



            Convenience stores



            Personal service establishments



            Restaurants - including outdoor seating



            Wineries and microbreweries under 12,000 square feet,
and distilleries under 5,000 square feet



            Financial institutions



            Hotels - not less than 50 rooms



            Convention centers, meeting space, and banquet
facilities



            Movie theaters - excluding drive-in theaters



            Indoor commercial recreation



            Day care facilities



            Health clubs and fitness centers



            Dry-cleaning and laundry



         c.   Civic & Institutional.



            Hospitals, medical rehabilitation centers and clinics
for the treatment of human ailments, no overnight stay



            Government uses, including offices, public schools,
parks, and municipal and recreational facilities, and incubator and research
facilities



            Boarding schools



            Colleges and universities, public and private,
including dormitories



            Structured parking - ancillary to a primary use



         d.   Residential.



            Attached dwellings - provided that no dwelling units
are located on the street level unless the dwelling units are part of a mixed
use development



      2.   Special Uses.



         a.   Office, Research & Manufacturing.



            Warehousing or distribution establishments



         b.   Commercial.



            Commercial retail establishments -exceeding 30,000
square feet of floor area



            Drive-through establishments (accessory to
restaurants, banks, pharmacies and all other uses)



         c.   Civic & Institutional.



            Hospitals, medical rehabilitation centers and clinics
for the treatment of human ailments, with overnight stay



            Vocational schools



            Theater, auditorium, museum, library, and other civic
and cultural facilities



            Stadia, auditoria and arenas



            Utility substations



            Public transportation facilities



            Wireless communication facilities



      3.   Prohibited Uses.



         Adult regulated uses



         Automobile/gasoline service stations



         Automobile car wash (either manual or automatic)



         Automobile repair shops (including bodywork)



         Automobile rental



         Building material sales



         Congregate senior housing



         Contractors or construction offices



         Funeral homes, mortuaries, and cremation facilities



         Furniture stores



         Greenhouses, garden centers, and landscape nurseries



         Gun dealer/shooting range



         Industrial facility (heavy)



         Kennel/pound



         Machinery and equipment rental and sales



         Motel or motor inn



         Plumbing, heating, air conditioning sales and service



         Second hand stores, flea markets, pawn shops



         Self-service storage facility



         Tattoo parlor



         Truck depot/truck stop



   G.   Private Lot Standards.



      1.   Land Use Intensity.



         This District shall have no restrictions on density or
floor-area-ratio (FAR).



      2.   Land Area Requirements.



         No minimum or maximum lot size.



      3.   Lot Width Requirements.



         No minimum or maximum lot width.



      4.   Maximum Lot Coverage.



         No more than eighty percent (80%) of the area of the parcel
may be covered with building, pavement and storm water storage, leaving at
least twenty percent (20%) of total parcel area in green space.



      5.   Maximum Building Height.



         a.   Properties North of Orland Parkway: 10-stories or
120 feet, whichever is less.



         b.   Properties South of Orland Parkway: 15-stories or
180 feet, whichever is less.



      6.   Dimensional Requirements.



         Figure 6-214.G.6 and Figure 6-214.G.6 establish the
dimensional regulations for the District, with the following special
provisions:



         a.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the length of the
property line along the primary street frontage, excluding driveways, shall
be occupied by the facade of the building.



         b.   No more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot
frontage of a site along a public right-of-way shall be devoted to parking or
service.



         c.   Where a plaza is between the building and the
street, the actual maximum building setbacks from the public right-of-way
shall be the depth of the plaza.







 



      7.    Encroachments into Setbacks.







      8.    Outdoor Seating.



         Outdoor seating shall have aisle widths of thirty-six (36)
inches or more, and any fence, wall, landscaping or similar barrier installed
in or around the outdoor seating areas shall be not less than twenty-four
(24) inches in height and not greater than forty-eight (48) inches in height.
The service of liquor will also require conformance with the provisions
outlined in Section 6-310 Fences, as well as the requirements of the Village
Code, as amended. 



      9.   Shared Parking Facilities.



         Large surface parking lots are not appropriate to the scale
and character of this district. To promote smaller lots, shared parking,
on-street parking and the shared use of public parking facilities,
developments will be allowed to reduce the on-site parking requirements
outlined in Section 6-306.B by up to twenty-five percent (25%).



   H.   Design Standards.



      1.   General Layout and Street Pattern.



         a.   Buildings shall be (1) located at the street edge
and clustered together with (2) shared parking facilities and (3) common
amenity space.



         b.   Various land uses shall be laid out and spaced to
make walking from one land use to any other land uses as easy as possible.



         c.   Streets shall be laid out to create blocks, and
blocks shall not exceed 600 feet in length before being interrupted by a
street intersection.



         d .   Streets shall be extended to abutting properties
in logical locations, as determined by the Village. When warranted by unique
circumstances, the Village may allow driveways to be used instead of streets
for these connections, provided cross access for the driveway is guaranteed
to the abutting property.











      2.    Pedestrian Design Standards.



         a.    Sidewalks with a minimum width of six (6) feet are
required along all street frontages and interior access roads.



         b.    Sidewalks are required to connect the street
frontage to all front building entrances, parking areas, plazas, and any
other destination that generates pedestrian traffic. Sidewalks shall connect
to existing sidewalks on abutting tracts and other nearby pedestrian
destination points.



      3.   Open Space and Plaza Design Standards.



         a.   Required open space areas shall only consist of (1)
plazas, (2) central greens, playgrounds, trails, greenways with trails,
pedestrian malls, promenades, picnic areas, and other similar types of
usable, public space.



         b.   Plazas shall meet the following requirements:



            i.   Developments shall provide 1 square foot of
plaza area for every forty (40) square feet of gross building floor area;
however, developments with less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area
are not required to provide any plaza area. Because of limits on the maximum
size of plazas, more than one plaza area may be required in larger
developments.



            ii.   Individual plazas shall be no smaller than
2,500 square feet and no larger than 75,000 square feet.



            iii.   Plazas shall be surrounded on all sides by
either (3) streets or the (4) front facades of buildings.



            iv.   At least twenty-five percent (25%), but no
more than eighty percent (80%), of the plaza shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs, and mixed plantings with year round interest.



            v.   The plaza shall not be used for parking,
loading, or vehicular access, except emergency and maintenance vehicular
access.



            vi.    Plazas shall include a defining central
element, such as a large fountain, sculpture, gazebo, pond, or similar
feature.











      4.    Parking Design Standards.



         a.   Surface Parking.



            i.    Surface parking lots shall be located to the
(1) rear of principal buildings or to the side. Surface parking (including
drive-aisles) shall not be located between a building and a street.



            ii.   Surface parking lots visible from a street
shall be continuously screened by a four (4) foot-high wall/fence, berm or
hedge.



            iii.   Surface parking lots within a block in
development shall be interconnected by access driveways.



            iv.   Each lot shall provide (2) cross-access
easements for its parking areas and access driveways guaranteeing access to
adjacent lots within the same block. Interconnections shall be logically
placed and easily identifiable to ensure convenient traffic flow.



         b.   Structured Parking.



            i.   Except for their pedestrian and vehicular
entrances, structured parking garages, or structured parking within a
principal building, that is located within fifty (50) feet of a street
curb-line at street level shall have (3) office, entertainment,
institutional, apartment lobby, retail, restaurant, or a related use in
occupied space along seventy percent (70%) of the first floor of the
structured parking that faces the street.



            ii.   Cars shall generally be screened from the
street through features such as grills, lattices, (4) mock windows, louvers,
false facades, etc. Such screening shall be in keeping with the rest of the
building's architectural style and materials. Landscape screening is required.











      5.   Building Design Standards.



         a.   Building Orientation and Entrances.



            i.   Front facades of buildings shall be (1)
oriented towards existing and proposed streets, with an everyday entrance in
the front facade. Buildings with multiple front facades shall have entrances
in each front facade, corner entrances, or, if permitted by the Village,
entrances in only some of the front facades.



            ii.   All primary building entrances shall be (2)
accentuated. Permitted entrance accents may include: recessed, protruding,
canopy, portico, or overhang.



            iii.   Loading doors, service doors, and loading
docks shall not be located in any facade facing a street or any portion of a
facade within 35 feet of a street, plaza or outdoor gathering area.



         b.   Walls and Windows.



            i.   Blank walls shall not be permitted along any
exterior wall facing a street.  Walls in these locations shall comprise a
minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) window area.



            ii.   Ground floor (3) facades of retail,
restaurant, office and related uses facing a street shall comprise a minimum
of fifty percent (50%) clear window area, with windows providing views of
display areas or the inside of the building.



            iii.    Smoked, reflective, or black glass in
windows is prohibited.











   I.   Supplemental Standards for Special Uses.



      1.   Warehousing or Distribution Establishments.



         a.    Minimum Lot Size: one (1) acre.



         b.    Maximum Lot Size: three (3) acres.



         c.    Cannot be located within 200 feet of a public
right-of-way.



         d.   The building height shall not exceed forty-eight
(48) feet.



         e.   All exterior portions and/or facades, including the
roof, shall use colors consisting of a neutral earth tone.



         f.   Storage bay doors shall not face any abutting
property located, nor shall they be visible from any public street.



         g.   No outside storage shall be permitted.



      2.   Drive-Through Establishments (Accessory to Restaurants,
Banks, Pharmacies and All Other Uses).



         a.   Drive through facilities cannot be located on the
building face which fronts a public street.



         b.   The drive through should be designed as a single
lane with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet and a minimum turning radius
of 20' from the centerline of the drive aisle.



         c.   Drive through lanes must be a minimum of ten (10)
feet from all property lines.



         d.   Drive through lanes must be constructed with
decorative pavement or pervious pavers.



      3.   Commercial Retail Establishments - Exceeding 30,000
Square Feet of Floor Area.



         a.   Buildings shall be designed to achieve a
fine-grained texture by dividing large facades into the appearance of several
sections or smaller buildings to avoid the appearance of a large, monotonous
building mass.



         b.   Buildings must have at least a three (3) foot break
in depth in all front facades for every 100 feet of continuous facade.



         c.   In addition to the required three (3) foot break,
building facades of 200 feet or more facing a street, surface parking lot, or
walking area shall include design elements that will break up the facade,
such as awnings, canopies, towers, bays, gables, changes in materials,
changes in facade treatments, etc.



      4.   Hospitals, Medical Rehabilitation Centers and Clinics for
the Treatment of Human Ailments, With Overnight Stay.



         a.   Structured parking shall be provided to accommodate
at least seventy-five percent (75%) of required on-site parking.



PART 3: REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY



SECTION 6-301.   BULK REGULATIONS.



(Entire Section moved to 6-104 - Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



SECTION 6-302.   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES.



   A.   General Requirements.  No land or structure shall be used,
developed, or occupied unless all accessory uses and structures conform to
all applicable requirements of these regulations. The remaining subsections
of this Section establish additional requirements and restrictions for
particular accessory uses and structures.  Any accessory use or structure
shall be required to obtain the same type of approval under Article 5 of
these regulations as the principal use would have to obtain.  Any accessory
use or structure may be approved in conjunction with approval of the
principal use.  No accessory use or structure shall be approved,
established, or constructed before the principal use is approved in
accordance with these regulations.



   B.   Accessory Dwellings.  An accessory dwelling shall be permitted
in any residential district in accordance with the requirements that
follow.  Except as provided for in Subsection 7, below, all accessory
dwellings shall be located within the primary dwelling.



      1.   The principal use of the lot shall be a detached dwelling.



      2.   No more than one (1) accessory dwelling shall be located
on a lot.



      3.   The accessory dwelling shall be owned by the same person
as the principal dwelling.



      4.   The accessory dwelling shall not be served by a driveway
that is separate from the driveway that serves the principal dwelling.



      5.   The accessory dwelling shall have a floor area no greater
than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling.



      6.   If the entrance to the accessory dwelling is separate
from the entrance to the principal dwelling, then that entrance shall not
face any street on which the lot fronts.  (Ord. 2462 - 10/18/93)



      7.   If the dwelling will be in a separate accessory
structure, then that structure shall also serve as a garage for residents of
the principal dwelling.



   C.   Permitted Accessory Structures and Uses. The following tables
summarize the accessory structures listed in Section C. Please refer to the
text following the tables for further details:



   Table 6-302.C.1(A) – Attached Accessory Structures



Note: Table 6-302.C.1(A) is available in printer-friendly PDF format, click
HERE



 

Permitted Structures
P = Permitted
PC = Permitted with Conditions
NP = Not permitted
 

Residential Zoning Districts

 

Mixed Use Zoning Districts

 
Non-Residential Zoning Districts
 
Setbacks Permitted
F = Front
S = Side
R = Rear
* = specific limits
 
Specific Standards
See Section:



E-1

 

R-1

 

R-2 & R-2A

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

LSPD

 

OOH

 

COR

 

ORI

 

VCD

 

RSB

 

BIZ

 

MFG

 

OL





Air Conditioning
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

R

 
6-302.C.1


Awnings, Marquees, and Canopies
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.3


Balconies
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.4


Bay Windows
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.6


Chimneys
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

S*, R

 
6-302.C.7


Decks
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.42


Eaves and Gutters
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.9


Fire Escapes
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R

 
6-302.C.11


Garages–See Section 6-302.C.13
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 


Green Roof/Eco-Roof
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N/A

 
6-302.H.1.c


Ornamental Lights
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F, S, R

 
6-302.C.22


Ornamental Features of the Principal Structure including Sills, Belt Courses
& Cornices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.35


Patios
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.25


Porches
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

R*

 
6-302.C.29


Satellite Dishes
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

R

 
6-311


Steps (open)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F, S, R

 
6-302.C.37


Television and Radio Antennae
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

R

 
6-302.C.40


Tensile Canopies
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

PC

 

NP

 

PC

 

NP

 

PC

 

NP

 

PC

 

NP

 

NP

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.43


Terraces
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.42




 



   Table 6-302.C.1(B) – Detached Accessory Structures



Note: Table 6-302.C.1(B) is available in printer-friendly PDF format, click
HERE



 


Permitted Structures
P = Permitted
PC = Permitted with Conditions
NP = Not permitted

 

Residential Zoning Districts

 

Mixed Use Zoning Districts

 
Non-Residential Zoning Districts
 
Setbacks Permitted
F = Front
S = Side
R = Rear
* = specific limits
 
Specific Standards
See Section:



E-1

 

R-1

 

R-2 & R-2A

 

R-3 & R-3A

 

R-4

 

LSPD

 

OOH

 

COR

 

ORI

 

VCD

 

RSB

 

BIZ

 

MFG

 

OL





Arbors, Pergolas and Trellises
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

S*, R*

 
6-302.C.2


Basketball Poles, Courts and Hoops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

F, S, R

 
6-302.C.5


Dumpsters, Garbage Containers and Enclosures
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

S, R

 
6-302.C.146-302.D6-304.C.8


Fences
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-310


Flagpoles
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.10


Garages – See Section 6-302.C.13
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
6-302.C.13


Geothermal Energy Systems
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F, S, R

 
6-314.F


Green Roof/Eco-Roof
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

N/A

 
6-302.H.1.c


Ice Skating Rinks
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

R*

 
6-302.C.17


Lawn Furniture
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F, S, R

 
6-302.C.18


Lawn Sprinklers
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

F, R

 
6-302.C.19


Laundry Drying Equipment
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

S, R

 
6-302.C.20


Mailboxes
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F, S

 
6-302.C.21


Outdoor Fireplaces
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

R*

 
6-302.C.23


Outside Storage
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.I


Parking Lots
 

PC

 

PC`

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-306


Pet Shelters
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

R

 
6-302.E


Playgrounds
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

S*, R*

 
6-302.C.27


Playhouses, Treehouses and Open-Sided Summer Houses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

S*, R*

 
6-302.C.28


Rain Barrels and Rain Gardens
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

S*, R*

 
6-302.H.1.h


Retaining Walls
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.31


Sheds and Storage Buildings
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

R*

 
6-302.C.33


Signs
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F, S, R

 
6-307


Solar Energy Systems
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-314.E


Stadia and Auditoria (accessory to schools only)
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.F


Storm Water Cistern
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

S*, R*

 
6-302.H.1.j


Swimming Pools
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

NP

 

PC

 

NP

 

NP

 

PC

 

R*

 
6-310.1


Tennis Courts
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

NP

 

PC

 

NP

 

NP

 

PC

 

R*

 
6-302.C.41


Vending Machines
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

NP

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-302.C.45


Wind Energy Conversion Systems
 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

PC

 

F*, S*, R*

 
6-314.D




 



      1.   Air Conditioning: May project into all rear setbacks and
may project into side yard only if it is not a required setback.



      2.   Arbors, Pergolas and Trellises:  Are not allowed in
front setback between building and property line and shall be five (5) feet
from the property line. Arbors and trellises shall not exceed eight (8) feet
in height; pergolas shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.  (Ord. 5167
– 2/20/17)



      3.   Awnings, Marquees, and Canopies:   May project not more
than three (3) feet into front (including approved existing front setbacks
which are less than the required front setback), side and rear setbacks. 
(Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      4.   Balconies:   May project not more than three (3) feet
into a front (including approved existing front setbacks which are less than
the required front setbacks), side or rear setback.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      5.   Basketball Poles, Courts and Hoops:   May be permitted
on driveways in front, side and rear setbacks of all zoning districts except
the BIZ General Business District and Village Center District.  No lights
shall be permitted accessory to the court.  (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93)



      6.   Bay Windows:   May project not more than three (3) feet
into a front (including approved existing front setbacks which are less than
the required front setbacks), side or rear setback.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      7.   Chimneys:   Attached chimneys and foundations for
attached chimneys may project not more than twenty-four (24) inches into a
side setback, and may be permitted in rear setbacks.



      8.   Decks: See Terraces.  (Ord. 4373 - 6/2/08)



      9.   Eaves and Gutters:   On principal buildings or attached
accessory buildings may project not more than four (4) feet into a front
(including approved existing front setbacks which are less than the required
front setbacks) and rear setback, and not more than twenty-four (24) inches
into a side setback.  (Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



      10.   Fences:   May be permitted in front, side and rear
setbacks, in accordance with the provisions of Section 6-310.



      11.   Fire Escapes:   Open or enclosed, may be permitted in
rear setbacks, and may project into a required front setback or side setback
adjoining a street not more than five (5) feet, and into a required interior
side setback not more than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet.



      12.   Flagpoles:   May be permitted in front, side, or rear
setbacks, but no more than ten feet (10') from the front of a building, no
higher than eighteen (18) feet, and the flag shall be no larger than
twenty-five (25) square feet.  No more than one (1) flagpole is permitted
per residential lot.



      13.   Garages:



         a.   In the E-1 Estate Residential District detached and
attached garages are both allowed on the same property. In the R-1, R-2,
R-2A, R-3, R-3A Residential Districts and the OOH Historic District either an
attached garage or a detached garage is allowed, but not both on the same
property when under 21,780 square feet. In the OOH Historic District, the
attached garage may front-load to the right-of-way if it is at least 25 feet
behind the street-facing façade.  (Ord. 4373 - 6/2/08)



         b.   Attached garages shall not exceed 50% of first
floor gross area of the entire building including the garage, with the
maximum size of the garage not to exceed 1,500 square feet.  (Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



         c.   Detached garages may be permitted in rear and side
setbacks within five (5) feet of the lot lines subject to staying outside of
existing easements. (Ord. 4373 – 6/2/08)



         d.   Detached garages on single family lots in the R-2,
R-3 and R-4 Districts may not exceed 720 square feet in size.  Detached
garages may be no higher than thirteen (13) feet to the mean height or
sixteen (16) feet to the mean height in Old Orland Historic District, unless
a second story is added over the garage, or it is to be used as an accessory
dwelling (see Section 6-302.B) or as additional space for uses such as
personal office, weight room, hobby space etc. subject to Section 6-303. In
no case may it be higher than two stories or 17 feet to the mean height.   
(Ord.2959 – 11/18/96; Amd. Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 3837 –
12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 4015 – 5/2/05; Amd. Ord. 4125 – 4/17/06; Amd. Ord.
4210 – 12/18/06; Amd. Ord. 4373 – 6/2/08; Amd. Ord, 4574 – 7/6/10; Amd.
Ord. 4996 – 6/15/15)



         e.   In the E-1 District, one attached and one detached
garage no larger than 1,000 square feet each is allowed per dwelling unit. 
In the R-1 Districts, one attached or detached garage no larger than 800
square feet is allowed per dwelling unit. Detached garages may be no higher
than thirteen (13) feet to the mean height.  (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93; Amd.
Ord. 4015 – 5/2/05; Amd. Ord. 4210 – 12/18/06; Amd. Ord. 4373 – 6/2/08;
Amd. Ord. 4996 – 6/15/15)



         f.   In any subdivision or development located in a
Residential District, which subdivision or development was finally approved
by the corporate authorities of the Village subsequent to January 1, 2000,
and for which subdivision or development building permits had been issued on
or before March 19, 2008, attached garages are permitted to encroach into the
front setback, but outside of any existing easement, by no more than five (5)
feet. (Ord. 4926 – 9/15/14)



      14.   Garbage Containers and Enclosures:   May not be stored
in residential front setbacks. Also, see Section 6-302.D.  (Ord. 3199 -
11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      15.   Geothermal Energy Systems: See Section 6-314
Environmental Technology Standards.  (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      16.   Green Roof/ Eco-Roof: See Section 6-302.I.  (Ord. 4574
- 7/6/10)



      17.   Ice Skating Rinks: May be permitted in rear setbacks in
all districts except the BIZ General Business District, Village Center
District and the (8/02) MFG Manufacturing District, and must be at least ten
(10) feet from the side and rear lot line.  (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      18.   Lawn Furniture:   Including benches, sun dials, bird
baths, statues and similar architectural features may be permitted in rear,
side and front setbacks.



      19.   Lawn Sprinklers:  Lawn sprinklers and irrigation
systems are allowed in the front and rear yards.  Lawn sprinkler heads may
be permitted in public parkways (at the risk of the private property owner)
but must be either installed along the sidewalk's edge when available or
setback a minimum of three (3) feet from the curb of the street.  Private
property owners with sprinklers installed in the public right-of-way are
responsible for any damage incurred by any public work maintaining
right-of-way infrastructure (i.e. snow plowing, water/sewer maintenance
etc.).  (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



      20.   Laundry drying equipment: May be permitted in side and
rear setbacks in all districts except the BIZ General Business District,
Village Center District and the MFG Manufacturing District, so long as they
are located at least five (5) feet within the lot lines and do not obstruct
storm water flow. (Ord.2746 - 6/5/95)



      21.   Mailboxes:   May be permitted in any front and side
setbacks.  Mailboxes damaged beyond repair by Village personnel or their
agents in the performance of their duty shall be replaced by a standard 4 x 4
wood post and support and a standard metal type mailbox, model type 1C. 
Structures shall be no greater than 54" in height, 34" in width (parallel to
the street), or 24" in depth.  No mailbox structure base can be closer than
12" to the back of curb for the first 36" above grade.  No mailbox or
mailbox structure shall be permitted to contain any electrical or plumbing. 
Mailboxes shall be used only for the purposes of mail delivery.  The bottom
of the mailbox shall be 40" - 44" above the grade.  The front of the mailbox
shall be even with the back of curb.  (Ord. 3242  - 4/19/99 & Ord. 3281 -
8/16/99) 



      22.   Ornamental Lights:  May be permitted in front, side,
and rear setbacks subject to lighting standards provided in Section
6-407.1.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      23.   Outdoor Fireplaces:   May be permitted in rear setbacks
at least five (5) feet from the lot line in all districts except the BIZ
General Business District, Village Center District and except as otherwise
permitted for outdoor eating areas in commercial districts.  (Ord. 2462 -
10/18/93)



      24.   Parking Lots: May be permitted only as accessory uses
and structures to a principal structure. Accessory parking lots shall be
either pervious or impervious but shall not be made of gravel, dirt or other
aggregate/loose material. They shall be asphalt, concrete, paver or similarly
firm material and comply with the landscaping, parking and lot coverage
regulations of this Code accordingly. (Ord. 4996 – 6/15/15)



      25.   Patios: See Terraces.  (Ord. 4373 – 6/2/08)



      26.   Pet Shelters:  May be permitted in rear setbacks of all
districts except the BIZ General Business District and Village Center
District.  (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93)



      27.   Playgrounds:  May be permitted in side and rear
setbacks in all districts except the MFG Manufacturing District, so long as
they are located at least five (5) feet within the lot lines and do not
obstruct storm water flow.  (Ord. 2756 – 6/5/95)



      28.   Playhouses, Treehouses and Open-Sided Summer Houses: 
May be permitted in side and rear setbacks in all districts except the BIZ
General Business District, Village Center District and the MFG Manufacturing
District, so long as they are located at least five (5) feet within the lot
lines and do not obstruct storm water flow.  (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93)



      29.   Porches: See Terraces.  (Ord. 4373 – 6/2/08)



      30.   Rain Barrels and Rain Gardens: See Section 6-302.I. 
(Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      31.   Retaining Walls:  May be permitted in front, side, and
rear setbacks, so long as they are located at least three (3) feet inside the
lot lines and do not obstruct storm water flow. Retaining walls shall be
limited to a maximum three (3) feet in height.  Any retaining wall in a side
yard associated with a side loading garage or driveway cannot exceed two (2)
feet in height, nor be closer than three (3) feet to the nearest side
property line.  When the consequence of grading land results in the
necessity for a total retaining wall height greater than three (3) feet, the
retaining wall must be tiered and each wall on the tiered retaining wall
system shall be limited to three (3) feet in height.  The formula for
determining the tiered wall setback shall be two (2) times the lower wall
height. A structural permit is required if the retaining wall system exceeds
three (3) feet (triggering the need for a second wall or more) in total
height.



(Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 4373 – 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4738 – 6/18/12)



      32.   Satellite Dishes:  May be permitted in rear setbacks. 
See Section 6-311 for further requirements on satellite dishes.  (Ord. 2462
– 10/18/93)



      33.   Sheds and Storage Buildings:  May be permitted in rear
setbacks so long as they are:



         a.   Limited to one (1) per lot and not exceeding two
hundred (200) square feet. Sheds and storage buildings exceeding (100) square
feet for non-residential uses must be constructed with primary material that
match the principal structure;  (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93)



         b.   Located off easements, at least five (5) feet from
the lot lines and do not obstruct storm water flow; and no closer than ten
(10) feet to the principal building; and



         c.   Do not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height to the
highest point of the roof. The height of a shed shall not exceed the height
of the top of the roof of the principal structure of the parcel on which it
is located.



         (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      34.   Signs:  May be permitted in front, side and rear
setbacks, as provided in Section 6-307.



      35.   Sills, Belt Courses, Cornices and Other Ornamental
Features of the Principal Structure:  May be permitted in front, side, and
rear setbacks, so long as they do not project more than eighteen (18) inches
into a setback.



      36.   Solar Energy Systems: See Section 6-314 Environmental
Technology Standards.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      37.   Steps, open:  May be permitted in front, side, and rear
setbacks. 



      38.   Storm Water Cistern: See Section 6-302.I.  (Ord. 4574
– 7/6/10)



      39.   Swimming Pools:  See Section 6-310.1 Swimming Pools.
May be permitted in rear setbacks in all districts except the BIZ General
Business District, Village Center District and the (8/02) MFG Manufacturing
District, and must be at least ten (10) feet from the side and rear lot
line.  (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93; Amd. Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      40.   Television and Radio Antennae:  May be permitted in
rear setbacks and on (8/02) roofs, but may be no higher than forty-five (45)
feet if ground mounted or ten (10) feet higher than the peak of the roof if
roof mounted.



      41.   Tennis Courts:  May be permitted in rear setbacks, not
less than five (5) feet from the lot line in all districts except the BIZ
General Business District, Village Center District and MFG Manufacturing
District.  No lights shall be permitted accessory to the court.  A fence
may be located at the perimeter of a tennis court subject to the following
conditions:  (Ord. 2462 – 10/18/93; Amd. Ord. 3837 – 12/1/03)



         a.   No such fence shall exceed 10 feet in height.



         b.   Materials for tennis court fences may include green
vinyl coated chain link or a comparable material as may be determined
appropriate by the Development Services Director.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



         c.   The view of tennis court fences from adjacent
properties shall be obscured by the planting of shrubbery, evergreen trees,
or comparable plant materials subject to the approval of the Development
Services Director.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      42.   Tensile Canopies: Tensile Canopies shall be permitted
with the following regulations:



         a.   The Tensile Canopy shall not extend more than fifty
percent (50%) or fifteen (15) feet into the setback area, whichever is less;



         b.   A minimum of forty four (44) inches of unobstructed
width of the sidewalk shall be maintained from the subject curb line;



         c.   A minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet
shall be maintained in all areas below the Tensile Canopy;



         d.   The Tensile Canopy width shall not exceed seventy
five percent (75%) of the subject building face;



         e.   All Tensile Canopy materials and structures shall
comply with the rules and regulations set forth in Chapter 5 (Fire Code) of
the Village Code of Ordinances; and



         f.   All Tensile Canopy materials and structures shall
be removed from November 1st to May 1st of the following year.  (Ord. 5167
– 2/20/17)



      43.   Terraces, Patios, Porches and Decks:  May be permitted
to project not more than five (5) feet into a front (including approved
existing front setbacks which are less than the required front setbacks)
setback in front of the building line, and terraces, patios, and decks may be
permitted up to five (5) feet from the rear and side lot lines. Porches may
be permitted to project not more than five (5) feet into a rear setback
behind the building line.  (Ord. 3199 – 11/16/98; Amd. Ord. 3281 –
8/16/99; Amd. Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16)



      44.   Underground Storm Water Cistern/Dry Well: See Section
6-302.I.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10; Amd. Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16)



      45.   Vending Machines: Permitted for non-residential uses in
the VC, BIZ, COR and ORI districts, and must be positioned as close to the
building as possible and meet the requirements of the Village Code and
applicable rules and regulations.  (Ord. 4880 – 2/3/14; Amd. Ord. 5126 –
9/19/16)



      46.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems: See Section 6-314
Environmental Technology Standards.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10; Amd. Ord. 5126
– 9/19/16)



   D.   Dumpsters and Trash Handling Areas.   The following
requirements shall apply to walls and fences surrounding dumpsters and trash
handling areas accessory to any multi-family or nonresidential use:



      1.   Except as provided below, any dumpster, grease
receptacles or trash handling areas shall be screened from view from public
streets and any abutting properties by three opaque walls and an opaque gate.
All dumpsters and grease receptacles shall have lids that remain closed and
remain inside garbage enclosure area at all times unless in use.  (Amd. Ord.
4926 – 9/15/14; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      2.   Except as provided in (4) (below) for industrial uses,
any wall around a dumpster or trash handling area (enclosure) accessory to a
new multi-family or a nonresidential use shall be constructed in a durable
fashion of brick, stone, or other masonry materials with no greater than
twenty-five (25) percent of the wall surface left open.  The wall shall be
constructed of the same building material and in the same architectural style
as the principal structure.  Existing multi-family or nonresidential uses
may construct enclosures using either wood or beige vinyl material as
replacements to either wood or chain link existing enclosures or
non-conforming trash handling areas.  Existing masonry enclosures may only
be replaced by other masonry enclosures.  (Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98; Amd. Ord.
4015 - 5/2/05; Amd. Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



      3.   Any wall required under this Section shall have a height
no greater than eight  (8) feet and no less than six (6) feet.  For other
fence heights see Section 6-310.  (Ord.2959 - 11/18/96 & Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02;
Amd. Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



      4.   Any wall around a dumpster or trash handling area
accessory to an industrial use shall be allowed to be constructed using walls
of materials matching the primary building or wood doors with masonry support
posts.  (Ord. 4015 - 5/2/05)



   E.   Pet Shelters.  Pens, runs, cages, houses or other facilities
for the keeping of dogs, cats, and other small animals shall be permitted as
an accessory use in any district in accordance with the following
requirements:



      1.   Any structure for the keeping of animals, except for
fences along property lines, shall be located between the principal structure
and the rear lot line and shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to
any rear or side lot line.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



      2.   Extensions of or additions to property line fences to
confine animals to a part of the property abutting the lot line shall not be
permitted.



      3.   Any fence required under this Section shall have a height
no greater than six (6) feet.



      4.   No such accessory use shall be operated for commercial
purposes as a regular source of income.



   F.   Stadia and Auditoria.   Stadia and auditoria that are
accessory to schools are permitted, provided that:



      1.   The use shall be located on a lot of at least twenty (20)
acres;



      2.   Vehicular access to the use shall not be provided by way
of a local street;



      3.   No direct beams of light from outdoor lighting fixtures,
signs or vehicles maneuvering on the site shall shine into any abutting
property located in a residential district; and



      4.   Off-street parking areas and accessways shall be designed
to allow direct public transit service to the use.



   G.   Automobile Rental.



      1.   Automobile rental shall be permitted as an accessory use
where the principal use is a retail automobile dealership, a commercial
retail establishment or an overnight accommodation.



      2.   Where the principal use is an overnight accommodation,
automobile rental shall be permitted as an accessory use only in accordance
with the following requirements:



         a.   No sign advertising the rental of automobiles shall
be located outside the overnight accommodation; and



         b.   No more than ten (10) automobiles that are not
currently leased to customers shall be parked on the same property as the
overnight accommodation.



   H.   Storm Water Best Management Practices. (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      1.   Best Management Practices. The following list of best
management practices serves to encourage residents and businesses to employ
clean technologies for local water quality improvements and storm water
management. For more information on best management practices, contact the
Development Services Department and reference the most up to date Village of
Orland Park Storm Water Management Technical Guidance Manual (TGM).



      a.   Bio-Swale. A bio-swale is a shallow drainage conveyance
trench or shoulder with a gentle slope designed to slowly transport and treat
run-off. A swale looks similar to a ditch, but is slightly wider and may use
berms and/or check dams to promote settling and infiltration.



      b.   Flow-Through Planter. A flow-through planter is a
structure or container placed above or below ground and filled with gravel,
soil and vegetation. Run-off is temporarily stored above the soil and slowly
filters down. Water that is not absorbed by the soils or plants is collected
in a perforated pipe at the bottom of the planter and routed to a drain
system or network of planters. These are effective for compact sites, next to
building foundations or other locations where infiltration may be problematic
or soils are poor-draining. Flow-through planters are permitted for all
commercial sites.



      c.   Green Roof/ Eco-Roof. A green roof uses living plant
material as part of the roofing system. Green roofs generally include a
waterproof membrane, root barrier, thermal insulation, drainage system,
filter layer, growing medium and living plant material. The plants, roots,
and soil filters detain and absorb rainwater, slowing, cleansing and cooling
the run-off. Roof gardens can be either extensive (soil depths three to four
inches) or intensive (soil depths six inches or greater). Green roofs are
permitted in all zoning districts.



      d.   Infiltration Planters. An infiltration planter is a
structure or container with an open bottom that is filled with a layer of
soil and vegetation. Run-off is diverted into the planter and temporarily
stored above the soil before infiltrating down into existing soils. This can
be employed in space-limited sites where run-off is received by a piped inlet
or sheet-flow, such as parking lot islands, plazas and walkways. If the soil
does not drain well or infiltration is not desired, a perforated pipe
under-drain can connect to storm sewers or defined, stabilized discharge
point.



         Infiltration Trench. An infiltration trench is a shallow
trench filled with stone, sand or rock to create a small reservoir for
run-off until it infiltrates into the soil or is released slowly into a storm
drain system, usually over a period of several days. Underground infiltration
trenches are effective for compact sites with limited space. Trenches should
be covered with stone, grass and small plants or shrubs to better incorporate
into the urban landscape. Shallow, wide trenches (as opposed to narrow, deep
trenches) are best for removing pollutants.



         e.   Native Landscaping. See Section 6-305, Landscape
and Tree Preservation.”  (Amd. Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



      f.   Permeable Pavers. A series of interlocking concrete
pavers that contain drainage voids for passing runoff to the sub-surface,
where the water is further conveyed through base materials into the ground or
storm drain system. Permeable pavers can be used in parking lots, private
roads, and private sidewalks where no chemicals or other hazardous materials
are used. In areas where soils do not drain freely, permeable pavement can be
used in combination with sub-surface storm drain systems.



      g.   Porous Pavement. Porous pavement is a mixed and placed
hard surface that allows water to infiltrate across the entire area. The
pavement is made without fine sand or small aggregate to create void spaces
that allow rain and snow melt to pass through to a bed of open-graded
aggregate beneath the pervious pavement. Storm water is then stored until it
infiltrates into the underlying soils. Permeable paving should not be used in
areas with the potential for high pollutant loads or high traffic/ high speed
because its load-bearing capacity is typically less than conventional
pavement.



      h.   Rain Barrels. Rain barrels are designed to collect storm
water from residential single family home and condominium rooftops and stored
for later irrigation and non-potable uses in buildings. Rain barrels that
contain up to 55 gallons are permitted in all zoning districts.



         1.   Setbacks. Rain barrels may project up to three (3')
feet beyond the established building side and rear yard setbacks.



      i.   Rain Garden (Bio-Retention). A rain garden is a shallow
depression that captures storm water run-off from roofs, driveways, streets
and parking lots allowing it to infiltrate into the soil. 



         These gardens typically utilize a modified soil mixture to
ensure that the gardens soak up the water within a two-day period. Many are
designed to have overflow outlet during heavy rainfall events. Rain gardens
may be planted with shrubs, perennials or native wildflowers and grasses to
increase infiltration and attract biodiversity. Rain gardens typically absorb
30% more storm water than conventional lawns. Rain gardens are permitted in
all zoning districts.



      j.   Storm Water Cisterns. Storm water cisterns are designed
to collect storm water runoff from non-residential and mixed-use rooftops and
stored for later irrigation and non-potable uses in buildings. Above ground
storm water cisterns that contain up to 10,000 gallons are permitted in the
LSPD, BIZ, COR, VC, ORI, MFG and R-4 zoning districts.



         1.   Height. Storm water cisterns may not extend beyond
the roofline of the building's height or 40 feet, whichever is lesser.



         2.   Setbacks. Storm water cisterns may project up to
ten (10') feet beyond the established building side and rear yard setbacks. A
cistern may not locate between the building and the right-of-way.



         3.   Appearance. Stor m water cistern colors must match
existing building colors and the system must be integrated as an
architectural feature.



      k.   Underground Storm Water Cistern/ Dry Well. An underground
storm water cistern/ dry well is a process where storm water run-off is
funneled into an underground rock-filled trench or vault, temporarily
detained and infiltrated back into the surrounding soils. Dry wells can
reduce the volume of storm water run-off generated by the roofs of
structures, a significant source of run-off volume that enters storm drain
systems (they can also potentially recharge local aquifers by diverting storm
water into the soils). Dry wells should be placed near areas that accumulate
standing water or receive rooftop run-off from gutter downspouts. They can be
manufactured, made by filling a trench with stone and gravel, or utilize a
perforated pipe made of concrete or plastic, and surrounded by gravel.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



   I.   Outside Storage. Outside storage shall be located at the rear
of the principal building. It shall be screened on all sides. Stored
materials, equipment or vehicles shall not exceed the height of the
screening, and shall not be visible from any adjacent streets or residential
areas.



      1.   Outside storage of materials, equipment or vehicles
essential to the operation of a business, on land other than the lot on which
the business is located, shall be considered as a special use if the land is
in the MFG Manufacturing District and is on a lot adjacent to and in
possession of the same title holder of record as the lot occupied by the
business for which the outside storage items are accessory.  (Amd. Ord. 5167
– 2/20/17)



      2.   Outside storage of vehicles essential to the operation of
a business, on land other than the lot on which the business is located,
shall be considered as part of the Appearance Review process if the land is
in the MFG Manufacturing District and is a lot with or without an existing
primary use that is owned or leased, in full or in part, by a business
establishment granted a special use for Motor Vehicle Sales or Rental or
Motor Vehicle Services located within the Village’s BIZ General Business
District for the purpose of the storage of new or used motor vehicle
inventory with the following conditions:



         a.   The vehicle storage area shall not be open to the
public;



         b.   No signage shall be allowed that advertises the BIZ
General Business District business establishment or contents of the vehicle
storage area; and



         c.   No vehicle sales, rental, or leasing shall take
place on the premises. (See Section 6-208.B and C). (Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03;
Amd. Ord. 5017 - 8/17/15; Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         d.   Review - Landscape and engineering review fees
shall be collected per Land Development Code requirements. All engineering
review requirements apply. Landscape review requirements are detailed below.
All project related fees shall be paid prior to appearance review approval; 
(Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         e.   Site Plan - At minimum, the following information
shall be provided on proposed site plans:



            1.   The total number of proposed parking spaces;



            2.   The hours of operation for the facility;



            3.   An estimate of frequency of daily
ingress/egress of vehicles;



            4.   The location of an address marker, visible
from abutting frontage;



            5.   The location of proposed vehicle storage
area(s), ingress/egress points, a general parking plan for the vehicle
storage area, proposed lot coverage and a description of base material to be
used;



            6.   The location of required fence. See below for
fence requirements. Plans must include an elevation drawing showing proposed
material, dimension, post footing and color details of the fence and entry
gate;



            7.   If an electric gate will be used, include
where meter will be located, how electricity will be brought to site and any
underground utility details;



            8.   The location of all required setbacks, as
outlined below in Section 6-302.I.2.f.;



            9.   Any additional information deemed necessary
by the Development Services Department for the review of a project.



(Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         f.   Screening - A uniform, 8' tall wood or vinyl opaque
fence shall be installed around the entire vehicle storage area. Vehicles
shall not exceed the height of the screening. A 25' front setback shall apply
to all fences abutting a public right of way. A 15' setback shall apply to
all fences not abutting a public right of way;  (Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         g.   Landscape - Parkway tree requirements per Section
6-305 apply to all projects. Foundation landscaping requirements per Section
6-305.D.5.a shall apply to all fences abutting a public right of way. One (1)
ornamental tree shall be planted for every 30' of fence length not abutting a
public right of way. No landscape requirements apply to the interior vehicle
storage area. Submittal of a Tree Survey and Tree Mitigation Plan is required
per Section 6-305.F.3.h. Tree mitigation requirements apply per Section
6-305.F.3.f.  (Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   J.   Collection Boxes.



      1.   A permittee shall operate and maintain all collection
boxes for which the permittee has been granted a permit as follows:



         a.   Collection boxes shall be metal and be maintained
in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes or visible
rust and shall be free of graffiti.



         b.   Collection boxes shall be locked or otherwise
secured in such a manner that the contents cannot be accessed by anyone other
than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents.



         c.   Collection boxes shall have in, at minimum,
one-half-inch lettering visible from the front of each collection box the
name, address, email, website, and phone number of the operator.



         d.   Collection boxes shall be serviced and emptied as
needed, but at least every thirty (30) days.



         e.   The permittee and property owner shall maintain, or
cause to be maintained, the area immediately surrounding the collection
boxes, free from any junk, debris, overflow items or other material.



      2.   Shall not be permitted on any undeveloped parcel, nor
where the principal use of the land has been closed or unoccupied for more
than thirty (30) days;



      3.   Shall not be less than 1,000 feet from another collection
box as measured along a straight line from one box to the other;



      4.   Shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height, six (6) feet
in width and six (6) feet in depth;



      5.   Shall not be placed closer than ten (10) feet from:



         a.   A public or private sidewalk except that this
provision does not apply to a private sidewalk as long as the private
sidewalk maintains a five foot clearance;



         b.   A public right-of-way;



         c.   A driveway; or



         d.   A side or rear property line of adjacent property
used for residential purposes;



      6.   Shall not exist in the front setback of any property;



      7.   Shall not interfere with an access drive, off-street
parking lot maneuvering lane and/or required off-street parking space; and



      8.   Shall be screened from view on all sides from public
streets and any abutting properties.



   K.   Drive-Through Accessories.



      1.   Drive-Through Accessories shall be screened from all
public right of ways and adjacent residential properties in accordance with
the Screening Requirements set forth in Section 6-308.J. No Drive-Through
Accessories shall be located within the building setback.



      2.   Drive-Through Accessory Standards.



         a.   Drive Through Structures are subject to the
following conditions:



            1.   Drive-Through Structures shall not exceed
fourteen (14) feet in height.



            2.   Drive-Through Structures shall not extend
beyond 20% of the size of the menu board in surface area.



         b.   Menu Boards are subject to the following conditions:



            1.   One (1) Menu Board shall be allowed per Order
Confirmation Point.



            2.   Menu Boards shall not be more than fifty (50)
square feet in surface area.



            3.   The highest point of a Menu Board shall not
exceed a height of seven (7) feet from grade.



            4.   Menu Boards shall not exceed two (2) feet in
dimensional depth.



            5.   A minimum five (5) foot wide on average
landscape planting bed shall be installed around the entire base of all new
permanent menu boards. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the area of the
landscape bed around a menu board shall be occupied by vegetation. Vegetation
should have year-round interest and should include shrubs, ornamental grasses
and perennials; turf grass is not permitted. Plantings should be large enough
to cover or soften the base of the menu board without blocking the displayed
information.



         c.   Preview Boards are subject to the following
conditions:



            1.   One (1) Preview Board shall be allowed per
Order Confirmation Point.



            2.   Preview Boards shall not exceed 50% of the
surface area of the primary Menu Board.



            3.   Preview Boards shall not exceed a height of
six (6) feet.



Figure 6-302.K.2 - Drive-Through Accessories







 



      3.    Digital Menu Board Brightness Size.



         a.   The maximum permitted brightness for a Digital Menu
Board shall be determined by the total area that emits light. The regulations
for Digital Menu Board size and brightness are set forth in Table
6-302.K.3.A. Digital Menu Board size shall be rounded to the closest
correlated size listed in Table 6-302.K.3.A when defining maximum permitted
brightness.



   Table 6-302.K.3.A



 


Menu Board Screen Size (Square Feet)

 

Menu Board Brightness (Nits)




0 - 25

 

3500




30

 

3200




35

 

2900




40

 

2600




45

 

2300




50

 

2000




 



(Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



SECTION 6-303.   HOME BUSINESSES.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   Home businesses are being regulated so as to ensure that nearby
residents retain enjoyment of their properties and retain their property
values.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   A home business may be permitted, accessory to any dwelling unit,
provided that the following requirements are met: (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   A.   The use may not be located in a detached accessory structure,
and may not require internal or external alteration of the dwelling, or
involve construction features or use of equipment not customarily used for
domestic or household purposes.



   B.   The home business must be incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   C.   The use must be conducted entirely within the dwelling by
members of the family residing on the premises, and shall employ no more than
one (1) person who is not a resident of the dwelling unit.



   D.   The use shall not utilize mechanical, electrical, or other
equipment which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference,
vibration, heat, glare, or other nuisances outside the dwelling unit.



   E.   The primary access to the use shall be from the primary
entrance to the dwelling unit.



   F.   The use shall occupy no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of
the total floor area of the dwelling unit, including the basement or cellar.



   G.   Operation of the use shall not be visible from any existing
dwelling on an adjacent lot and shall not change the essential residential
character of the principal use. 



   H.   No more than fifteen (15) vehicle trips by either customers,
delivery persons or employees may be made throughout a day to and from the
home business. (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00 & Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   I.   No heavy equipment, including excavation, towing or
construction equipment, may be located on the site of the home business. 
(Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   J.   No vehicle that exceeds a limit of 3/4 tons may be parked on
the site of a home business, regardless of whether that vehicle is used for
commercial purposes associated with the home business.  No vehicle over five
(5) tons may provide deliveries to service the home business.  (Ord. 3354 -
4/17/00 & Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   K.   There shall be no outdoor storage or display of equipment or
materials used in the home business.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   L.   No stock in trade shall be sold or displayed on the premises,
and no services may be rendered on the premises that require receipt or
delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment by other than U.S. letter
carrier mail service or by passenger automobile of the person conducting the
home business.  (Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



   M.   All necessary licenses for the business must be obtained and
kept current.  (Ord. 3130 - 5/18/98  & Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02)



SECTION 6-304.   TEMPORARY USES.



   A.   Temporary Use Permit Required. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this Section, no temporary use shall be established or maintained
unless a temporary use permit evidenc-ing the compliance of such use with the
provisions of this Section has first been issued by the Building Department.



   B.   Use Limitations. Temporary uses are subject to the specific
regulations and time limits that follow, and to other applicable regulations
of the district in which the use is located:



      1.   Any temporary use, together with any principal use, shall
not jointly exceed the land use density or intensity that is applicable in
the district in which it is located.



      2.   No signs in connection with the temporary use shall be
permitted except in accordance with Section 6-307 of these regulations.



      3.   The temporary use shall operate only during the hours and
dates specified in the permit.



      4.   Off-street parking that will reasonably be required for
such temporary use shall be provided if the Building Department determines
that the use would otherwise unreasonably reduce the amount of off-street
parking spaces available for nearby permanent uses.  The operator of the
temporary use shall be responsible for guiding patrons to such parking lots.



      5.   No temporary use shall be permitted unless the Orland
Park Fire Protection District and Police Department and the Village Health
Official have first certified that such use will result in no additional
on-site or off-site threat to the public health, safety and welfare.



      6.   No temporary lighting shall be installed without an
electrical permit issued by the Village Building Director.



      7.   The site of the temporary use shall be cleared of all
debris at the termination of the event.  A cash bond for an amount deemed
appropriate by the Village Manager shall be posted with the Building
Department or a signed contract with a disposal firm shall be required to
ensure that the site is cleared of debris.



   C.   Permitted Temporary Uses.  The following uses are some of the
temporary uses permitted in the Village:



      1.   Carnivals and Circuses.



         a.   Permitted in any district, provided that such use
obtains the prior approval of the Village Manager.



         b.   The maximum length of the permit shall be fifteen
(15) days.



         c.   No structure or equipment shall be located within
three hundred feet (300') of any residential structure.  Such use need not
comply with the height or setback requirements of Section 6-104 of these
regulations, except that structures or equipment shall not be located within
the sight triangle as provided in Section 6-104 of these regulations.



         d.   The person responsible for the operation of any
such carnival or circus shall provide the Village Manager in advance of the
event date with the information as required.



      2.   Christmas Tree Sales.



         a.   Permitted in any district, provided that such use
receives specific prior approval by the Village Manager.



         b.   The maximum length of such permit shall be sixty
(60) days.



         c.   Display of Christmas trees are exempt from the
setback requirements of Section 6-104 of these regulations, except that no
tree shall be displayed within the sight triangle, as provided in Section
6-104(E).



         d.   The person responsible for the operation of such
Christmas tree sales shall provide the Village Manager in advance of the date
of such operation with information as required.



      3.   Contractor's Offices and Construction Equipment Sheds.



         a.   Permitted in any district where the use is
accessory to a construction project. No contractor's office or equipment shed
shall contain sleeping or cooking accommodations, except as necessary to
accommodate security personnel.



         b.   The maximum length of the permit shall be one (1)
year, but may be renewed by the Building Department for a period not to
exceed the duration of the construction project.



         c.   Any contractor's office or equipment shed shall be
removed upon completion of the construction project.



      4.   House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales.



         a.   Permitted in any residential district, provided
that such sale is limited to the personal possessions of the owner-occupants
of the dwelling unit and their neighbors.



         b.   House, apartment, garage and yard sales are not to
exceed a three (3) consecutive day period.



         c.   No residence shall conduct more than three (3) such
sales in a twelve (12) month period.



         d.   No temporary use permit is required for such uses.



      5.   Indoor and Outdoor Arts and Crafts Shows.



         a.   Permitted in any district provided that such use
receives the prior approval of the Village Manager.



         b.   The maximum length of the permit shall be three (3)
days.



         c.   The person responsible for the operation of such
show shall provide the Village Manager in advance of the event date with
information as required.



      6.   Non-residential Seasonal Outdoor Storage.



         a.   Permitted on parcels that have a minimum area of
25,000 square feet and a minimum road frontage of 250 feet.  Storage
containers shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the nearest
street right-of-way. 



         b.   A drawing of the location of the storage
container(s) must accompany any request for seasonal outdoor storage. 



         c.   The maximum length of the permit shall be three (3)
months in any single year. 



         d.   Not more that  ten percent (10 %) of the required
parking spaces may be used for the seasonal outdoor storage containers.



(Ord. 4125 - 4/17/06)



      7.   Real Estate Offices.



         a.   Permitted in any district accessory to any new
development.  Such offices shall not be used as a residence, and shall not
contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations unless a model home is used as
a temporary sales office.  All such offices shall comply with the Illinois
Accessibility Code and the Illinois Plumbing Code.  (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00;
Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         b.   The maximum length of a permit issued by the
Building Department shall be one (1) year, but the permit may be renewed
throughout the sales or leasing period by action of the Village Board upon
application made no less than one month prior to the termination of the
then-current permit period.  Village Board action to renew a permit shall
state the length of the renewal period and whether further renewals will be
considered.  (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00)



         c.   If the temporary sales office is in a trailer or
similar temporary structure, a letter of credit shall be provided prior to
the issuance of a permit, in an amount not less than $5,000.00 to assure the
removal of the trailer or similar temporary structure, disconnection of any
utilities which were connected thereto, and storage of the trailer after
removal.  Storage costs shall be assessed at $100.00 per day.  The letter
of credit shall be in a form similar to that provided in Section 5-112 (b) of
this Land Development Code, and shall expire not less than 60 days after the
end of the permit period or any renewal period granted.  (Ord. 3354 -
4/17/00)



         d.   No such office shall be used as the general office
or headquarters of any real estate.  (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00)



      8.   Residential Outdoor Storage and Dumpsters.



         a.   Allowed for a single thirty (30) day period within
a calendar year unless associated with a building permit. 



         b.   Must be placed on private driveways.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10; Amd. Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      9.   Seasonal Outdoor Sales.



         a.   Permitted on parcels that have a minimum area of
twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet and a minimum road frontage of two
hundred fifty (250) feet.  Sales area, including tents, produce stands, and
all other structures, shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from
the nearest right-of-way of any street or highway. 



         b.   A drawing of the event location must accompany any
request for outdoor sales.



         c.   The maximum length of the permit shall be for a six
(6) month period in any single calendar year.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         d.   Not more than ten (10) percent of the required
parking spaces may be used for the outdoor sales structures. 



(Ord. 3070-10/20/97)



      10.   Temporary Hiring Offices.



         a.   Permitted in any district where the use is
accessory to a non-residential construction project. Such offices shall not
be used as a residence, and shall not contain any sleeping or cooking
accommodations.  All such offices shall comply with the Illinois
Accessibility Code and Illinois Plumbing Code.



         b.   The maximum length of a permit issued by the
Building Department shall be 45 days from the date Occupancy is granted.



         c.   If the temporary hiring office is in a trailer or
similar temporary structure, the trailer or structure shall be removed upon
completion of the construction project and before a Conditional or Full
Certificate of Occupancy is issued.



         d.   If the temporary hiring office is in a trailer or
similar temporary structure, a bond shall be provided prior to the issuance
of a permit, in an amount not less than $5,000.00 to assure the removal of
the trailer or similar temporary structure, disconnection of any utilities
which were connected thereto, and storage of the trailer after removal. 
Storage costs shall be assessed at $100.00 per day.  The bond shall expire
not less than 60 days after the end of the permit period or any renewal
period granted.



         e.   No such office shall be used as a primary office
headquarters.



(Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      11.   Temporary Sales.



         a.   For existing onsite businesses, temporary sales of
items including flowers, food, novelties, sidewalk sales, tent sales and
special promotions shall be permitted in any district, provided that all
sales are conducted at least thirty (30) feet from the right-of-way of any
street or highway, and do not interfere with traffic.  (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



         b.   A drawing of the event location must accompany
request for outdoor sales.



         c.   Permit application is required.



         d.   The maximum length of a permit will be three (3)
days.



         e.   Permits are limited to one (1) per calendar month.



         f.   In the event food is prepared for outside
consumption, an inspection is required by the Village health inspector.



         g.   Not more than ten (10) percent of the required
parking spaces may be used for outdoor sales structure.



         (Ord. 4695 - 12/19/11)



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      12.   Temporary Shelter.



         a.   When a natural disaster renders any residence unfit
for habitation, the temporary use of a mobile home or recreational vehicle
located on the parcel is permitted during the rehabilitation or construction
of a new residence.



         b.   The maximum length of the permit shall be six (6)
months, but may be extended by the Building Department.



         c.   The temporary shelter shall be removed from the
parcel after an occupancy permit has been issued for the new or rehabilitated
residence.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      13.   Temporary Storage Units.



         a.   Permitted Units. Temporary storage units that are
not specifically regulated by Sections 1 through 10 of this section may be
allowed subject to the following:



            1.   The maximum total unit size shall be 768
cubic feet for residential zoning districts and a maximum of 1,000 cubic feet
per 10,000 square feet of existing principal building area for
non-residential zoning districts. A maximum unit height of eight (8) feet
above grade shall be allowed in all zoning districts;



            2.   Units shall be located on private property
with a minimum lot line setback of five (5) feet from any lot line;



            3.   The maximum time allowed for a temporary
storage unit shall be 30 days from the day of placement on the site;



            4.   Residential waste collection/ garbage
enclosures are regulated by the Village Code (See 6-2-2-4 and 6-2-2-5);



            5.   Paper recycling containers/ paper retrievers
are permitted for governmental uses and schools.



         b.   Prohibited Units. The following temporary storage
units are prohibited:



            1.   Temporary storage units for materials that
emit noxious odors or hazardous substances;



            2.   Temporary storage units in outdoor areas used
for the collection of clothing, small household items, books, toys, hygienic
materials, food, biohazards and other similar miscellaneous products and
items;



      (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      14.   Tents and Canopies.



         a.   Tents in excess of 200 square feet and canopies in
excess of 400 square feet require permits for non-residential uses as an
ancillary use to a permitted, accessory or special use permit. Tents for
non-residential uses less than the above area thresholds do not require
permits. Tents for residential uses are allowed and do not require a permit.



         b.   The maximum length of the permit shall be ten (10)
days, or two (2) days longer than the allowable period for the principal use,
where such tent is incidental to the primary use.



         c.   No permit may be issued to the same person/business
more than three (3) times in a twelve (12) month period.



(Amd. Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



SECTION 6-305.   LANDSCAPE AND TREE PRESERVATION.



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish meaningful
standards for the design, installation, maintenance and preservation of
landscaping and natural areas throughout the Village.



   B.   Applicability.



      1.   General.  No permit for the construction,
reconstruction, extension, repair or alteration of any building, structure or
use of land and no building or land or any part of any building or land, may
be occupied or used until landscaping has been provided in accordance with
the requirements of this Section.



      2.   Responsibility for Compliance.  The following shall
comply with all requirements provided in this Section, except where noted:



         a.   All new single-family detached dwellings on an
individual lot shall only comply with the provisions of 6-305.D.2 Landscape
Parkways, Sections 6-305.E Landscape Plan and 6-305.F Maintenance and
Preservation, where applicable. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



         b.   New residential developments;



         c.   New non-residential developments;



         d.   New mixed-use developments;



         e.   New vehicular parking areas;



         f.   Modifications to an existing building or site (see
Section 6-305.B.3 Modifications);



         g.   Any project requiring a Special Use Permit, Map
Amendment, or Appearance Review, as determined by the Development Services
Department.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      3.   Modifications.  An existing building or site may be
renovated or repaired without providing additional landscaping except when:



         a.   An addition, alteration, or enlargement to an
existing building, excluding single-family dwellings, expands the original
building square footage by twenty-five percent (25%) or more, singularly or
collectively.



         b.   There is a creation of, or increase in, residential
units within an existing building, excluding single-family dwellings.



         c.   The restoration of any building, accessory
buildings or structures or portion thereof damaged by fire, explosion, flood,
casualty or other natural disaster of any kind is undertaken.



   C.   Special Conditions.



      1.   Alternate Landscape Plans.  The Board of Trustees may
approve preliminary landscape plans whose makeup may not meet the specified
quantities stated herein, if such plans are clearly superior to what could be
achieved by using those minimum standards and are consistent with the
purposes of this Section, as determined by the Development Services
Department. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



      2.   Additional Landscaping.  The Board of Trustees may
require additional landscaping or site furnishings (e.g. benches, walls, park
equipment) above quantities specified herein in order to mitigate a specified
problem or in order to ensure a development is consistent with the objectives
of this Section and/or adopted Village policy.



      3.   Changes to Approved Landscape Plan.  Minor changes to an
approved landscape plan shall require approval by the Development Services
Department by way of an administrative appearance review. Minor changes are
acceptable where such revisions do not diminish the overall intent of the
approved landscape plan. Substantial changes to an approved landscape plan
shall require the re-initiation of the preliminary/final landscape plan
process outlined in Section 6-305.E.4. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



   D.   Landscape Zones.



      1.   General.  Landscape zones refer to distinct areas within
a particular site and the specific landscape requirements that apply therein.
A project site may have up to seven (7) different landscape zones, as
described in this Section, although not all sites will contain every
landscape zone (e.g. some developments will not have stormwater basin
landscaping). Plant material quantities shall meet or exceed the requirements
detailed in this Section. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



         a.   Landscape Zones.



            1.   Landscape Parkways



            2.   Landscape Corridors



            3.   Landscape Bufferyards



            4.   Foundation and Interior Landscape



            5.   Parking Lot Area Landscape



            6.   Signage Landscape



            7.   Stormwater Management Area Landscape



Figure 6-305.D.1.a (A) - Landscape Zones Overview (Figure for Illustrative
Purposes Only)







 



   Non-Residential Development Example Scenario







 



   Residential Development Example Scenario



         b.   Conflicts.



            1.   Where landscape zone requirements overlap or
conflict, the more stringent requirements shall apply, as determined by the
Development Services Department.



      2.   Landscape Parkways.



         a.   General.  The Landscape Parkway is intended to
provide a landscaped seam between the roadway and adjacent development to
ensure a continuous green corridor along the public right-of-way. Movement
between seams is facilitated and encouraged with pedestrian sidewalks,
crosswalks and other amenities that give a positive sense of ambiance and
create a desire to move from one side to the other.



            1.   A minimum number of parkway trees are
required per lineal feet of frontage for all development. On a corner lot,
the requirements of this section shall apply along both frontages.



            2.   Parkway requirements shall be based on the
width of the parkway, as detailed in Table 6-305.D.2.b (A) Parkway
Requirements. If more than one (1) Landscape Parkway type may be used, the
Development Service Department shall make the final determination.



         b.   Requirements.



Figures 6-305.D.2.b (A and B) – Parkway Requirements (Figures for
Illustrative Purposes Only)







Table 6-305.D.2.b (A) – Parkway Requirements



 




 
Type A
 
Type B
 
Type C


Parkway Width (P)
 
4’ or less
 
4’ or more
 
7’ or more


Sidewalk Width (S)
 
varies
 
varies
 
varies


Tree Location
 
Tree Grates*
 
Grass, Tree Grates*
 
Grass


Tree Spacing
 
30’ on center
 
40’ on center
 
40’ on center


Permitted Encroachments
 
Driveways, Furniture
 
Driveways, Furniture
 
Driveways, Furniture



 



*or equivalent



         c.   Details.



            1.   The parkway shall be planted with grass or
low ground cover, except where occupied by trees, tree grates or equivalent,
driveway pavement, plant materials, site furnishings or decorative brick
pavers.



            2.   Parkway trees shall consist of recommended
shade tree species unless overhead utilities exist or if the street is known
to be subject to widening in the future. Evergreen trees are not allowed in
any parkway. Recommended tree species are provided in 6-305.G List of
Recommended Plant Species.



            3.   Parkway trees shall be planted in the public
parkway and not on the private property side of the sidewalk unless such
placement does not meet the other criteria set forth in this Section. Any
required tree that cannot be accommodated in the parkway shall be relocated
to another landscape zone.



            4.   Trees shall be planted on the centerline of
parkways or as close to five (5) feet from the sidewalk as possible and
located so as not to interfere with overhead wires, traffic or pedestrian
safety.



            5.   Other than trees, no landscaping in the
parkway shall be taller than three (3) feet. No landscaping taller than two
(2) feet shall be located within six (6) feet of fire hydrants or buffalo
boxes.



            6.   The use of loose stone, rock, or gravel is
prohibited in public parkways. Compacted cobbles, flagstone, or other rocks
may be approved if these features are compacted firmly into the ground or
mortared, reducing risk of being scattered in the street, as determined by
the Development Services Department.



            7.   See Village of Orland Park Code of Ordinances
Tree Management Program, Title 3, Chapter 6 for additional parkway tree
regulations.



      3.   Landscape Corridors.



         a.   General.  Landscape Corridors shall provide a
physical and visual connection between the parkway and a building’s main
façade and foundation planting area. Landscape Corridors act as an extension
of the parkway into the site, the intent of which is to add a consistent
quality and definition to areas adjacent to roadways and enhance the physical
and visual access to important site features.



            1.   Landscape Corridor requirements shall be
based upon the adjacent roadway classification, as detailed in Section 2-102
Definitions, or as required by other provisions of the Land Development Code.
Refer to individual Zoning District requirements for additional information.
The more stringent requirements shall apply.  Refer to Table 6-305.D.3.b (A)
– Corridor Types for planting requirements.



            2.   Canopy, Ornamental and Evergreen trees are
the only required plant materials within “Typical” and “Arterial”
Landscape Corridors. “Auto-Row” Landscape Corridors require the use of
canopy trees and a meandering, continuous row of low-growing perennials,
hedge rows, ornamental grasses or other plant materials, as detailed in
6-305.D.3.b Requirements.



            3.   While not required, the use of planting beds
with shrubs, perennials, ornamental grasses and other plant materials may be
included in the design of Landscape Corridors. These plant materials should
be designed in a way to frame or accentuate important site features.



            4.   New residential developments with rear and/or
side yards abutting a public street are considered a special condition. See
Section 6-305.D.3.c Special Conditions below for details.



         b.   Requirements.



Figure 6-305.D.3.b (A) – Corridor Types (Figure for Illustrative Purposes
Only)







 



Table 6-305.D.3.b (A) – Corridor Types



 




 
Typical
 
Arterial
 
Auto-Row


Landscape Corridor Width
 

Varies

 

Varies

 

Varies



Shade Trees (per 100’)
 

1

 

2

 

0**



Ornamental or Evergreen Trees (per 100’)
 

1

 

2

 

3



Shrubs* (per 100’)
 

0

 

0

 

Minimum of 20




 



*   Includes shrubs, perennials and ornamental grasses.



**   If trees in an adjacent parkway are not present or feasible, then 2
canopy trees and 0 ornamental trees are required per 100' within the
Corridor.  (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



            1.   Typical Landscape Corridor: Typical Landscape
Corridors are intended to act as a physical and visual connection  between
the parkway and a building’s main facade. Requirements for Typical
Landscape Corridors apply to all applicable parcels adjacent to any roadway
not defined in Section 2-102 Definitions as “Street, Arterial, Major” and
“Street, Arterial, Minor”, except for those defined in Section
6-305.D.3.b.3. Auto-Row Landscape Corridor.



            2.   Arterial Landscape Corridor:  Arterial
Landscape Corridors are intended to act as a physical and visual connection
between the parkway and a building’s main facade. Requirements for Arterial
Landscape Corridors apply to all applicable parcels adjacent to any roadway
defined in Section 2-102 Definitions as “Street, Arterial, Major” and
“Street, Arterial, Minor”, except for those defined in Section
6-305.D.3.b.3. Auto-Row Landscape Corridor.



            3.   Auto-Row Landscape Corridor:  Auto-Row
Landscape Corridors are intended to accommodate the unique needs of auto
dealerships while creating a visual relationship between the parkway and a
building’s main facade. Auto-Row Landscape Corridor requirements apply to
any parcel occupied by a Village-licensed auto-dealership with frontage along
any roadway. The use of shade trees and a meandering, continuous row of
low-growing perennials, shrubs, ornamental grasses, and other plant materials
shall be installed.



         c.   Special Conditions.



            1.   New Residential Rear and Side Yard Corridors:
Where the rear or side yard of a new residential development borders an
arterial or collector street, the following requirements shall apply:



               i.   The plant material requirements
detailed in “Typical Landscape Corridors” shall be installed along the
entirety of the rear or side yard that adjoins an arterial or collector
street. Refer to Table 6-305.D.3.b (A) – Corridor Types for planting
requirements.



               ii.   Additionally, a uniform fence shall be
installed along the entirety of the rear or side yard that adjoins an
arterial or collector street. Fencing shall comply with the requirements set
forth in Section 6-310 Fences.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



               iii.   Small infill projects in established
areas adjacent to public streets shall follow the existing pattern of rear
yard screening, as determined by the Development Services Department.



               iv.   The location of plant materials and
fences shall be determined by the Development Services Department.



      4.   Landscape Bufferyards.



         a.   General.  Landscape bufferyards shall act as
physical and visual edges between the side and rear yards of adjacent
parcels. Depending on the type of required bufferyard, their intent is to
either unify or separate adjoining land uses. When the intent of a bufferyard
is for the unification of adjacent parcels, pedestrian and vehicular
cross-access between adjacent parcels is strongly encouraged, and may be
required by the Village.



            1.   Single-family residential developments
adjacent to single-family residential developments are exempt from bufferyard
requirements. Mixed-use developments which include single-family residential
units are not exempt from bufferyard requirements.



            2.   Bufferyards may remain in the ownership of
the owner of the lot, or they may be subjected to deed restrictions and
subsequently conveyed to a homeowners' association, provided that any such
conveyance adequately guarantees the protection and maintenance of the
bufferyards for the purposes of this Section.



         b.   Requirements.



            1.   A required bufferyard is determined by
cross-referencing the "proposed land use" with the appropriate "adjacent land
use" as detailed in Table 6-305.D.4.b (A) – Bufferyard Land Use Types.
There are only two (2) land use types: Residential and Non-Residential, as
described below. Specific bufferyard requirements are detailed in Table
6-305.D.4.b (B) – Bufferyard Types.If an adjacent parcel is vacant or
undeveloped, the appropriate bufferyard shall be based on the parcel’s land
use category as detailed in the Village’s Comprehensive Plan. If more than
one bufferyard option is available, a petitioner may decide which type of
bufferyard to install.



Table 6-305.D.4.b (A) – Bufferyard Land Use Types



 




 
ADJACENT LAND USE


 
 
 
 

R

 

NR



PROPOSED LAND USE
 

R

 

Type 1

 

Type 2 or 3




NR

 

Type 2 or 3

 

Type 1




 



Residential (R) – Parcel containing only single- or multi- family
residential uses(s).



Non-Residential (NR) – All other parcels, including mixed- use developments.



Figure 6-305.D.4.b (A) - Bufferyard Types (Figure for Illustrative Purposes
Only)







 



Table 6-305.D.4.b (B) - Bufferyard Types



 




 
Type 1
 
Type 2
 
Type 3




Bufferyard Width (min.)
 

10’

 

15’

 

10’



Planting Bed Width (min)
 

7’

 

7’

 

7’



Shade Trees per 100’
 

3

 

4

 

3



Evergreen or Ornamental Trees per 100’
 

1

 

2

 

1



Shrubs* per 100’
 

16

 

18

 

16



Fencing
 

Permitted

 

Permitted

 

Minimum 6’ required



Site Amenities
 

Permitted

 

Not permitted

 

Not permitted





 



*   Includes shrubs, perennials and ornamental grasses. (Amd. Ord. 5221
– 9/18/17)



            2.   Type 1 Landscape Bufferyard – (10’). A
Type 1 Landscape Bufferyard is intended to act as a physical and visual seam
between adjacent parcels by unifying similar land uses using landscaping.
Movement between seams is facilitated and encouraged with cross streets,
pedestrian sidewalks, crosswalks and other amenities that give a positive
sense of ambiance and create a desire to move from one side to the other.
Minimum width for a Type 1 Landscape Bufferyard is ten (10) feet. Site
amenities and pedestrian and vehicular cross-access between adjacent parcels
is strongly encouraged, and may be required, where appropriate.



               a.   Site amenities can occupy any portion 
of the area within a Type 1 Landscape Bufferyard, subject to Development
Services Department approval. Examples of site amenities include, but are not
limited to:



                  i.   Plazas, outdoor gardens, patios
and outdoor seating areas;



                  ii.   Water features, including
bioswales or other stormwater management elements;



                  iii.   Public art or outdoor
architectural features;



                  iv.   Pergolas and/or arbor structures;



                  v.   Benches and complimentary site
furniture.



               b.   A reduction in plant material
requirements and/or landscape-related development fees proportional to the
proposed site amenity (amenities) may be applied, as determined by the
Development Services Department.



            3.   Type 2 Landscape Bufferyard – (15’). A
Type 2 Landscape Bufferyard is intended to act as a physical and visual
filter between adjacent parcels by separating dissimilar land uses using
landscaping. Minimum width for a Type 2 Landscape Bufferyard is fifteen (15)
feet. Vehicular cross-access between adjacent parcels is encouraged where
appropriate. Site amenities are not encouraged within Type 2 Landscape
Bufferyard.



            4.   Type 3 Landscape Bufferyard – (10’ +
Fence). A Type 3 Landscape Bufferyard is intended to act as a physical and
visual filter between adjacent parcels by separating dissimilar land uses
utilizing both an opaque, minimum six (6) foot tall fence and required
landscaping. Minimum width for a Type 3 Landscape Bufferyard is ten (10)
feet. Site amenities are not encouraged in Type 3 Landscape Bufferyard.
Fences shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 6-310 Fences.



         c.   Details.



            1.   If the area of a required bufferyard is
increased or decreased through a modification to the required width, the
required area coverage and planting requirements still apply based on the
original minimum required width. If the area of the bufferyard will not
accommodate the required number of plants, the same number of plants that
cannot be accommodated shall be relocated to other areas within the site.



            2.   Landscape bufferyards shall be located within
setbacks, except where landscape corridor requirements, easements, covenants,
natural or engineered drainage, natural features, approved property entrances
or exits, or required sight triangles require the bufferyard to be set back
from the property line.



            3.   Landscape bufferyards shall not contain any
development, impervious surfaces, or site features that do not function to
meet the standards of this Section, unless approved by the Development
Services Department. No grading, development, or land-disturbing activities
shall occur within the corridor unless approved by the Plan Commission at the
time of site plan approval.



            4.   A landscape bufferyard may be used for
passive recreation or for utility or drainage easements, if the utility
requirements and the bufferyard requirements are compatible, as determined by
Development Services Department. If approved by the Development Services
Department, stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) may also be located
within the bufferyard. For details see Section 6-302.H Storm Water Best
Management Practices.



            5.   Existing fences on adjacent properties may be
counted as a credit if such fences are in good condition, are constructed of
an opaque material, have a height of at least six (6) feet tall and meet all
other fence requirements as detailed in Section 6-310 Fences.



         d.   Bufferyard Fences, Walls, Berms and Hedges. 
Fences, walls, berms and/or hedges may be required to supplement required
Landscape Bufferyard requirements if the Development Services Department
determines that additional screening is necessary to shield a proposed land
use from adjacent uses. All fences shall meet the requirements of Section
6-310 Fences. If required, fences, walls, berms or hedges shall be
constructed in accordance with the following specifications:



            1.   Bufferyard fences or walls shall not exceed
six (6) feet in height in residential areas and shall not exceed eight (8)
feet in height in non-residential areas along the perimeter of the property
as outlined above.



            2.   Bufferyard fences and walls for residential
developments over two (2) dwelling units and all non-residential development
shall be made of natural materials such as wood, stone, vinyl or brick, with
the design to be approved as a part of the landscape review. Hedges shall
meet standards of this Section.



            3.   Earthen berms may be a part of the approved
final grading plan to ensure adequate stormwater management, as determined by
the Development Services Department. Berms shall have a maximum slope of 3:1
and shall be integral to the planting design,with groundcovers, native
materials, grasses, perennials and/or lawn required to cover the berm. Berms
proposed for landscaping that are not a part of the original grading design
will require re-submittal review and approval of stormwater engineering.



      5.   Foundation and Interior Landscape.



         a.   Foundation Landscaping.



            1.   General.  Foundation landscape areas shall
be provided to enhance architectural features, integrate a building(s) with
the site and add visual interest to large expanses of building walls.



            2.   Requirements.



               i.   A minimum ten (10) foot wide on average
foundation landscape area shall be provided along one-hundred percent (100%)
of all building facades fronting a public street, except where building
access walkways / driveways or emergency service connections are necessary.



               ii.   A minimum seven (7) foot wide
foundation landscape area shall be provided along fifty percent  (50%) of
all building facades not fronting a public street, except where building
access walkways/driveways or emergency service connections are necessary.



               iii.   Foundation landscape areas shall
consist of well-defined planting beds. A minimum of seventy-five percent
(75%) of each foundation landscape area shall be occupied by planting beds,
with the remaining area to be covered in a turf-grass or turf-grass
alternative.



               iv.   Foundation planting beds shall consist
of a combination of trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses, perennials and
groundcovers. The majority of required foundation trees, shrubs and
ornamental grasses shall provide year-round visual interest.



               v.   On average, a minimum of one (1)
ornamental tree and sixteen (16) shrubs or ornamental grasses shall be
provided for every one hundred (100) linear feet of building face.



               vi.   Foundation landscaping may be placed
away from the building face in instances where the site layout allows such an
alternative, but shall be no more than twenty-five (25) feet from the
building face.



            3.   Exception.



               i.   Attached dwellings that share a common
wall with one (1) other dwelling unit (duplexes) are exempt from foundation
landscaping requirement.



         b.   Interior Lot Landscaping.



            1.   A minimum of one (1) tree is required per
dwelling unit for multi–family residential development, one (1) tree per
10,000 square feet of lot area for commercial/office development, and one (1)
tree per 25,000 square feet of lot area for industrial development.



         c.   Residential Site Interior Landscaping.



            1.   For commonly owned land in single-family and
multi-family developments with more than one (1) structure, the open space
between buildings shall appropriately landscaped to provide: screening of
adjacent dwelling units, screening and shading to improve energy efficiency,
and a visually appealing living environment. Landscape features such as trees
and shrubs, groundcovers, flowering annuals and perennials, permitted
naturalized landscaping areas, BMPs and berming shall be used as appropriate
to enhance the overall appearance and function of the open space area.



      6.   Parking Lot Area Landscape.



         a.   General.  The following standards shall apply to
the perimeter screening and interior landscaping of parking lot areas:



            1.   Perimeter Screening.  The design of the
landscape screening around a parking lot area shall meet the following
standards:



               i.   All parking lot areas greater than
seven (7) parking spaces shall be significantly screened from view from
adjacent properties and streets with landscaping, ornamental fencing, masonry
wall, or a combination thereof. A minimum ten (10) foot wide planting bed
shall be required around the perimeter of all required parking lots. The
setback distance between a parking lot and a property line shall in all cases
be a minimum of ten (10) feet, as measured from the parking lot back of curb.



               ii.   A minimum of seventy-five percent
(75%) of perimeter plant materials shall attain a minimum mature height of
three (3) feet and a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of the
planting bed shall be covered with plant materials. Plant material quantities
and diversity shall comply with Section 6-305.E.6 Landscape Material
Requirements.



               iii.   The size and placement of plant
material at maturity shall allow for a three (3) foot bumper overhang from
the face of the curb.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



            2.   Parking Lot Island Landscaping.  Landscaped
parking lot islands are required in order to provide aesthetic relief and
shade to large expanses of paved surface. The design of parking lot islands,
the selection of plant materials and the vehicular use area shall meet the
following standards:



               i.   One (1) detached parking lot island is
required for every ten (10) parking spaces provided. Required parking islands
may be consolidated to allow for better soil volume and drainage. Parking lot
islands at the corners of a parking lot do not count towards the parking lot
island requirements.



               ii.   The area of a single parking lot
island shall match the size of a single adjacent parking lot space. Minimum
landscape island soil depth shall be thirty-six (36) inches, as measured from
top of curb. If parking lot islands are consolidated, the area of a
consolidated island shall be equal to or greater than the combined area of
the required parking lot islands being consolidated.



               iii.   At minimum, parking lot islands shall
be located at the end of each row of parking stalls.



               iv.   Shade trees shall be the primary plant
materials used in parking lot islands and landscape areas. Each parking lot
island shall have a minimum of one (1) shade tree. If parking lot islands are
consolidated, one (1) shade tree is required for every 162 square feet of
parking lot area.



               v.   Additional plant materials other than
turf grass, such as shrubs, ornamental grasses, perennials and ground covers,
shall be planted such that sixty percent (60%) or more of the parking lot
island area includes live plant material. Other than trees, items planted in
an island shall not exceed the mature height of thirty (30) inches above the
top of curb.



               vi.   Evergreen and ornamental trees shall
not be allowed in interior parking lot islands.



               vii.   Curbs shall be provided between
vehicular use areas and landscaped areas.



               viii.   Parking lot islands shall contain at
least six (6) inches of stone base and thirty-six (36) inches of topsoil per
island. Islands should not be constructed on a compacted base; if severe
compaction exists as determined by the Development Services Department, a
drainage strategy shall be implemented.



               ix.   Parking lots shall be graded so that
landscape islands do not impound water, unless surface impoundment is
required as a method of on–site retention of stormwater. Landscape islands
may contain bioswales and vegetated swales to reduce stormwater runoff and
facilitate ground infiltration if the parking lot is designed to accommodate
such a strategy.



               x.   Best Management Practices (BMPs) should
be used where appropriate within parking lot designs. See Section 6-302.H
Storm Water Best Management Practices for further information.



      7.   Signage Landscape.



         a.   Required Landscaping.



            1.   A minimum five (5) foot wide on average
landscape planting bed shall be installed around the entire base of all new
permanent ground signs, or existing ground signs where the external structure
is modified, as determined by the Development Services Department.



            2.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the area
of the landscape bed around a ground sign shall be occupied by vegetation.
Vegetation should have year-round interest and should include shrubs,
ornamental grasses and perennials; turf grass is not permitted. Plantings
should be large enough to cover or soften the base of the sign without
blocking the sign copy. All planting beds shall be mulched with 3” of
organic mulch.



            3.   A landscape plan for ground signs, which will
be reviewed administratively, shall be submitted with the associated sign
permit. Such plans shall only be required to comply with landscape plan
requirements listed in Section 6-305.E.2.a through Section 6-305.E.2.f, or as
determined by the Development Services Department.



            4.   All landscaping shall conform to requirements
listed in Section 6-104.E Clear Sight Triangles at Street Intersections and
Section 6-307 Signs.



Figure 6-305.D.7.a (A) – Minimum Signage Landscape Area Examples



(Figures for Illustrative Purposes Only)







 



      8.   Stormwater Management Area Landscape.



         a.   General.  This Section details landscape
requirements for stormwater management areas, namely retention and detention
basins. See Section 6-409 Storm Sewers and Storm Water Detention for
additional storm water management area requirements. See Section 6-412 Local
Stream and Waterbody Protection, Section 6-413 Wetlands Protection and 6-414
Conservation Areas for requirements for these areas.



         b.   Requirements.



            1.   Detention or retention basins shall be
naturalized using native herbaceous plants, shrub and trees from the basin
bottom to the outer edge of the required naturalized landscape area.  The
entirety of the naturalized landscape area shall be planted with 100%
context-appropriate naturalized landscaping, which shall provide complete
coverage of the perimeter of the basins. At minimum, native canopy trees
shall be planted at a ratio not less than one (1) tree for every one hundred
(100) linear feet of retention or detention basin perimeter as measured at
the high water line; native understory trees shall be planted at a ratio not
less than one (1) tree for every two hundred (200) linear feet; and native
shrubs at a ratio not less than three (3) shrubs for every fifty (50) linear
feet.



            2.   Native vegetation that is appropriate for the
basins hydrology shall be established, in wet or dry basins, from the basin
bottom to the outer extent of the high water level.  Only those plants that
are adapted to temporary flooding shall be planted below the high water line.



            3.   Within the minimum twenty-five (25) foot
setback from an artificial detention/retention basin, a minimum fifteen (15)
foot wide naturalized landscape area is required above all retention and
detention pond high water levels in order to slow runoff, filter pollutants,
recharge aquifers and enhance water quality. Within the naturalized landscape
area, a maintenance vehicle access area shall be provided around the pond, at
least eight (8) feet wide not exceeding a two percent (2%) cross slope and
shall remain open and accessible for maintenance purposes, planted with
native low-growing plant materials or as a recreational/maintenance trail.
The balance of the naturalized landscape area, not exceeding a five percent
(5%) cross slope, shall include naturalized landscaping, as detailed below in
Section 6-305.D.8.b.4. See also Section 2-102 Definitions "Naturalized
Landscaping".  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



            4.   A Monitoring and Management Plan (M&M Plan)
shall be submitted along with the required landscape plan for all applicable
projects, as determined by the Development Services Department. M&M Plans
shall coincide with the project Watershed Management Ordinance (WMO) Permit,
if applicable. For further details see Section 6-305.F.2 Naturalized
Landscaping Area Management Standards. Monitoring and Management Plans shall
be recorded with the county recorder of deeds in which the project is
located. For projects with stormwater management features, an Annual
Monitoring Report must be submitted to the Village before annual acceptance
may be granted. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



            5.   A hydro-period analysis, submitted in a
diagrammatical "stage versus time" graph shall be submitted for the 2-, 5-,
10-, and 100-year storm events so that it can be confirmed that proposed
plantings within the basin will be able to withstand the frequency and
duration of these storm events.  This information shall coincide with the
project Watershed Management Ordinance (WMO) Permit, if applicable.



Figure 6-305.D.8.b (A) – Naturalized Landscape Area Requirements (Figure
for Illustrative Purposes Only)







 



Figure 6-305.D.8.b (B) – Naturalized Landscape Area Cross-Section (Figure
for Illustrative Purposes Only)







 



            6.   Conventional lawn grasses are not recommended
within ten (10) feet of the required naturalized landscape area.  However, a
ten (10) foot wide buffer of native vegetation or No Mow grasses is
recommended to protect the required naturalized vegetation and expand the
benefits of the naturalized habitat.



            7.   Where a stormwater basin is proposed to be
located within or bordered on a required buffer, the intensity of landscaping
around the basin shall be increased to comply with the applicable standard
for the buffer. In these circumstances, the fifteen (15) foot naturalized
landscape area is still required. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5167
– 2/20/17)



            8.   An "as -built" landscape plan of all
stormwater management areas is required before acceptance by the Village
including but not limited to topographic information, planting limits and
normal and high water level elevations, or any additional information
requested by the Village. Additional information may be required, as
determined by the Development Services Department.  (Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   E.   Landscape Plan.



      1.   General.  An applicant for development required to
install landscaping per this Section shall comply with development
regulations stated in the development petition. The applicant shall submit a
landscape plan along with the application for development approval to the
Development Services Department.



         a.   The final grading plan approved by the Village
shall be used as a base map for the landscape plan. It is imperative that the
landscape design professional and project engineer coordinate their work to
provide grading required for landscape compliance.



         b.   All new developments and redevelopments shall
adhere to the Watershed Management Ordinance (WMO), as amended, as written by
the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago and regulated
by the Village of Orland Park.



      2.   Landscape Plan Requirements.  The landscape plan shall
be prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the State of Illinois or a
qualified landscape designer. The landscape plan shall include all of the
following:



         a.   Landscape Architect/Designer's name, address, and
telephone number;



         b.   Petitioner’s name and name of development;



         c.   Scale, north arrow, date of preparation and
revision dates;



         d.   Location, quantity, size, and type of existing
on-site naturalized landscaping to be retained, including a tree survey, if
applicable;



         e.   A proposed plant material list that includes
botanical name, common name, caliper/height and pot size;



         f.   Location, quantity, size and type of all proposed
plant materials and species, including quantities for all seed mixes,
including tree mitigation plantings, and showing the relationship of plant
materials to other site features such as utilities and easements. Plants
depicted on the plan should be represented at two-third (2/3) mature plant
width;



         g.   DATA BOX - A landscape data box which includes the
required and proposed calculations for the following: total area in square
feet of the lot to be developed, the total square feet and percentage of
landscape area, the total number of and square footage of landscape islands
as compared to parking stalls, and a list comparing all required and proposed
landscape materials; (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



         h.   Landscape construction and planting details;



         i.   Elevations and details of all fences, retaining
walls or other site amenities or decorative features proposed for location
on-site. The details shall include, but are not limited to, materials,
colors, styles and sizes;



         j.   Lot numbers on all subdivision parcels;



         k.   Planting time restrictions and/or limitations;



         l.   Final engineering approved grading plan showing
existing and proposed contours, including berms;



         m.   All proposed building footprints and hardscape
areas (i.e. parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, patios);



         n.   Topography, grading plan and overland flow routes;



         o.   Proposed and existing utilities and easements;



         p.   Site utilities including transformers/power sources
for buildings and location of mechanical equipment exhaust and air intakes;



         q.   An attached WMO Permit for all qualifying
developments with a maintenance plan included; and



         r.   Any other information that may be needed to show
compliance with this Section.



      3.   Additional Requirements.



         a.   A preliminary landscape plan must be submitted at
the initiation of all development petitions, unless otherwise noted. A final
landscape plan must be submitted to the Development Services Department in
conjunction with final engineering submittals.  The Development Services
Department may require landscape plans to be submitted earlier if deemed
critical to the review of the overall proposal. A digital copy must accompany
all landscape plan submittals.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         b.   A tree survey and tree mitigation plan shall be
reviewed with either a site plan review, variance review, and/or special use
review. See Section 6-305.F.3 for tree mitigation plan details. The following
actions require a tree survey and tree mitigation plan:



            1.   The development or redevelopment of any
property for any use other than a single family home.



            2.   Tree removal on any vacant or undeveloped
property, with the exception of an individual single family home lot.



         c.   A Monitoring and Management Plan shall be submitted
with the landscape plan for all projects where naturalized landscaping is
included. See Section 6-305.F.2.b Monitoring and Management Plan for details.



         d.   A WMO Permit shall be obtained for all qualifying
developments. All WMO permitted projects require a Monitoring and Maintenance
Plan.  Qualifying developments shall reference the WMO Maintenance Plan when
preparing the Monitoring and Maintenance Plan in conjunction with a Landscape
Plan. See Section 6-305.F.2.b Monitoring and Management Plan for details.



         e.   Letter of Credit. A letter of credit covering the
estimated cost of required landscaping, including naturalized landscape
installation, monitoring and establishment management shall be posted as part
of the final landscape plan approval process. The letter of credit shall be
provided to the Village by the owner or developer prior to the issuance of a
building permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-112
Development and Subdivision Requirements. The letter of credit shall cover
costs associated with earthwork, planting, inspections, maintenance or any
other cost necessary to achieve Village acceptance standards. The amount of
the letter of credit associated with naturalized landscape areas shall be
held for the duration of period outlined in the Village approved Monitoring
and Management Plan or until the naturalized landscape meets acceptance
criteria, whichever is later, as determined by the Development Services
Department.



      4.   Review and Approval of Landscape Plan.



         a.   All development petitions shall provide a
preliminary landscape plan as a part of the initial petition submission. The
Development Services Department shall review, or have reviewed, all
preliminary landscape plans. All preliminary and final landscape plans shall
comply with the requirements outlined in Section 6-305 Landscape and Tree
Preservation.



         b.   The Development Services Department shall review
preliminary landscape plans and other required documents and work with the
petitioner until the plans satisfy the criteria set forth in this Section
and/or any conditions of approval.



         c.   The Development Services Department shall issue a
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees regarding whether the
proposed preliminary landscape plan satisfies the Village's landscape
criteria.



         d.   The Board of Trustees shall review the preliminary
landscape plan and the recommendation of the Development Services Department
and shall then approve or deny the preliminary landscape plan.



         e.   The Village Board of Trustees may also impose
conditions on the issuance of the preliminary landscape plan approval. These
conditions shall pertain to the external appearance of the development, and
may include additional landscaping, buffering, fencing or other exterior
treatment. These conditions shall be reflected on the approved final
landscape plan.



         f.   Upon approval of a preliminary landscape plan by
the Village Board, a final landscape plan shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department for review and final approval. The final
landscape plan shall reference and be in accord with a project's approved
final engineering plans, site plan and Village Board conditions, if
applicable.



         g.   The Development Services Department shall review,
or have reviewed, all final landscape plans. The Development Services
Department shall approve or deny all final landscape plans. (Amd. Ord. 5221
– 9/18/17)



      5.   Criteria for Approval of Landscape Plans.



         a.   Design Guidelines.  The following design
guidelines shall be used to evaluate proposed landscaping plans:



            1.   Landscape improvements shall serve to
integrate the project to the site and surrounding context, with particular
sensitivity to the natural topography, watercourses, and existing vegetation.
Preservation of the existing landscape material and land forms should be
taken into account, particularly where mature trees are a part of the site.
Depending on the context, landscaping should either offer a visual and
physical connection or separation between land uses;



            2.   Landscaping shall be designed to have a
natural aesthetic while having proportion, balance, unity, variety of
species, and variety of color throughout the seasons, and shall be comprised
of associations of plants which have similar climate, water, soil, sun
exposure and maintenance needs;



            3.   The best professional practices of the
American Society of Landscape Architects, American Nursery & Landscape
Association, and Illinois Green Industry Association shall be followed. In
addition, guidelines proposed and referenced through the Sustainable Sites
Initiative shall be utilized;



            4.   Landscaping shall provide drifts and massing
of plants with varying texture, color and forms to offset the mass of a
building and to provide a visual relief to the straight lines of building
architecture, parking lots and other man-made features;



            5.   Landscaping shall reduce the intrusion of
headlights and other glare and shall provide a safety barrier between
vehicles and pedestrians. Landscape plantings shall be designed to
accommodate snow removal by providing appropriate setbacks and storage space;



            6.   Landscaping should screen the view of
utilities or mechanical equipment. Existing site features within a required
landscape zone which do not function to meet the standards of the required
landscape zone shall be screened from the view of other properties or
removed, as determined during review of a site plan or landscape plan;



            7.   If landscaping is used to screen service
yards, utility meters and hardware, overhead doors, mechanical equipment,
dumpster enclosures, and/or other potentially unattractive places from public
view, landscape materials shall be planted in a natural type configuration,
be equally effective in all seasons, and comply with Section 6-308.J
Screening;



            8.   Landscaping should shade seating, walking,
and outdoor activity areas, shield buildings from winter wind and summer sun
so as to conserve energy, and should not interfere with clear access to the
sun where solar energy collection is anticipated;



            9.   Landscaping should provide a natural habitat
for birds and other animal life, and should preserve existing natural
vegetation and other natural features (unless prohibited by building use and
other agency restrictions);



            10.   Landscapes should be designed to encourage
the minimum use of water, inorganic fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides
in the development and long term maintenance of landscapes;



            11.   Irrigation systems may be required for
certain landscaped areas, as determined by a landscape architect. The need
for sprinkler irrigation systems shall be determined by the type of plant
material and the condition/growing medium that they are installed in. All
irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use of water;



            12.   All earth berm locations shall be reviewed
by the Village Engineer to determine how the berms shall relate to drainage
and public utilities. Berms shall not exceed a maximum slope of 3:1;



            13.   An appropriate sight triangle shall be
maintained at all intersections and entryways to negate the impact of visual
obstructions and shall comply with Section 6- 104.E Clear Sight Triangles at
Street Intersections; and



            14.   Nothing shall be planted or installed within
an underground or overhead utility easement or any other easement without the
consent of the Village and/or the appropriate utility.



      6.   Landscape Material Requirements.



         a.   Plant Sizes. Minimum sizes for plant materials for
all projects at time of installation shall be as follows:



            1.   Evergreen or deciduous shrubs: minimum
eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches in height, varieties normally
measured by spread shall be a minimum of twenty- four (24) inches in spread;



            2.   Deciduous shade trees: minimum two and
one-half (2.5) inches caliper, balled and burlapped (B&B), measured six (6)
inches above the ground, all shade trees shall have a central leader. Smaller
caliper trees (e.g. 1.5") are permitted in naturalized landscape areas, or as
determined by the Development Services Department;  (Amd. Ord. 5312 –
7/16/18)



            3.   Ornamental trees: clump form shall be a
minimum six (6) feet in height or have a minimum trunk size of two inches (2)
caliper;



            4.   Evergreen trees: minimum six (6) feet in
height and (B&B) when installed; and



            5.   Ornamental grasses, perennials and climbing
vines shall be specified as a minimum container size of one (1) gallon unless
otherwise approved by the Development Services Department.



Table 6-305.E.6.a (A) – Plant Size Requirements



 


Table 6-305.E.6.a(A) - Plant Size Requirements




Plant Type

 

Minimum Plant Size

 

Minimum Plant Width




Deciduous Shade Tree

 

2.5' Caliper*

 

n/a




Ornamental Tree

 

6' OR 2" Caliper

 

n/a




Evergreen Tree

 

6'

 

n/




Evergreen/Deciduous Shrub

 

18" to 24"

 

24"




Ornamental Grass, Perennials, Vines

 

1 Gallon

 

n/a




 



* Smaller caliper trees (e.g. 1.5") are permitted in naturalized landscape
areas, or as determined by the Development Services Department.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         b.   Plant Diversity.  Diversity among required plant
material is required for both visual interest and to reduce the chance of
losing a large population of plants due to disease.



            1.   Table 6-305.E.6.b (A) – Plant Diversity
Requirements details the necessary maximum and minimum percentage of plant
species diversity based on the total quantity of plant species per plant
type. Plant types include, but are not limited to, shade trees, evergreen
trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, perennials and ornamental grasses. Minor
deviations from plant diversity requirements may be permitted, as determined
by the Development Services Department.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



               i.   For example, if a development requires
fifty (50) shade trees (i.e. plant type), no more than forty (40) percent
[i.e. twenty (20) trees] nor less than ten (10) percent [i.e. five (5) trees]
can be of any one (1) species, and there must be a minimum of five (5)
different tree species within the fifty (50) trees selected.



            2.   Native landscaping materials shall compromise
thirty percent (30%) of the total plant count for all projects, except for
trees and shrubs in naturalized landscapes, which should be one hundred
percent (100%) native plant material specific to the proposed area’s soil,
hydrology, and ecosystem.



            3.   The overall number of trees and shrubs
required for a site shall be comprised of not less than thirty percent (30%)
evergreen, and seventy percent (70%) deciduous, plus or minus five percent
(5%).



Table 6-305.E.6.b (A) – Plant Diversity Requirements



 




   Table 6-305.E.6.b(A) - Plant Diversity Requirements



Total Number of Plants per Plant Type*
 
Maximum % of Any Species#
 
Minimum % of Any Species
 
% of Native Species Per Plant Type^
 
Minimum Number of Species



1-4

 

100%

 

n/a

 

30%

 

1




5-10

 

60%

 

40%

 

30%

 

2




11-15

 

45%

 

20%

 

30%

 

3




16-75

 

40%

 

10%

 

30%

 

5




76-500

 

30%

 

5%

 

30%

 

8




500-1000

 

25%

 

5%

 

30%

 

10




1000+

 

15%

 

5%

 

30%

 

15



*   Plant Types = Shade Tree, Evergreen Tree, Ornamental Tree, Shrub,
Perennial, Ornamental Grass


#   The overall number of trees and shrubs required for a site shall be
comprised of not less than 30% evergreen, and 70% deciduous, plus or minus 5%.


^   Unless otherwise noted.




 



         c.   All other specifications shall conform to the
American Nursery & Landscape Association, and “American Standard for
Nursery Stock (ANSIZ60.1–2014)”, as amended, published by the American
Association of Nurserymen at the time of installation, and the recommended
practices of the International Society of Arboriculture. (Amd. Ord. 5221 –
9/18/17)



         d.   The Development Services Department shall be
notified in writing if a plant substitution is needed due to the lack of
availability during construction. The plant substitution shall have the same
essential characteristics of the board approved plan species. See Section
6-305.C.3 Changes to Approved Landscape Plan.



         e.   Existing trees and vegetation within a required
landscape zone which are deemed healthy based on a tree survey completed by a
certified arborist may be counted toward the total plant material
requirements. If existing trees and shrubs do not fully meet the standards
for the type of landscape zone required, additional vegetation shall be
planted.



         f.   Areas within landscape bufferyard or corridors not
planted with trees or shrubs must be maintained as live landscaping. The
clustering of trees and shrubs is encouraged in these areas. Only small
trees, small shrubs and flowers may be planted in raised containers.



         g.   The minimum depth of topsoil applied to new
residential subdivisions, commercial areas and parks shall be (6) inches. All
plant material shall be planted with a minimum of six (6) inches of organic
soil.



         h.   Organic mulch shall be installed under trees,
shrubs, and throughout planting beds to a recommended depth of three (3)
inches, in accordance with the recommended practices of the International
Society of Arboriculture. Mulch should be pulled away at least four (4)
inches away from the bases of trees and shrubs. Mulch should not be piled up
against the trunk of a tree (i.e. “volcano mulching”) and should extend
to the drip line of the tree’s branches. Colorized mulch is not permitted.
(Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



         i.   All sod shall be clean and reasonably free of
weeds, pests or diseases. Grass seed shall be in conformance with U.S.
Department of Agriculture rules and regulations and applicable Illinois state
seed laws. All dormant seeding will require the use of an erosion control
blanket (North American Green S150 or equal).



         j.   All plant material shall be installed free of
disease and in a manner than ensures the availability of sufficient soil and
water to sustain healthy growth, and shall be planted in a manner which is
not intrusive to utilities or pavement.



      7.   Time for Installation of Required Plantings.



         a.   All landscaping, including mulching and seeding
shall be completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan and site
plan prior to issuance of an occupancy permit and prior to release of any
letter of credit for the site. This shall apply to all types of developments.



         b.   The Village may issue a temporary occupancy permit
until June 1 of the following year if landscaping is delayed due to unusual
conditions, such as drought, ice, over–saturated soil (deep mud), or
inappropriate planting season for the planned species, unavailability of
plant species, or other circumstances beyond the petitioner's control. If the
developer has not posted a letter of credit that includes landscaping costs
for the property, the petitioner must provide the Village with a letter of
credit to ensure the installation of the remaining landscape material.



         c.   All parkway trees are required to be planted by
June 1 of the year following issuance of the occupancy permit for any single
family home.  Single-family detached dwellings shall complete all
landscaping, including grass, within one year of the date of issuance of a
temporary occupancy permit for that dwelling.



         d.   All bufferyard and common area landscaping for
residential developments shall be completed in accordance with the approved
site plan at the time that eighty percent (80%) of the development is
completed or within the next planting season following occupancy, whichever
comes first. If the development is built in phases, then the landscaping
shall be completed as eighty percent (80%) of each phase is completed or
within the next planting season following occupancy, whichever comes first.



         e.   The developer or property owner shall contact the
Development Services Department for a final landscape inspection upon
completion of landscape installation. The Development Services Department
shall notify the developer or property owner of any deficiencies.



   F.   Maintenance and Preservation.



      1.   General Maintenance Standards.



         a.   The plantings in any landscaped area must be
properly maintained in order for the landscaped area to fulfill the purposes
for which it was established. 



         b.   The obligation for continuous maintenance is
binding on the petitioner who received landscape plan approval, to any
subsequent property owner(s) or any other parties having a controlling
interest in the property. (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



         c.   Continuous maintenance includes, but is not limited
to, the removal of weeds; mowing; trimming; edging; cultivation; reseeding;
plant replacement; appropriate fertilization; spraying; control of pests,
insects and rodents by nontoxic methods whenever possible;
watering/irrigation and other operations necessary to assure normal plant
growth. The maintenance, repair, and replacement of all landscaping materials
and barriers, including refuse disposal areas, walls, fences and other
amenities upon their acceptance is also included.



         d.   Continuous maintenance also includes all
requirements set forth in the Village of Orland Park Code of Ordinances,
Title 5, Chapter 7 “Property Maintenance Code”.



         e.   The replacement of any dead or dying plant
materials or plant materials supporting less than fifty percent (50%) healthy
leaf growth shall be replaced annually in compliance with the approved
landscape plan.



         f.   Areas of a parcel not covered by structures or
pavement shall be planted with live landscaping.



         g.   In the event that any vegetation or physical
element functioning to meet the standards of this Section is severely damaged
due to an unusual weather occurrence or natural catastrophe, the owner shall
have one (1) year or one (1) growing season, whichever is sooner, to replace
or replant.



         h.   Property owners are responsible to repair or
replace any and all areas damaged by seasonal snow removal to a condition
compliant with the approved landscape plan on file with the Village within
(1) year or one (1) growing season of the damage, whichever is sooner.



         i.   All landscape materials shall be protected from
damage by vehicles or pedestrians that could reduce the viability of the
plant materials. This includes maintaining landscape materials in a natural
manner that precludes shaping or over-pruning of plant materials.



         j.   A parkway shall be maintained by the adjacent
property owner unless an agreement for maintenance has been reached with the
Village. See Village of Orland Park Code of Ordinances Tree Management
Program, Title 3, Chapter 6 for additional parkway tree maintenance
requirements.



         k.   At the time a developer turns over a subdivision to
a homeowners association, the developer shall be responsible for replacing
all dead plant material which was planted within the prior two (2) years. If
a homeowner association has been responsible for maintenance during that
period for over one year, the developer shall not be responsible for
replacing poorly maintained plants. Examples of poor maintenance include over
pruning, excessive weeds, improper trimming, diseases from lack of attention,
cracking, leaning, or other problems associated with damage from snow plowing
and mowing.



      2.   Naturalized Landscaping Area Monitoring and Management
Standards. Naturalized landscaping areas need management on a regular basis
after installation. Naturalized landscaping areas are most often planted as
the landscape perimeter for a stormwater detention area, although not limited
to just these areas. Site specific conditions influence the type and
frequency of management needed. See Section 6-305.E.3.e for Letter of Credit
requirements for naturalized landscape areas.



         a.   Landscape Plan. A landscape plan shall be submitted
for all projects where naturalized landscaping is included. See Section
6-305.E Landscape Plan for landscape plan requirements.



         b.   Monitoring and Management Plan. A near and
long-term Monitoring and Management Plan (M&M Plan) is an integral component
to ensuring proper long-term management of naturalized landscapes. When
required, a Monitoring and Management Plan shall be submitted with a
corresponding landscape plan for Village review and approval and shall
coincide with the Maintenance Plan approved with a WMO Permit.



            1.   The Village document, commonly referred to as
“Monitoring and Management Plan for Naturalized Vegetation Areas and
Detention Basins”, as amended, shall be used as a template for the
completion of a Monitoring and Management Plan. Minor edits to this template
may be made by the petitioner; however, the final text of the Monitoring and
Management Plan shall be approved by the Development Services Department. The
following are minimum components of a Monitoring and Management Plan:



               i.   The names, addresses, contacts, and
telephone numbers of the owner(s).



               ii.   The names, addresses, contacts, and
telephone numbers of the party or parties legally responsible for operations
and maintenance.



               iii.   If long-term management will be
provided by a public agency, the Monitoring and Management Plan is to include
written documentation by the public agency that they will accept such
responsibility, including associated capital expenses.



               iv.   If long-term management will be
provided by a property owner, business or an association, the Monitoring and
Management Plan is to include a copy of the terms to demonstrate that the
agreement is recorded for all lots.



               v.   A description and/or plan drawing
indicating the location of permanent access (public and private), overland
flow paths, control structures, etc.



               vi.   A list and schedule indicating how and
when inspections and maintenance are to be performed, including both routine
and infrequent maintenance tasks.



               vii.   A list of general tasks or activities
that are prohibited within the basin (e.g., dumping of yard waste or debris;
replacement of approved vegetation with non–approved materials;
construction or placement of structures; pesticide application, fertilizer
application, mowing other than for meeting specific management goals; etc.).



               viii.   Documentation of the estimated
routine and non–routine expenses and dedicated source(s) of funding for
continued inspection, operation, and maintenance.



               ix.   A Homeowners Association (HOA) /
Business Owners Association (BOA) shall include language in the governing
documents authorizing for collection of fees for the naturalized landscape
maintenance and outlining the process by which corrective actions will be
taken and enforced.



               x.   Written acknowledgment that any
amendment to the covenants and restrictions that alters the site beyond the
original condition must have prior Village approval.



         c.   Single-Family Residential Naturalized Landscaping.
Single-family residential properties that include naturalized landscaping
areas that exceed twelve inches (12") in height are exempt from the letter of
credit requirements detailed in 6-305.E.3.e Letter of Credit, although a
Landscape Plan and an abridged Monitoring and Management Plan (M&M Plan) are
still required. The following conditions apply to naturalized landscaping on
single-family residential properties:



            1.   A property owner shall apply to the
Development Services Department and receive a written approval of the
landscape plan prior to the installation of the naturalized landscaping.



               i.   The application shall include a plat of
survey and a site plan of the single-family lot drawn to scale on a sheet not
less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8½" × 11"), which
contains: the location of property lines; location of structures, fences,
existing drainage patterns, and paved areas; location of each natural
landscaping area; a list by scientific and common name of species intended to
be planted and maintained within each area; and the setback distance of each
naturalized landscape area that will be located near any property line. Any
proposed soil amendments and levels of shade and sunlight should also be
included on the plan.



            2.   An M&M Plan for the near- and long-term
maintenance of the naturalized landscape area shall be submitted for review
and approval.



               i.   The Village document, commonly referred
to as “Monitoring and Management Plan for Naturalized Vegetation Areas on
Single Family Residential Properties”, as amended, shall be used as a
template for the completion of a single-family residential naturalized
landscapeMonitoring and Management Plan. Minor edits to this template may be
made by the petitioner; however, the final text of the M&M Plan shall be
approved by the Development Services Department.



            3.   It shall be permitted to grow native plants
that exceed twelve inches (12") in height within a natural landscaping area,
including ferns, grasses, sedges, rushes, forbs, shrubs and trees, in lieu of
turf grass lawn in designed and managed natural landscape areas.



            4.   Natural landscaping shall be permitted in
rear or side yards only, and setback at a minimum of three (3) feet of any
property line. No setback shall be required where the natural landscaping is
separated from adjacent lots by fencing or continuous shrub of three (3) feet
or more in height, or where the natural landscape area abuts permitted
naturalized landscaping on an adjacent lot.



            5.   Naturalized landscaping may occupy a maximum
of thirty percent (30%) of the total existing open space within the side or
rear yards of a single-family residential property.



            6.   It is not the intent of this section to allow
vegetated areas to be unmanaged, overgrown, a health hazard or a breeding
ground for fauna known to create a safety or health hazard. Plant species
that are defined as noxious and/or invasive by the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources, Midwest Invasive Plant Network, or Illinois Invasive
Species Council do not come within the protection of this section.



            7.   If the naturalized landscape installation
would affect natural drainage or involve earthwork or affect capacity of
neighboring retention or detention facilities, then a land development review
application shall be submitted as per the provisions of Title 5 of the
Village’s Land Development Code.



            8.   Upon installation of a naturalized landscape
area, the site shall be inspected by a Village inspector or designee to
verify compliance with the approved landscape plan and proper maintenance of
the natural landscape area. After a successful inspection, the property owner
will be provided with a letter from the Village certifying that the
naturalized landscape has been inspected and meets the criteria of this
Section. Subsequent inspections shall be performed annually by the Village or
designee, or as determined by the Development Services Department.



            9.   Permission for single-family residential
natural landscaping may be revoked with cause, such as failure of the owners
to manage the areas or to respond to notices of creation of a nuisance or
violation of the weed control ordinance.



      3.   Tree Preservation Standards.



         a.   Purpose.  The purpose of this Section is to
establish high preservation standards for all public and private properties
within the Village, protect the Villages natural qualities and heritage,
continue its reputation as an extension of the Forest Preserves, benefit the
public at large as an asset to the neighborhoods, and become a source of
identity and pride to the community. In addition to these high standards,
this preservation ordinance specifically strives to accomplish the following:



            1.   Prevent soil erosion and sedimentation;



            2.   Reduce storm water runoff, replenish
aquifers, and eliminate the costs associated with correcting the above;



            3.   Assist in the absorption of excess carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere;



            4.   Create a sound buffer to noise pollution;



            5.   Provide protection against natural elements
such as the sun, wind and rain;



            6.   Provide habitat for birds, which in turn,
assists in the control of insects;



            7.   Protect and increase property values; and



            8.   Conserve and enhance the Village's
environment, especially its natural setting, and to protect the habitat of
its existing wildlife.



         b.   Responsibility for Compliance.  The following
actions require tree removal permits. No Village official, unless the tree is
a safety hazard, shall issue a permit provided herein in violation of the
requirements of this Section.



            1.   The removal of any heritage tree, defined as
any healthy tree that is twenty-four (24) inches in diameter, or greater,
measured four (4) feet from the ground, from any lot, developed or
undeveloped;



            2.   The removal of any tree from a parkway;



            3.   The removal of any tree, in good or poor
condition, from a conservation or tree preservation easement. Easements are
legal recorded agreements tied to property most often shown on a plat of
survey and/or plat of subdivision;



            4.   The removal of any tree from utility owned
property or non- residential utility easement;



            5.   The removal of any tree from any property,
commercial, institutional, office, industrial or multifamily residential,
with an approved landscape plan. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



         c.   Fines.



            1.   Failure to obtain a tree removal permit prior
to removing trees will result in a fine of $200.00 per inch of tree caliper
that shall be levied against that entity primarily responsible for said tree
removal. Each subsequent act of unauthorized tree removal by the same entity
shall result in a fifty percent (50%) increase over the previous fine levy.
This is in addition to the required tree mitigation. Trees removed without a
tree removal permit must also be replaced per the replacement standards set
forth in Section 6-305.F.3.f Tree Replacement Standards.



            2.   Permits for the removal, relocation or
replacement of trees covered herein shall be obtained by submitting an
application, on a form prescribed by the Development Services Department,
pursuant to the standards set forth in this Section.



         d.   Tree Pruning.



            1.   Tree pruning, done in order to remove dead
branches or to 'limb up' the tree is permitted without a permit. If limbed
up, a tree should be pruned gradually so that an unbranched trunk of a tree
is never more than one-third (1/3) the total height of the tree.



            2.   Tree topping, or the removal of the tree
central leader, is not permitted on any parkway tree, heritage tree, or
conservation easement tree.



            3.   No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of a
single tree’s canopy shall be removed in any one (1) year.



            4.   All trees must be installed and trimmed to
ensure that branches shall not obstruct the view of any street intersection
and so that there shall be a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface
of the street or sidewalk.



         e.   Tree Protection.



            1.   During the development of a property, or the
relocation/removal of permitted trees, the owner of the property shall be
responsible for the erection of any and all barriers or protective guards
necessary to protect any existing or installed vegetation from damage both
during and after construction.



            2.   Trees to be preserved during the development
of the property shall be protected during construction by a fence around the
drip line of each tree to prevent compaction of soil and other damage to the
tree by equipment or materials. No excess topsoil, construction materials,
debris, or chemicals are allowed within the protected drip line of each tree.
In addition, no parking of vehicles, on-site offices, or machinery is allowed
inside the protected dripline. All refueling, maintenance, lunch, break and
burning areas are to be located away from all protected trees.



            3.   Wherever a change of ground grading is
planned, the trees to be preserved shall be protected by a retaining wall,
placed at the drip-line so as to preserve the existing grade for the roots.



            4.   Wherever a change of grading is planned, the
topsoil shall be preserved for the new landscaping to be installed.



            5.   When trenching alongside existing trees is
unavoidable, the trench must be one (1) foot for every one (1) inch tree
caliper, as measured four (4) feet above grade, away from the base of the
existing tree to be preserved.



            6.   Construction pruning and root pruning of
trees directly impacted by construction may be required for preservation of
existing trees. These measures must be indicated on the tree preservation
plan or the submitted application for permit.



         f.   Tree Replacement Standards.



            1.   Size.  All trees that are four (4) inches in
diameter, measured four (4') feet from the ground shall be replaced as
detailed in Table 6-305.F.3.f.1 (A) - Native Illinois Tree Replacement
Standards or Table 6-305.F.3.f.1 (B) - Non-Native Illinois Tree Replacement
Standards pursuant to Village approval.



Table 6-305.F.3.f.1 (A) - Native Illinois Tree Replacement Standards



 


TREES NATIVE TO ILLINOIS






CANOPY TREES



Diameter of Removed Trees
 
Number of Replacement Trees Required per Every (1) Tree Removed


4" to 12"
 
2 trees at 2.5" or 1 tree at 4"


13" to 23"
 
4 trees at 2.5" or 2 trees at 4"


24" or greater
 
6 trees at 2.5" or 3 trees at 4"



EVERGREEN TREES




Height of Removed Trees

 

Number of Replacement Trees Required




6' to 10'

 

2 trees at 6' or 1 tree at 10'




10' to 14'

 

4 trees at 6' or 2 trees at 10'




14' or taller

 

6 trees at 6' or 3 trees at 10'





 



(Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



Table 6-305.F.3.f.1 (B) - Non-Native Illinois Tree Replacement Standards



 


TREES NON-NATIVE TO ILLINOIS





CANOPY TREES


Diameter of Removed Trees
 
Number of Replacement Trees Required

per Every (1) Tree Removed


4" to 12"
 
1 tree at 2.5"


13" to 23"
 
2 trees at 2.5" or 1 tree at 4"


24" or greater
 
3 trees at 2.5" or 2 trees at 4"


EVERGREEN TREES


Height of Removed Trees
 
Number of Replacement Trees Required


6' to 10'
 
2 trees at 6' or 1 tree at 10'


10' to 14'
 
2 trees at 6' or 1 tree at 10'


14' or taller
 
3 trees at 6' or 2 trees at 10'




 



            2.   Exempt Species.  The species listed in Table
6-305.F.3.f.2 are exempt from tree mitigation requirements.



Table 6-305.F.3.f.2 - Species Exempt From Tree Mitigation Requirements



 



Species Exempt From Tree Mitigation Requirements


Acer ginnala - Amur Maple


Acer negundo - Box Elder


Acer platanoides - Norway Maple


Acer pseudoplatanus - Sycamore Maple


Acer saccharinum - Silver Maple


Ailanthus altissima - Tree-of-Heaven


Albizia julibrissin - Silktree


Alnus glutinosa - European Alder


Aralia elata - Japanese Angelica Tree


Berberis thunbergii - Japanese Barberry


Betula pendula - European White Birch


Broussonetia papyrifera - Paper Mulberry


Elaeagnus angustifolia - Russian Olive


Elaeagnus umbellata - Autumn Olive


Euonymus alatus - Winged Euonymus


Frangula alnus - Glossy Buckthorn


Fraxinus spp. - Ash


Koelreuteria paniculata - Golden Rain Tree


Ligustrum sinense - Chinese Privet


Lonicera maackii - Amur Honeysuckle


Maclura pomifera - Osage Orange


Morus alba - Mulberry


Paulownia tomentosa - Princesstree


Phellodendron amurense - Amur Corktree


Pinus nigra - Austrian Pine


Pinus sylvestris - Scots Pine


Pinus taeda - Loblolly Pine


Populus alba - White Poplar


Populus deltoides - Cottonwood


Prunus avium - Sweet Cherry


Pyrus calleryana - Callery Pear


Rhamnus spp. - Buckthorn


Robinia pseudoacacia - Black Locust


Salix spp. - Willow


Sorbus aucuparia - European Mountain Ash


Ulmus pumila - Siberian Elm


Viburnum lantana - Wayfaring Tree




 



            3.   Trees with a condition rated as 'Poor' or
'Dead' on a tree survey completed by a certified arborist are also exempt
from mitigation requirements.



            4.   The owner of a site with landscaping that is
unhealthful (i.e. spaced too closely) may be permitted to plant replacement
trees in the parkway or elsewhere in the Village, if approved by Development
Services Department.



            5.   Cash in Lieu.  If required mitigation trees,
or any other tree required by Code, cannot be provided on the site, the
petitioner shall pay cash in lieu of tree replacement in the amount of $400
for each two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper deciduous canopy tree or eight
(8) foot evergreen tree to the Village's Tree Preservation and Green
Infrastructure Account. Such a fee in lieu of mitigation must be approved by
the Development Services Department and can only be used when replacement on
site is not possible. The quantity of trees requiring mitigation does not
count towards a reduction in the quantity of trees or landscaping required by
this Section.



The maximum cash in lieu amount for projects less than 10 acres in area is
$50,000. The maximum cash in lieu amount for projects greater than 10 acres
in area is $100,000. Any cash in lieu amount above the set maximum amount
will be waived by the Village. A 10% reduction of Tree Mitigation cash in
lieu amount will awarded if said fee is paid in full before or at time of
final landscape plan approval.



            6.   Tree Preservation and Green Infrastructure
Account.  The Tree Preservation and Green Infrastructure Account shall be
used to support Village-initiated tree planting and green infrastructure
projects located on public property within the Village of Orland Park and
shall be administered by the Development Services Department. This account
shall be used only for tree preservation and green infrastructure projects
approved by the Village Board.



            7.   Tree Preservation Credit.  A credit of $150
per caliper inch will be applied towards a project's tree mitigation fee for
every healthy (fair to good) native tree preserved on site. Preservation
credit shall be for the preservation of native Illinois trees only, or as
determined by the Development Services Department. A Tree Preservation Credit
shall never exceed the tree mitigation fee amount. Adherence to an Village
approved Tree Preservation Plan shall be required for projects awarded tree
preservation credit. A line item in the amount of the tree preservation
credit will be applied to a project's letter of credit, which will be reduced
to zero after written verification from a Certified Arborist that the
preserved tree(s) are still in good to fair condition at least one year after
issuance of a project's certificate of occupancy. Preservation credit shall
not be applied towards any other fee other than tree mitigation fees.  (Amd.
Ord. 5167–2/20/17; Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



            (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         g.   Heritage Tree and Parkway Tree Removal.



            1.   All heritage trees and parkway trees shall be
replaced per the replacement standards set forth in Section 6-305.F.3.f Tree
Preservation Standards.  The number of replacement trees may be limited by
what can be reasonably accommodated within the available lot area, but any
reduction in mitigation requirements must be approved by the Development
Services Department.



            2.   A heritage tree that is dead or diseased may
be removed without replacement if the tree is certified as dead or diseased
by a certified arborist, to be retained by the homeowner, and with issuance
of a tree removal permit.



            3.   A parkway tree that is dead or dying may be
removed without replacement if the tree is confirmed as dead or diseased by
the Development Services Department or Public Works Department and with
issuance of a tree removal permit.



         h.   Procedures to Obtain a Tree Removal Permit For New
Development.



            1.   Tree Mitigation Plan. Developers of any site
for any use other than a single family home seeking a site plan or landscape
plan approval shall submit a Tree Mitigation Plan with the petition for
development. A tree mitigation plan shall include:



               i.   A tree survey showing the location,
edge of dripline, species, diameter at breast height (DBH) and condition of
every tree four (4) inches or larger, measured from four and a half (4.5')
feet from the ground, on the property. The survey shall distinguish existing
trees which are proposed to be destroyed, relocated, replaced, preserved at
their present location. The Development Services Department may require that
the tree survey exclude those portions of the site which it determines will
not be affected by the development activity.



               ii.   A tree mitigation report that
highlights the quantity, diameter at breast height (DBH) and condition of
trees to be removed and the quantity and caliper size of the required
replacement trees pursuant to the replacement standards set forth in Section
6-305.F.3.f Tree Replacement Standards.



            2.   A tree survey and tree mitigation report,
collectively known as a Tree Mitigation Plan, will be reviewed and approved
by the Development Services Department through the landscape plan review
process. Approval of a Tree Mitigation Plan shall be granted only if the
Development Services Department finds that all reasonable efforts have been
undertaken in the architectural layout and design of the proposed development
to preserve existing trees and to otherwise enhance the aesthetic appearance
of the development by the incorporation of trees in the design process.
Relocation or replacement of trees may be required as a condition of approval
in accordance with the criteria set forth in this Section. No tree removal
shall take place until a Tree Mitigation Plan has been approved by the
Development Services Department. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



         i.   Procedures to Obtain a Tree Removal Permit For
Single Family Homes and Existing Development.



            1.   All others requesting a tree removal permit
shall fill out a tree removal permit application prescribed by the
Development Services Department prior to its removal or relocation. The
applicant shall provide the following information:



               i.   Information on the type of tree and the
size of the tree under consideration;



               ii.   Reason(s) for the tree(s)
removal/relocation;



               iii.   Photograph(s) of the condition and
location of the tree in question;



               iv.   At least one full scale photo of the
tree(s) showing its surrounding environment. Any photographs supporting the
reason(s) for relocation/removal should be included;



               v.   A copy of the plat of survey for the
property showing the location of the existing building(s) and outlining the
location of the existing tree(s) in question. If the tree location/removal
involves existing or proposed utilities, driveways, structures, easements or
other pertinent site features, these should also be drawn in to scale. Plans
may be drawn by property owners; and



               vi.   A description of the tree(s) to be
planted to replace any removed trees.



            2.   Approval of a tree removal permit shall be
granted only if the Development Services Department finds that all reasonable
efforts have been undertaken in the architectural layout and design of the
proposed development to preserve existing trees and to otherwise enhance the
aesthetic appearance of the development by the incorporation of trees in the
design process.  Relocation or replacement of trees may be required as a
condition of approval in accordance with the criteria set forth in this
Section. No tree removal shall take place until the issuance of a tree
removal permit.



            3.   If the Development Services Department
determines that the scope of the tree removal exceeds the provisions of this
Section, the applicant must supply the information listed in Section
6-305.F.3.h Procedures to Obtain a Tree Removal Permit for New Development.



         j.   Final Inspection.



            1.   No final certificate of occupancy or letter
of credit release shall be issued until the relocation or replacement of
trees, or payment of any outstanding tree mitigation fees, as required by the
approved mitigation plan or tree removal permit, has been completed and the
final landscape inspection approval has been given by the Development
Services Department. Trees relocated from one portion of the site to another
which do not survive transplanting shall be replaced with a suitable
replacement tree as specified by the Development Services Department. Should
the Department determine that, due to the time of the year that the
certificate of compliance and occupancy is requested, the relocation or
replacement of trees should be deferred until a more suitable time, a
certificate of compliance and occupancy may be issued provided that:



               i.   The letter of credit is renewed in an
amount to cover the remaining landscaping to be installed.



               ii.   If a project does not have a letter of
credit with the Village, the applicant(s) provides the Development Services
Department with a cash deposit or bond in the amount equal to the cost of the
relocation or replacement of trees;



               iii.   The applicant completes all required
tree relocation or replacement within the time frame specified by the
Development Services Department. The cash deposit or bond will be returned to
the applicant provided that all work is completed within the established time
frame. (Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



            2.   Should the applicant fail to comply with the
above item, the Development Services Department may elect to use the cash
bond or letter of credit to hire a landscaper to complete the required tree
relocation or replacement. Excess cash deposit, letter of credit or bond
funds, if any, will then be returned to the applicant.



         k.   Exceptions.



            1.   In the event that any tree shall pose a
threat to one's health, safety or property and require immediate removal
without formal Village approval (e.g. a tree which has been blown over or
struck by lightning), verbal authorization may be given by the Development
Services Department and the tree removed without obtaining a written permit
as herein required. Such verbal authorization shall later be confirmed in
writing by the Department.



            2.   All state approved and governmental plant or
tree nurseries and botanical gardens shall be exempt from the terms and
provisions of this Section, but only in relation to those trees which are
planted and grown for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the
ordinary course of business or for some public purpose.



            3.   A tree removal authorization may be issued
when a tree, due to natural circumstances, is dead or irreversibly declining,
is in danger of falling, is too close to existing structures so as to
endanger such structures, interferes with utility services, creates unsafe
vision clearance, or constitutes a health hazard. Such trees may be removed
only after the Development Services Department or Public Works Department has
verified that such a condition exists.



            4.   A tree removal authorization may be issued
when a tree removal is necessary to observe good forestry practice such as
the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land will support or when such
removal is in accordance with a documented landscape management plan.



         l.   Civil Remedies.  In addition to any other remedies
provided by this Section the Village shall have the following judicial
remedies available for violations of this Section or any permit condition
promulgated under this Section.



            1.   The Village may institute a civil action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages
for any injury caused by the removal of trees in contravention of the terms
of this Section.



            2.   The Village may institute a civil action in a
court of competent jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce
compliance with this Section to enjoin any violation hereof; and to seek
injunctive relief to prevent irreparable injury to the trees and/or
properties encompassed by the terms of this Section.



   G.   List of Recommended Plant Species.



 


LIST OF RECOMMENDED PLANT SPECIES



Common Name
 
Botanical
 
Cultivar(s)




CANOPY (SHADE) TREES
 
 
 
 


Bald cypress
 
Taxodium distichum
 
 


Beech, American
 
Fagus grandifolia
 
 


Beech, European
 
Fagus sylvatica
 
 


Buckeye, Ohio
 
Aesculus glabra
 
 


Cherry, black
 
Prunus serotina
 
 


Coffeetree, Kentucky
 
Gymnocladus dioica
 
 


Elm
 
Ulmus spp.
 
 


Filbert, Turkish Corylus colurna
 
 
 
 


Ginkgo (male only)
 
Ginkgo biloba
 
Autumn gold


 
 
 
 
Fairmount


 
 
 
 
Lakeview


 
 
 
 
Princeton sentry


Hackberry, common
 
Celtis occidentalis
 
 


Hickory, bitternut
 
Carya cordiformis
 
 


Hickory, shagbark
 
Carya ovata
 
 


Honey locust (thornless)
 
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis
 
Green glory


 
 
 
 
Imperial


 
 
 
 
Majestic


 
 
 
 
Shademaster


 
 
 
 
Skyline


Hornbeam, European
 
Carpinus betulus
 
 


Horse chestnut, common
 
Aesculus hippocastanum
 
 


Larch, common
 
Larix decidua
 
 


Linden, littleleaf
 
Tilia cordata
 
Chancellor


 
 
 
 
Glenleven


 
 
 
 
Greenspire


 
 
 
 
Olympic


Linden, Redmond
 
Tilia euchlora
 
Redmond


Linden, silver
 
Tilia tomentosa
 
 


London Plane Tree
 
Platanus x acerifolia
 
 


Maple, black
 
Acer nigrum
 
Greencolumn


Maple, Freeman
 
Acer x freemanii
 
Autumn blaze


 
 
 
 
Morgan


Maple, red
 
Acer rubrum
 
Armstrong


 
 
 
 
Autumn flame


 
 
 
 
Columnare


 
 
 
 
Red sunset


 
 
 
 
October glory


Maple, sugar
 
Acer saccharum
 
Green mountain


 
 
 
 
Wright Brothers


Oak, bur
 
Quercus macrocarpa
 
 


Oak, English
 
Quercus robur
 
 


Oak, pin
 
Quercus palustris
 
 


Oak, red
 
Quercus rubra
 
 


Oak, swamp white
 
Quercus bicolor
 
 


Oak, white
 
Quercus alba
 
 


Tulip tree
 
Liriodendron tulipifera
 
 


Zelkova, Japanese
 
Zelkova serrata
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


EVERGREEN TREES
 
 
 
 


Douglas fir
 
Pseudotsuga menziensii
 
 


Pine, eastern white
 
Pinus strobes
 
 


Pine, Limber
 
Pinus flexilis
 
 


Pine, Japanese white
 
Pinus parviflora
 
 


Pine, Scotch
 
Pinus sylvestris
 
 


Spruce, Colorado
 
Picea pungens
 
 


Spruce, Norway
 
Picea abies
 
 


Spruce, Serbian
 
Picea omorika
 
 


Spruce, Black Hills
 
Picea glauca
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


ORNAMENTAL/SMALL TREES
 
 
 
 


Birch, river
 
Betula nigra
 
 


Birch, white
 
Betula platyphylla
 
Whitespire


Buckeye, red
 
Aesculus pavia
 
 


Chokecherry, common
 
Prunus virginiana
 
 


Crabapple, flowering
 
Malus spp.
 
 


Dogwood, Kousa
 
Cornus kousa
 
 


Fringetree, white
 
Chionanthus virginicus
 
 


Hawthorn, cockspur
 
Crataegus crusgalli var. inermis
 
 


Hawthorn, Washington
 
Crataegus phaenopyrum
 
 


Hophornbeam, American
 
Ostrya virginiana
 
 


Hornbeam, American
 
Carpinus caroliniana
 
 


Magnolia, saucer
 
Magnolia x soulangiana
 
 


Magnolia, star
 
Magnolia stellata
 
 


Maple, hedge
 
Acer campestre
 
Marmo


Maple, miyabi
 
Acer miyabe
 
 


Maple, tartarian
 
Acer tataricum
 
 


Pagoda tree, Japanese
 
Sophora japonica
 
Regent


Plum, wild
 
Prunus americana
 
 


Redbud, eastern
 
Cercis canadensis
 
 


Serviceberry, Allegheny
 
Amalanchier laevis
 
 


Serviceberry, apple
 
Amelanchier x grandiflora
 
 


Serviceberry, downy
 
Amelanchier arborea
 
 


Serviceberry, Saskatoon
 
Amelenchier alnifolia
 
 


Tree lilac, Japanese
 
Syringa reticulata
 
Morton


 
 
 
 
Zhang Zhiming


 
 
 
 
Ivory Silk


LARGE DECIDUOUS SHRUBS
 
 
 
 


Amorpha, indigobush
 
Amorpha fruticosa
 
 


Buttonbush, common
 
Cephalanthus occidentalis
 
 


Clethra, summersweet
 
Clethra alnifolia
 
 


Cotoneaster, hedge
 
Cotoneaster
 
 


Cotoneaster, Peking
 
Cotoneaster acutifolius
 
 


Cotoneaster, spreading
 
Cotoneaster divaricatus
 
 


Dogwood, cornelian cherry
 
Cornus mas
 
 


Dogwood, gray
 
Cornus racemosa
 
 


Dogwood, pagoda
 
Cornus alternifolia
 
 


Dogwood, Redosier
 
Cornus sericea
 
Baileyi


 
 
 
 
Isanti


Dogwood, tatarian
 
Cornus alba
 
 


Elderberry
 
Sambucus canadensis
 
 


Filbert, American
 
Corylus americana
 
 


Filbert, Turkish
 
Corylus colurna
 
 


Forsythia, border
 
Forsythia x intermedia
 
 


Forsythia, greenstem
 
Forsythia viridissima
 
Meadowlark


 
 
 
 
Northern sun


 
 
 
 
Sunrise


Hydrangea
 
Hydrangea spp.
 
 


Lilac
 
Syringa spp.
 
 


Ninebark, common
 
Physocarpus opulifolius
 
 


Sumac, smooth
 
Rhus glabra
 
 


Sumac, staghorn
 
Rhus typhina
 
 


Viburnum, American cranberry
 
Viburnum trilobum
 
 


Viburnum, arrowwood
 
Viburnum dentatum
 
Autumn jazz


 
 
 
 
Chicago lustre


Viburnum, blackhaw
 
Viburnum prunifolium
 
 


Viburnum, burkwood
 
Viburnum x burkwoodii
 
 


Viburnum, European cranberry
 
Viburnum opulus
 
 


Viburnum, lantanaphyllum
 
Viburnum x rhytidophylloides
 
 


Viburnum, nannyberry
 
Viburnum lentago
 
 


Viburnum, wayfaringtree
 
Viburnum lantana
 
 


Weigela, old fashioned
 
Weigela florida
 
 


Winterberry, common
 
Ilex verticillata
 
 


Witchhazel, common
 
Hamamelis virginiana
 
 


Witchhazel, vernal
 
Hamamelis vernalis
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


SMALL EVERGREEN TREES
 
 
 
 


Arborvitae
 
Thuja occidentalis
 
Techny


Hemlock, Canadian
 
Tsuga canadensis
 
 


Juniper, upright
 
Juniperus spp.
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


SMALL DECIDUOUS SHRUBS
 
 
 
 


Alpine currant
 
Ribes alpinum
 
Green mound


False Indigo
 
Baptisia x bicolor
 
 


Bayberry
 
Myrica pennsylvanica
 
 


Chokeberry, black
 
Aronia melonocarpa
 
 


Chokeberry, red
 
Aronia arbutifolia
 
Brilliantissima


Cotoneaster, cranberry
 
Cotoneaster apiculata
 
 


Cotoneaster, creeping
 
Cotoneaster adpressus
 
 


Cotoneaster, rockspray
 
Cotoneaster horizonalis
 
 


Forsythia, greenstem
 
Forsythia viridissima
 
Bronxensis


Kerria, Japanese
 
Kerria japonica
 
 


New Jersey tea
 
Ceonothus americanus
 
 


Rose
 
Rosa spp.
 
 


Spiraea spp.
 
Spiraea spp.
 
 


St. Johnswort
 
Hypericum kalmianum
 
 


St. Johnswort, shrubby
 
Hypericum prolificum
 
 


Stephanandra, cutleaf
 
Stephanandra incisa
 
Crispa


Sumac, gro low
 
Rhus aromatica
 
Gro low


Viburnum, dwarf cranberry
 
Viburnum trilobum
 
Compactum


Viburnum, dwarf Korean
 
Viburnum carlesii
 
Compactum


Viburnum, judd
 
Viburnum x juddii
 
 


Viburnum, sargent
 
Viburnum sargentii
 
 


SMALL EVERGREEN SHRUBS
 
 
 
 


Boxwood
 
Buxus koreana x sempervirens
 
Glencoe


 
 
 
 
Green gem


 
 
 
 
Green mountain


 
 
 
 
Green mound


 
 
 
 
Green velvet


 
 
 
 
Winter gem


Boxwood, common
 
Buxus sempervirens
 
 


Boxwood, littleleaf
 
Buxus microphylla
 
 


Juniper, Chinese
 
Juniperus chinensis
 
Kallays compacta


 
 
 
 
var. sargentii Glauca


 
 
 
 
var. sargentii Viridis


 
 
 
 
Sea green


Juniper, creeping
 
Juniperus horizontalis
 
Bar Harbor


 
 
 
 
Blue chip


 
 
 
 
Blue rug


 
 
 
 
Hughes


 
 
 
 
P.C. Youngstown


Pine, mugo
 
Pinus mugo var. mugo
 
 


Rhododendron
 
Rhododendron spp.
 
Northern lights


 
 
 
 
P.J.M.


Yew, dense
 
Taxus x media
 
Densiformis


 
 
 
 
Tauntonii


 
 
 
 
Hicksii


GROUNDCOVERS AND VINES
 
 
 
 


Ajuga
 
Ajuga reptans
 
 


Barren strawberry
 
Waldsteinia ternata
 
 


Boston ivy
 
Parthenocissus tricuspidata
 
 


Clematis
 
Clematis spp.
 
 


Common periwinkle
 
Vinca minor
 
 


Fleeceflower
 
Polygonum reynoutria
 
 


Ginger, wild
 
Asarum canadense
 
 


Hydrangea, climbing
 
Hydrangea anomola ssp. petiolaris
 
 


Pachysandra, Japanese
 
Pachysandra terminalis
 
 


Purpleleaf wintercreeper
 
Euonymous fortunei
 
Coloratus


Sedum
 
Sedum spp.
 
 


Virginia creeper
 
Parthenocissus quinquefolia
 
 


UNACCEPTABLE TREES
 
 
 
 


All Ash (green, white, blue and all their varieties)
 
Fraxinus spp.
 
 


Austrian pine
 
Pinus nigra
 
 


Black locust
 
Robinia spp.
 
 


Boxelder
 
Acer negundo
 
 


Buckthorn
 
Rhamnus frangula
 
 


Cottonwood, Eastern
 
Populous deltoides
 
 


Mulberry
 
Morus spp.
 
 


Osage orange
 
Maclura pomifera
 
 


Russian olive
 
Elaeagnus angustifolia
 
 


Siberian Elm
 
Ulmis pumila
 
 


Silver maple
 
Acer saccharinum
 
 


Tree of Heaven
 
Ailanthus altissima
 
 


Willow
 
Salix spp.
 
 




 



(Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17; Amd. Ord. 5221 –
9/18/17)



SECTION 6-306.   OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Purpose.



      1.   In order to reduce the visual impact of large residential
and nonresidential parking areas, to minimize the adverse effects of
off-street parking on adjacent properties, and to ensure the proper
development of parking areas throughout the Village, off-street parking and
loading spaces for every use shall be provided in accordance with the
standards established in this Section.



      2.   For any off-street parking area required under this
Section, and for any public parking lot, garage, and storage area operated on
a commercial basis, an off-street parking management plan shall be submitted
as part of site plan review.



   B.   Required Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces.



      1.   Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (2) below,
each principal use on a parcel shall be provided with the number of
off-street parking spaces indicated for that use in Table 6-306(B).



      2.   In the event that the number of parking spaces listed on
Table 6-306(B) cannot be placed on the parcel in accordance with these
regulations without the demolition of an existing structure to accommodate a
parking area, the Development Services Department may authorize up to a
twenty percent (20%) reduction in the total number of parking spaces required
on the lot.  The Development Services Department may issue such an
authorization only upon the request of the applicant and only upon
determining that the reduction in the number of required parking spaces will
not unreasonably increase parking congestion along public streets or in
parking areas located on nearby lots.  After such authorization is granted,
the ap-plicant shall not demolish or remove the existing structure without
the approval of the Development Services Department.  (Ord. 4373 - 6/2/08)



      3.   In the event that an applicant demonstrates that a new
commercial use, whether in an existing building or new construction, will
require more parking spaces than the number allocated under Table 6-306(B),
the Development Services Department may authorize up to a twenty percent
(20%) increase in the total number of parking spaces permitted on the lot. 
Any request exceeding a twenty percent (20%) increase in the total number of
parking spaces permitted on the lot shall be a variance.  The Development
Services Department may issue such authorization only upon the request of the
applicant and only upon determining that the new use will attract more
vehicles than the parking lot could otherwise accommodate.  (Ord.2860 -
3/18/96; Amd. Ord. 4373 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13)



      4.   In the event that an applicant demonstrates that fewer
parking spaces are needed to serve the use at the time of permit application,
the Development Services Department may authorize a reduction in the amount
of parking spaces and reserve additional land for potential use as parking
spaces at a future time.  (Ord. 4373 - 6/2/08)



      5.   When the required number of off-street parking spaces
computed according to Table 6-306(B) results in a fractional number, the
number of required parking spaces shall be determined as follows:  any
fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and
fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one (1) parking space.



      6.   If a use is not listed in Table 6-306(B), The Development
Services Department shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces
that shall be required.



 



TABLE 6-306(B)


LAND USE
 
REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES*


RESIDENTIAL USES:


Congregate Elderly Housing
 
0.5 per resident + 1 per staff person


Dwellings - detached, including Fee Simple Lot and Common Ownership
 
2 per dwelling unit


Dwellings - multifamily, including condominiums and apartments
 
2 per dwelling unit


Dwellings - townhouses and rowhouses
 
2 per dwelling unit  + 0.5 per bedroom over 2 bedrooms


Residential car homes
 
0.25 per resident + 1 per staff person


Residential units above retail or commercial establishments
 
2 per dwelling unit + retail spaces as required by ordinance


COMMERCIAL USES:


Animal hospitals, pounds, and boarding
 
1 per 300 square feet


Automobile / Car washes
 
3 stacking spaces per stall + 1 per employee


Automobile repair with outside storage (maximum of 10 vehicles)
 
1 per 300 square feet


Automobile sales and rentals
 
1 per 300 square feet


Automobile service stations
 
1 per pump + 1 stacking space per pump + 1 per 500 square feet of commercial
space


Cemeteries
 
1 per each full time employee + required spaces for offices


Conference Centers
 
1 per 4 seats


Commercial retail building footprint up    to 5,000 sq. ft. in floor area
 
1 per 250 square feet + 4 stacking spaces per drive through lane
(Ord. 4738 - 6/18/12)

1 per 250 square feet + 4 stacking spaces per drive through lane
(Ord. 4738 - 6/18/12)

1 per 250 square feet + 4 stacking spaces per drive through lane


Commercial retail building footprint 5,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. in floor area


Commercial retail building footprint exceeding 50,000 sq. ft. in floor area


Composting facilities
 
1 per 300 square feet


Day care centers and day care homes (check definition to add elderly care)
 
1 per 300 square feet


Dry-cleaning and laundry processing stations
 
1 per 500 square feet


Excavating and recycling services
 
1 per employee


Facilities handling hazardous materials
 
1 per employee


Financial Institutions
 
1 per 300 square feet + 3 stacking spaces per drive through lane


Food Processing Plant
 
1 per employee


Funeral parlors
 
1 per 200 square feet


Golf Courses
 
6 per green + 1 per employee on the peak shift


Health clubs and fitness centers
 
1 per employee + 1 per 200 square feet


Hotels, Motels and Extended Stay
 
1 per sleeping room


Indoor Recreational Facilities
 
1 per 200 square feet


Nurseries and greenhouses
 
1 per 400 square feet


Nursing homes
 
0.25 per resident + 1 per staff person


Offices (general)
 
1 per 300 square feet


Offices (medical or dental clinics with no overnight stay)
 
1 per 300 square feet
(Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)


Personal service establishment
 
1 per 200 square feet


Restaurants and banquet halls
 
1 per 100 square feet


1 per 200 square feet for carry-out
(Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)


Restaurants, Fast Food
 
(Drive In) 1 per 100 square feet + 7 stacking spaces per drive through lane
(Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)


Stadium or arena
 
Parking spaces equal in number to 33% of the capacity in persons


Swimming Pools
 
1 per 75 square feet of water area


Tennis or Racquet Court
 
3 per court


Theatres
 
1 per 3 seats


Wholesale Establishments
 
1 per 1,000 square feet




 



 



CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES


Boarding Schools, Seminaries and Convents
 
1 per 1000 square feet


Community Centers, Clubs and Lodges
 
1 per 300 square feet


Colleges and Universities
 
1 per classroom + 1 per 3 students


Government Uses, including offices, and incubator and research facilities
 
Fire/Police:  1 per 500 square feet


Libraries:  1 per 400 square feet


Post Offices:  2 per station + 4 per service bay


Offices:  1 per 300 square feet


Hospitals
 
1 per 2 hospital beds + 1 per each full-time employee


Medical / Institutional uses including surgery centers, out patient centers,
testing facilities and research laboratories
 
1 per 300 square feet
(Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)


Museums, Civic and Cultural Centers
 
1 per 1000 square feet


Parks (public)
 
Ballfields/Picnic Areas:  10 per acre


Swimming:  1 per 75 square feet of water area


Tennis/Racquet Court:  3 per court


Places of worship within 300 feet of a residential use
 
1 per 4 sanctuary seats or one space per each 12 feet of bench length (if no
seating, one space per 60 sq. ft. of sanctuary space) + spaces required for
other uses


Private Schools and Instructional Facilities for arts, athletics and
vocational training
 
2 per classroom + 1 per 2 students


Schools - Elementary, Middle, Junior High
 
1.5 per classroom


Schools - High
 
1 per classroom + 1 per 5 students




 



 



INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING AND STORAGE


Light Industry and Assembly
 
2 per 1000 square feet -OR- 1 per each employee on the largest shift
(whichever is greatest)


Office Warehouse and Flex Space
 
1 per 300 square feet office space + 1 per 1000 square feet of warehouse
space.


Manufacturing
 
1.25 per 1000 square feet -OR- 1 per each 0.75 employees on the largest shift
(whichever is greatest)


Petroleum Storage Facilities
 
1 per employee


Warehouses or Distribution Establishments
 
1 per 1000 square feet


TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITIES


Public Utility Structures
 
1 per 2 employees


Utility Substations
 
1 per employee


Wireless Communication Facilities
 
1 service space




 



(Ord. 3949 - 11/1/04; Amd. Ord. 4210 - 12/18/06; Amd. Ord. 4535 - 1/18/10;
Amend Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



*-Requirements based on square feet mean square feet of gross building floor
area, except as otherwise indicated.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



-Requirements based on the number of seats or students mean the number that
is the design capacity of the building.



-Requirements based on the number of staff or employees mean the maximum
number of staff or employees on one shift, as certified by the applicant. 



**-If no on-street parking is allowed, every dwelling unit must provide 2.5
spaces, or a parking agreement must be provided with a parking lot within 500
feet of the dwelling units.  (Ord. 2586 - 6/6/94)



***  For any restaurants, banquet halls and fast food restaurants that have
a special use as of the date of passage of Ordinance No. _______, the special
use must meet either the required number of parking spaces set forth in the
special use permit or the parking requirements passed in Ordinance No.
_____,whichever is least restrictive. (Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



   C.   Size of Required Parking Spaces and Aisles



   1.   Each required parking space shall cover a rectangle at least
nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long as measured from the back of
curb, as illustrated in Figure 6-306(C). The minimum required eighteen (18)
foot length shall be greater where there is a wall or fence at the end of the
parking space. The minimum required length may be up to two (2) feet less if
a strip of ground at least two (2) feet wide exists of the space and a curb
prevents a vehicle from driving onto the strip or hitting any fence or wall
the edge of the parking area. 



         a.   Parking spaces for train stations shall cover a
rectangle at least eight and one-half (8 ½) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet
long. 



(Ord. 4647 - 5/16/11; Amd. Ord. 5221 – 9/18/17)



      2.   Each required parking space shall have direct and
unrestricted access to an aisle.  The minimum width of said aisle is set out
in Figure 6-306(C).



      3.   The vertical clearance of each enclosed off-street
parking space shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet.




Figure 6-306.C(A) Required Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions










 



(Amd. Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   D.   Spaces for the Handicapped.



      1.   Except for single family dwellings, the number of spaces
required under the provisions of Subsection (B) above shall include the
following requirements for parking spaces for handicapped persons:



Figure 6-306.D(A) Required Parking Spaces



 


Total Number of Provided Off-Street Parking Spaces

 

Total Number of Accessible Spaces Required





1-20
 

1



21-50
 

2



51-75
 

3



76-100
 

4



101-150
 

5



151-200
 

6



201-300
 

7



301-400
 

8



401-500
 

9



501-1000
 

2% of total number



1001+
 

20 + 1 for each 100 over 1,000





 



(Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      2.   Off-street parking spaces for the handicapped shall be
designed as follows:



         a.   All spaces for the handicapped shall have access to
a curb-ramp or curb-cut when necessary to allow access to the building
served, shall be located so that users will not be compelled to wheel behind
parked vehicles, and shall be located the shortest possible distance between
the parking area and the entrance to the prin-cipal building it serves.



         b.   The total number of accessible parking spaces may
be distributed among parking lots, if greater accessibility is achieved in
consideration of such factors as anticipated usage, number and location of
entrances and level of parking areas.



         c.   Each parking space for the handicapped shall be at
least sixteen (16) feet wide including an eight (8) foot wide access aisle,
and adjacent parking spaces shall not share a common access aisle.  All
access aisles shall blend to a common level with an accessible route and
shall be diagonally striped.



         d.   Parallel parking spaces for the handicapped shall
be located either at the beginning or end of a block, or adjacent to alley
entrances.  Curbs adjacent to such spaces shall be of a height which will
not interfere with the opening and closing of motor vehicle doors.



         e.   No accessible parking spaces shall be required if
only attendant or valet parking is provided and is available at all times
that the facility is open for public use.  If accessible at-grade parking is
available, at least one (1) space for self parking of a vehicle with
sensitive specialized control devices shall be provided.



         f.   Each parking space for the handicapped shall be
equipped with a sign which complies with 625 ILCS 5/11-301, as amended, and
shall meet the requirements of Sign R7-8, U.S. Department of Transportation
Standard and the Illinois Department of Transportation.  Signs shall bear
the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and shall be vertically
mounted on a post or a wall at the front center of the parking space, no more
than five (5) feet horizontally from the front of the parking space, and set
a minimum of four (4) feet from finished grade to the bottom of the sign.



(Ord.2860-3/18/96)



   E.   Location of Required Parking.



      1.   Required off-street parking spaces accessory to
residential dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the use served.



      2.   Required off-street parking spaces accessory to
nonresidential districts shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet 
of the use served, except for spaces accessory to overnight accommodations,
which shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the use served.



      3.   No parking spaces accessory to a use in a nonresidential
district may be located in a residential district, unless a special use
permit is obtained in accordance with Section 5-105.  Off-street private
parking and municipal parking lots may be permitted with a special use permit
provided they are completely within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary
of a BIZ, OOH, MFG, COR, VCD or ORI district.  (Ord. 4647, 5-16-11)



      4.   Where these regulations allow shared parking between uses
on different lots, all such off-street parking areas shall be located no more
than five hundred (500) feet from the use they are intended to serve.



      5.   One (1) recreational vehicle or utility or haul trailer
may be parked in a driveway, provided it is located at least five (5) feet
from a side, rear, or front lot line, and not less than ten (10) feet from an
adjoining residential building.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94 & Ord. 3672 - 8/5/02;
Amd. Ord. 4373 - 6/2/08; Amd. Ord. 4574; 7/6/10)



      6.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no commercial
vehicle (e.g. truck) which either has a weight in excess of 8,000 pounds,
including vehicle or maximum load, or which exceeds twenty-one (21) feet in
length, eight (8) feet in width or nine (9) feet in height may be parked on
either streets or alleys.  However, commercial vehicles may be parked for a
reasonable period of time necessary to pick up or deliver property, or
necessary to install or assemble such delivered property or to prepare such
property for loading and removal.  The overnight parking of such vehicles
shall not be permitted in any setback.



      7.   Front setbacks:



         a.   Passenger automobile parking is permitted in a
front setback on a private driveway serving detached and attached dwellings,
but shall not be considered as satisfying the off-street parking requirements
for such uses as required by these regulations, unless there are a minimum of
two (2) off-street parking spaces located elsewhere on the lot.



         b.   Off-street parking spaces for nonresidential uses
may not be located in the front and corner-side building setbacks between the
building and the right-of-way. However, parking spaces may locate no closer
than ten (10) feet from the right-of-way provided that they are to the side
of the building.  (Ord. 4273 - 6/2/08)



         c.   No parking shall be permitted in the front setback
for any use located in the Old Orland Historic (OOH) District.



      8.   Side setbacks:



         a.   Passenger Automobile parking is not permitted in
any required side setback in a residential district.  Passenger automobile
parking is permitted in the driveway of the required corner side yard
setback, with a twenty (20) foot minimum driveway length, excluding
right-of-way and sidewalks.  No open off-street parking serving a
residential use in a non-required side setback shall be located nearer than
five (5) feet to a principal residential building.  (Ord.2959-11/18/96)



         b.   Parking may be permitted in the side setback of a
nonresidential district.  However, where the nonresidential district abuts a
residential district, parking shall not be permitted in the side setback.



         c.   Parking may be permitted in the side setback of a
lot that abuts a railroad right-of-way.



      9.   Rear setbacks:



         a.   Passenger Automobile parking is permitted in any
rear setback of a lot with a detached garage on the driveway, but not in the
rear if the house has an attached garage, subject to the exceptions and
requirements of Subsection (b).



         b.   In a nonresidential district, when a rear setback
is adjacent to a residential district, no parking shall be permitted within
twenty (20) feet of a residential district.



   F.   Shared Parking.



      1.   In order to reduce the total number of parking spaces
which would otherwise be required according to Subsection (B) above, joint
use of up to fifty percent (50%) of required parking spaces may be permitted
for two (2) or more uses located on the same or adjacent parcels.  In order
to qualify for a joint use reduction, the owner of the parking lot and the
owner(s) of adjacent uses must demonstrate that the shared parking will not
create a parking shortage during peak hours.



      2.   Any sharing of required parking spaces by uses located on
different parcels shall be guaranteed by a legally binding written agreement
between the owner of the parking area and the owner of any use located on a
different parcel and served by the parking area that is approved by the
Village Attorney.



      3.   In the event that joint use of parking spaces becomes
inappropriate, in the opinion of the Development Services Department, after a
shared parking program has been implemented, the agreement in Subsection (2)
above shall be set aside.  The required number of off-street parking spaces
shall be computed and provided according to the provisions of Subsection (B),
above. 



   G.   Parking Lot Barriers.  Peripheral barriers, such as curbs,
walls, or fences, shall be located along the perimeter of parking lots,
garages and vehicle storage areas, except at entrances and exits.  These
parking barriers shall be designed and located to prevent parked vehicles
from extending beyond property lines and from hanging over any sidewalk or
other pedestrian path. All barriers shall be designed and located in
accordance with the standards set out in Section 6-305. (Ord. 4373 - 6/2/08)



   H.   Bicycle Parking.  All nonresidential uses containing ten (10)
or more automobile parking spaces shall provide bicycle parking facilities at
the rate of three (3) bicycle parking spaces for the first thirty (30)
automobile parking spaces provided and one (1) additional bicycle parking
space for each ten (10) additional automobile parking spaces provided, up to
a maximum of thirty (30) bicycle parking spaces.  Bicycle racks shall be
installed to support the frame of the bicycle and not just the wheel.



   I.   Maintenance.  All parking areas shall be kept in a dust-free
condition at all times. 



   J.   Number, Size and Location of Loading Spaces.



      1.   Any loading space and any area required for maneuvering a
vehicle into and out of the loading space shall be located entirely on the
same lot as the use it serves.  The unenclosed loading space shall not be
located on any public right-of-way or other lot, and shall be oriented away
from the street fronting the lot.



      2.   No loading space for vehicles over two (2) tons capacity
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district, unless it
is completely enclosed by either building walls or a uniformly painted solid
fence or wall which is not less than six (6) feet in height.



      3.   No loading space or dock may be located within the
required front setback.  Completely enclosed loading spaces may face a
public street, provided the garage door is kept closed at all times and
during loading and unloading operations.  Vehicles waiting for loading or
unloading shall not park or be stored within the required front setback.



      4.   Off-street loading spaces may be permitted obstructions
in rear setbacks, so long as they are not closer than fifty (50) feet from
the nearest building or structure.



      5.   Unless otherwise provided by these regulations, a
required loading space shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width by at
least twenty-five (25) feet in length, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering
space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.



      6.   Loading spaces shall be provided on the basis of the
floor area of the establishments they serve, as indicated in Table 6-306(L).



 



Table 6-306(L)a
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS


Floor Area of Establishment (sq. ft.)
 
Required Number
 
Minimum Size (ft.)
 
Minimum Vertical Clearance (ft.)


0-10,000
 
1
 
12 x 25
 
12


10,001-25,000
 
2
 
12 x 25
 
12


25,001-40,000
 
3
 
12 x 25
 
15


40,001-100,000
 
4
 
12 x 25
 
15


over 100,000
 
5*
 
12 x 25
 
15



 

 

 



* plus one additional space for every 50,000 sq. ft. of floor area over
150,000.




 



   K.   Restriction on Use of Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces



   The storage of merchandise, materials, or motor vehicles, and/or the
repair of motor vehicles or any other kind of equipment, is prohibited in all
off-street parking and loading areas, including required and not required
spaces. Temporary storage units as regulated by Section 6-304.C.12 shall be
permitted.  (Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



   L.   Configuration of Off-Street Parking and Loading Ingress and
Egress.



      1.   Ingress and egress to and from off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided by means of clearly limited and defined
entrance and exit drives which lead from public rights-of-way to clearly
limited and defined maneuvering lanes which in turn provide access to
in-dividual off-street parking or loading spaces.



      2.   Layout configurations which require backing directly onto
an arterial street are prohibited.



(Ord. 4647 - 5/16/11)



      3.   On arterial roadways, the number of access points shall
be limited to one (1), unless a competent traffic engineering study
determines that site access would be improved by additional access points. 
The minimum space between access drives shall be based on roadway speed and
not on speed type and shall be determined by the Department of Development
Services.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      4.   Wherever practicable, access drives shall be shared by
several uses.  Such uses shall be jointly responsible for the maintenance
and landscaping of the drive.



   M.        Truck Trailer Parking.   One truck trailer shall be
allowed for every 20,000 square feet of building, excluding those parked in a
loading dock, limited to side and rear setbacks and no closer than 30 feet to
the property line.  These trailers shall be screened year-round from
adjacent public right-of-way and residences with adequate landscaping/berming.



(Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00)



   N.   Vehicle to Grid (V2G) Parking Standards.



(Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      1.   Vehicle to Grid (V2G) Parking Standards. V2G refers to
the system of communication between electric or plug-in hybrid vehicles and
the power grid to sell demand response services by either delivering
electricity into the grid or by throttling their charging rate. Such vehicles
are often either battery electric vehicles (BEV) or plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles (PHEVs). BEVs and PHEVs displace the use of petroleum fossil fuels,
improve transportation fuel efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Since most vehicles are parked the majority of the time, BEV or PHEV
batteries could be used to let electricity flow from the vehicle to the power
lines and back, registering potential energy savings to utilities per
vehicle. As BEVs and PHEVs become more main-stream, the purpose of this
subsection is to regulate vehicle to grid (V2G) land uses and associated
technologies.



         a.   Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE). EVSE are
the plug-in or power control stations (e.g. electric vehicle battery
chargers) that allow BEVs and PHEVs to re-charge batteries. EVSE technologies
must meet and comply with the most up to date provisions of the National
Electrical Code for Level 2 conductive power stations and be approved by
Underwriters Laboratories. One EVSE power station will be permitted per
parking space.



         b.   Electric Utility Interface and Screening. ComEd
shall be contacted to determine appropriate grid interconnection and
interfacing, including metering policies. All associated and ancillary
equipment, batteries, devices, structures or support(s) for EVSE shall be
screened from the public right-of-way with low native landscaping. Cables,
wires and other transmission conduits or lines, with the exception of the
actual EVSE to vehicle plug/ adapter cable, providing connections from the
EVSE to the electrical distribution point or to buildings or non-vehicle
batteries must be installed underground.



         c.   EVSE Ports. EVSE ports are two (2) or more EVSE
power control stations/ parking spaces aligned adjacent to each other. These
typically are associated with specific parking spaces in a parking lot or
structure. In parking lots EVSE ports can have canopies to protect the EVSE
power stations from weather, provide adequate lighting for safety and
convenience, and provide a platform for co-located renewable energy
conversion systems to produce onsite energy. Two types of EVSE ports are
permitted through an administrative review. EVSE ports may not locate between
the building and street.  (Ord. 4738 - 6/18/12)



            1.   Utility Public Charging Port (UPCP). A UPCP
is an EVSE port established in a publically owned and maintained parking lot
by either the electrical utility that services the area (ComEd) or the local
government. UPCPs shall be permitted in all zoning districts.



            2.   Private Charging Port (PCP). A PCP is an EVSE
port established in a privately owned and maintained parking lot by the
private property owner or property management company. A PCP is permitted in
R-4, VC, BIZ, COR, MFG, ORI and OL district parking lots. Commercial and
multi-family PCPs do not typically require canopies for Underwriters
Laboratories approved charging equipment. However, providing shelter over
charging equipment to protect from rain or snow fall is permitted.



         d.   Location of EVSE and EVSE Ports. EVSEs must be
located in accessible locations in parking lots near electrical distribution
points/ transformer boxes (typically within 40 feet) and/ or on light poles
in parking lots  for commercial properties or, for multi-residential
properties, near a PHEV/BEV tenant's electrical meter for appropriate grid
connectivity and metering. 



         e.   V2G Parking Only Spaces. V2G parking spaces shall
meet the requirements for standard parking spaces as outlined in this
section. In addition to these requirements, the EVSE shall be centered at the
top of the parking space and protected by either stopping blocks, in the
absence of curbs, or curbs. V2G parking only spaces may be used by regular
automobiles if no other parking spaces are available.



         f.   V2G Parking Requirements. V2G parking requirements
are voluntary. If V2G parking is proposed, there shall be one (1) V2G parking
space per the first 30 required parking spaces and one (1) V2G space for
every 10 required parking spaces thereafter.



         g.   Overnight V2G Parking in Parking Lots. Overnight
parking in V2G parking spaces and lots is not permitted for recreation
vehicles (10 p.m. to 10 a.m.). Overnight V2G parking is permitted for
non-recreation PHEVs/ BEVs in publicly accessible parking lots via permit
parking.



SECTION 6-307.   SIGNS.



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish equitable
regulations and promote excellence in design for communication through
signage within the Village of Orland Park. These regulations were developed
with the following intentions:



      1.   To preserve and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare through the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of all signs.



      2.   To confirm that signs may cause harm to the public by
creating obstructions, providing distractions to motorists, displacing
alternative land uses, decreasing property values and aesthetics, and
endangering the safety of person and property.



      3.   To establish the Village's substantial and compelling
interest in regulating signs in a manner as to reduce the effects and impacts
signs have on the public health, safety, and welfare.



      4.   To preserve property values within the Village by
regulating and directing the design, location, construction, and maintenance
of signs.



      5.   To protect the Village's physical appearance by
encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the visual environment and
compatibility with the surroundings.



      6.   To support the Village's economy by recognizing the need
for adequate site identification and maintaining effective communication
between signs and the public.



      7.   To protect the general public, pedestrians, and motorists
within the Village by assuring the design, location, construction, and
maintenance of signs allow safe navigation and travel throughout the Village
and ensure signs do not create distractions, obstructions, and hazards.



      8.   To enhance the physical appearance of site identification
to be in harmony with the visual character of the Village and for the signage
to be an integral part of the aesthetic of the site and be cohesive with the
architectural style of associated buildings.



      9.   To encourage signs that support adopted Village
guidelines, standards, and plans or the principles within said documents.



   B.   Applicability. The regulations within this Section apply to all
properties within the Village's municipal boundaries except for those
properties owned, used, leased, or controlled by the Village. Village signage
on Village property is exempt due to the inherent public purpose of such
messaging and sign copy. All signs on the exterior of a property, building,
or structure, and interior signs visible from exterior windows are subject to
the regulations within this Section. This Section shall not apply to the Old
Orland Historic District.



   C.   General Standards.



      1.   Village Codes. Signs shall meet all applicable Village
codes, including the Building Code, as amended from time to time.



      2.   Interpretation. All regulations within this Section shall
be interpreted by the Development Services Department. An interpretation may
be appealed to the Plan Commission for a final decision.



         a.   Conflict. In the event of a conflict within this
Section and/or between this Section and any provision within another Village
Code, the most restrictive regulation shall apply.



         b.   Substitution Clause. To the extent the regulations
of this Section 6-307 permit commercial signs, such regulations are also to
permit non-commercial signs.



         c.   Minimum and Maximum. All provisions herein shall be
interpreted as maximum allowable regulations unless otherwise noted.



         d.   Measurement and Calculation.



            1.   Sign Face Area. The sign face area (SFA)
shall be the entire area of the sign face(s) on an individual wall, ground,
or other type of sign. The area of a sign face shall be determined by
calculating the area within a single continuous perimeter encompassing the
entire advertising copy or art designed to attract attention. The area within
the single continuous perimeter shall be calculated by determining the area
of the smallest measurable square, circle, rectangle, or triangle within the
single continuous perimeter, including the background. For ground signs with
multiple faces: when two identical ground sign faces are placed back to back
so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when
such sign faces are part of the same sign structure, the sign face area shall
be the area of one side of the sign. In all other circumstances, the sign
face area of a ground sign shall be the total sign face area of all sign
faces on the ground sign. The background color of a wall sign is included
within the measurement of sign face area for wall signs unless otherwise
considered an architectural feature by the Development Services Department.







 



         2.   Sign Height (Ground Sign). A ground sign shall be
measured vertically from the adjacent average natural grade to the top of the
sign. The measurement includes the full height of the sign, including the
base or support structure and any design element surrounding or enclosing the
sign face.







 



            3.    Roof Signs. The roof is measured from grade
to the highest point of the roof line, parapet, or fascia of the building.
Signs shall be located below this point.



            4.    Tenant Frontage. The tenant frontage is
measured horizontally between the limits of the tenant's leasable space.







            5.   Clearance. Sign clearance is measured
vertically from grade to the bottom of the sign.







 



            6.   Window Signs. The sign face area of window
signs shall be measured by individual windows.







 



      3.   Accessory Structu re/Use. Signs shall be accessory
structures/uses and shall not be principal structures/uses. As such, all
signs must be accessory to an occupant of the land (or development) on which
the sign is located.



      4.   Distractions, Obstru ctions, and Hazards. Signs shall not
cause distractions, obstructions, or hazards and shall abide by the following
requirements:



         a.   Legibility. All letters and characters on each sign
shall be legible from the public right-of-way and/or the parking spaces
closest to the sign. The edges of the letters and characters shall be cleanly
defined, unfaded, and maintain a clear contrast with the background.



         b.   Conflict with Traffic and Pedestrian Signs. Signs
shall not conflict with traffic or pedestrian signs. Signs and/or
illumination shall not resemble emergency lighting or signals.



         c.   Ingress/Egress. No sign shall be erected so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door or window, or any other point
of access into a building required by the Village Building Code or Fire
Protection District regulations, or any amendments thereto, nor shall any
sign be erected so as to impair access to the roof of a building.



         d.   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). No sign
shall be erected so as to obstruct accessibility requirements per the
Illinois Accessibility Code, Village Building Code, and any amendments
thereto.



         e.   Construction and Attachment. All signs shall be
designed and constructed as required in the Village Building Code and other
applicable Village ordinances, as amended from time to time. Signs shall be
securely attached to a wall, structure, or the ground at all times.



         f.   Line-of-Sight. Signs shall not cause visibility
obstructions.



      5.   Location.



         a.   Public Property. Signs shall not be erected on
public property, including the public right-of-way, except for Governmental
Signs per Section 6-307.D.1.a.1.



         b.   Private Property. Signs may be located within
private property lines on the premises identified by the signs. For
multi-tenant and/or multi-story buildings, wall signs shall be located within
the tenant's lease lines.



         c.   Parkways. Signs shall not be erected within
parkways, except for Governmental Signs per Section 6-307.D.1.a.1.



         d.   Drainage. Signs shall not be constructed in a
manner that negatively impacts drainage.



         e.   Utility Poles. Signs shall not be located on public
or private utility poles.



         f.   Sidewalks and Paths. Signs shall not be erected so
as to obstruct sidewalks or paths.



         g.   Parking Spaces. Signs shall not be erected so as to
obstruct parking spaces.



         h.   Loading Areas. Signs shall not be erected so as to
obstruct loading areas.



         i.   Trees and Landscaping. Signs shall not be attached
to trees or other landscaping.



         j.   Required Setback. All ground signs shall be set
back a minimum of five feet (5') from property lines, drive aisles, parking
spaces, loading areas, sidewalks, and paths.



      6.   Materials.



         a.   Permanent Signs. Permanent signs shall be
constructed of materials that can withstand the elements in an outdoor
environment. Acceptable materials for permanent signs include, but are not
limited to: acrylic, polycarbonate, marine grade plywood (MDO), aluminum, or
aluminum composite materials (ACM). The base of a sign may also include, but
is not limited to: brick, stone, or concrete. Similar permanent sign
materials may be approved by the Development Services Department.



         b.   Temporary Signs. Temporary signs may be constructed
of materials including, but not limited to: paper (interior window signs
only), cloth, canvas, vinyl, wallboard, wood, or metal. Similar temporary
sign materials may be approved by the Development Services Department.



      7.   Illumination. Internally or externally illuminated signs
shall be permitted unless otherwise noted, provided that the sign meets the
following requirements:



         a.   Signs shall be illuminated only by steady,
stationary, shielded, or shaded light sources directed solely at the sign or
the sign may be internally lit.



         b.   Changes in illumination shall only occur a maximum
of one (1) time within a twenty-four (24) hour period.



         c.   Exposed reflective-type bulbs, strobe lights, or
incandescent lamps shall not be used on the exterior surface of any sign.



         d.   Illuminated signs shall produce no more than thirty
(30) foot candles of illumination when measured four feet (4') from the sign.



         e.   Whenever external illumination is used for a sign,
the source of light shall be located, shielded, and directed in such a manner
that the light source is not visible from a public right-of-way or private
residence.



         f.   Illumination shall comply with the exterior
lighting standards within Section 6-315 of the Land Development Code.



      8.   Maintenance. The owner of a sign shall be required to
maintain the sign, the sign structure, and its surrounding landscaping, if
applicable, in a neat and attractive condition and in compliance with the
following standards:



         a.   General. The sign and sign supports must be kept
painted to prevent rust, rot, or deterioration. If a sign becomes rusted,
rotted, or deteriorated the sign must be immediately repaired or replaced.
Painting, repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair of a
sign  (not exceeding 50% of the value of the sign) for which a permit has
been previously issued is allowed without a permit, provided that the sign is
not otherwise modified in any way.



         b.   Damage. If a sign is damaged it shall be repaired
within two (2) weeks of the reported date of the damage.



         c.   Landscaping. Landscaping at the base of ground
signs shall be regularly maintained.



         d.   Animals. Signs shall be free of nesting animals.



         e.   Restoration After Wall Sign Removal. When a wall
sign is removed from the façade of a building and replaced with a new sign,
the facade shall be restored to like new condition. Previous sign mounting
holes and the like shall be filled and painted to match the façade and
ghosting images shall be removed. The façade shall be cleaned and/or
repainted if necessary in order to match the existing condition of the
building.



      9.   No Discrimination Against Non-Commercial Signs or Speech.
The owner of any legal sign may substitute non-commercial copy within the
allowable sign face area of the sign in lieu of any other commercial or
non-commercial copy in accordance with the following:



         a.   The substitution of copy must adhere to all
applicable Village codes and may be executed without any additional approval
or permitting from the Village.



         b.   The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or
favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other
non-commercial message.



         c.   This provision does not create a right to increase
the total amount of signage on a parcel or allow the substitution of an
off-site commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message.



   D.   Procedures.



      1.   Permit Requirement. A permit shall be obtained through
the Development Services Department prior to the installation or display of
any sign.



         a.   Exemptions. The following signs meeting the
criteria within Section 6-307.D.1.a. are exempt from the requirement to
obtain a sign permit. Such signs shall meet the Appearance Standards within
Section 6-307.F.1.b. unless determined inapplicable by the Development
Services Department.



            1.   Governmental Signs. Governmental signs
incidental thereto for identification, information, directional, or public
safety purposes erected or required by governmental bodies, or authorized for
a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance, such as traffic control
signs and legal notices, including those located in the public right-of-way.



            2.   Address Sign. An address sign is required for
each property/tenant space and shall be installed in compliance with the
Building Code and Fire Code and any amendments thereto.



            3.   Sign on Residential Property. One (1)
non-illuminated sign is allowed per residential property, provided that:



               a.   The sign meets all General Standards
within Section 6-307.C. of the Land Development Code;



               b.   The sign is no larger than four (4)
square feet in area (total of all sign faces visible from the public
right-of-way);



               c.   The sign(s) shall be set back a minimum
of five feet (5') from all property lines, walks/paths, and access drives;



               d.   The sign(s) shall not exceed three feet
(3') in overall height when measured from grade; and



               e.   The sign is not above the roof line
when located on a building.



            4.   Political Campaign Signs. In accordance with
65 ILCS 5/11-13-1-12, as amended from time to time, political signs meeting
the following requirements are allowed:



               a.   The sign(s) shall meet all General
Standards within Section 6-307.C. of the Land Development Code;



               b.   The sign(s) shall be located on private
properties with permission from the property owner;



               c.   The sign(s) shall be set back a minimum
of five feet (5') from all property lines, walks/paths, and access drives;



               d.   The sign(s) shall not exceed five feet
(5') in overall height when measured from grade;



               e.   The sign is not above the roof line
when located on a building; and



               f.   The total sign face area (for all signs
combined) allowed per property shall be in accordance with the following
table:



 


Land Area/Location

 

Maximum Allowable Total Sign Face Area
(all signs combined)



Less than one (1) acre and not located on a major/minor arterial road or
major collector road
 
Six (6) square feet


Less than one (1) acre and located on a major/minor arterial road or major
collector road
 
Forty (40) square feet


One (1) to ten (10) acres
 
Forty (40) square feet


Greater than ten (10) acres
 
Sixty-four (64) square feet



 



            5.   Real Estate Signs. Sign(s) meeting the
following requirements shall be permitted on real property which is actively
being offered for sale or lease:



               a.   The sign shall meet all General
Standards within Section 6-307.C. of the Land Development Code;



               b.   The sign shall be set back a minimum of
five feet (5') from all property lines, walks/paths, and access drives;



               c.   One (1) sign is allowed per frontage
along a public right-of-way;



               d.   Sign(s) shall be displayed no earlier
than thirty (30) days before and removed no later than seven (7) days after
the close of the transaction of the sale or rental;



               e.   The sign is not above the roof line
when located on a building; and



               f.   The maximum sign face area (for each
sign) shall be in accordance with the following table:



 


Land Area/Location

 

Maximum Allowable Sign Face Area
(per sign)



Less than one (1) acre and not located on a major/minor arterial road or
major collector road
 
Six (6) square feet


Less than one (1) acre and located on a major/minor arterial road or major
collector road
 
Forty (40) square feet


Greater than one (1) acre
 
Forty (40) square feet



 



            6.   Replaceable Copy. Changing of the sign copy
or message on a manual changeable sign.



            7.   Window Signage.Changes in the copy of window
signage, provided that it does not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of any
single window. Window signs shall be located on the interior side of the
window and shall not be located on spandrel glass.







            8.   Historical Marker/Integral Signs. Such signs
shall have a maximum sign face area of six (6) square feet and meet all
General Standards within this Section.



            9.   Flags. Flags on flagpoles are allowed,
provided that the flag and flagpole are in compliance with Section
6-302.C.12. of the Land Development Code.



            10.   Light Pole Banners. Banners on light poles
are allowed in accordance with the following provisions:



               a.   There shall be no more than two (2)
banners per pole; and



               b.   The size of each banner shall not
exceed ten (10) square feet.



            11.   Business Status Sign. One (1) sign may be
displayed near the entrance to the business on the inside of a window or
door, provided that the sign is no greater than four (4) square feet in area.
Such sign may be internally-illuminated with a steady, motionless light
source.



            12.   Outdoor Bulletin Boards. One (1) bulletin
board shall be allowed per tenant, provided that the sign is no greater than
four (4) square feet in area and is attached to the exterior wall within six
feet (6') of the entrance to the building.



            13.   Sandwich Boards/A-Frames. Sandwich
boards/A-frames are allowed in accordance with the following provisions:



               a.   The sign meets all General Standards
within Section 6-307.C. of the Land Development Code, except sandwich boards
may be located on private sidewalks provided that a minimum of thirty-six
inches (36") is clear for pedestrians;



               b.   One (1) sandwich board/A-frame is
allowed per tenant;



               c.   The sign shall be constructed of wood
or aluminum and not plastic;



               d.   The sign face area shall not exceed a
maximum of seven (7) square feet per side;



               e.   The height shall not exceed a maximum
of fifty-four inches (54") tall;



               f.   The sign shall be located within
fifteen feet (15') of the tenant's entrance to the building;



               g.   The sign shall securely anchored to
withstand weather conditions; and



               h.   The sign shall not be displayed
outdoors while the business is closed.



            14.   Branding Without Copy. Brand elements
without sign copy do not require a sign permit but instead shall be reviewed
administratively by the Development Services Department through an Appearance
Review and/or approval of Elevations.



            15.   Window Displays. Shall be allowed provided
that prohibited signage is not within the window display.



      2.   Permit Application. An application for a sign permit must
be submitted to the Development Services Department on forms furnished by the
Department. The Applicant must provide information to determine if the
proposed sign is allowed under this Code and other applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances. Village Staff will review the application to
determine if the proposed sign is permissible. The Applicant shall pay a sign
permit fee in accordance with Title 5, Chapter 2 of the Village Code, as
amended from time to time, when the permit is issued to the Applicant.



      3.   Installation. Signs shall not be installed unless a valid
sign permit has been issued for a sign or a sign meets the criteria for
exemption from the permit requirement. A sign with a valid sign permit must
be installed within six (6) months of permit issuance or else the permit
becomes invalid. Signs shall be installed per the approved drawings and any
supplementary information provided in the sign permit application.



      4.   Removal. The Village reserves the right to require
removal of signs, at the owner's expense, in the following circumstances:



         a.   When a sign is erected without a valid permit;



         b.   When a permit is invalidated or revoked;



         c.   When a permit for a temporary sign has expired;



         d.   When a sign becomes obsolete and no longer
identifies a bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the premises
where said sign is located. Such sign shall be removed immediately by the
owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure,
or property upon which said sign may be found.



            1.   If the sign to be removed is located on a
multi-panel ground sign, the obsolete panel must be completely replaced with
a blank panel consistent in color with other existing panels.



            2.   If the sign to be removed is within a fixed
cabinet on a façade, the obsolete panel must be completely replaced with a
blank panel consistent in color with other existing panels or the entire
cabinet must be removed and the façade must be restored.



         e.   When any sign is deemed unsafe, insecure, or a
danger to the public, or has been constructed, erected, or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this Section, the Development Services
Department shall give written notice to the permittee thereof requesting
removal of the sign. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure
so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within five (5) days
after such notice, the Development Services Department may declare such sign
to be a public nuisance and remove such sign at the owner's expense. The
Village may immediately remove illegal signs located within the public
right-of-way.



      5.   Noncompliance. When a sign is not in compliance with an
approved permit or the provisions of this Section the Village shall issue
citation(s) to the owner of such sign and/or the owner of the premises on
which the sign is located.



   E.   Sign Types. The following sign types are expressly allowed or
prohibited within the Village. Sign types are defined within Section 6-307
.K. of the Land Development Code. In the event that a proposed sign is not
classified as allowable or prohibited the Development Services Department
shall determine if the sign will be allowed.



      1.    Allowable Signs.







 



         a.   Types of Wall Signs.



            1.   Wall Sign (Permanent)



            2.   Channel Letters (Permanent)



            3.   Cloud Sign (Permanent)



            4.   Push-Thru Letters (Permanent)



            5.   Awning Sign (Permanent)



            6.   Canopy Sign (Permanent)



            7.   Projecting Sign (Permanent)



            8.   Window Sign (Permanent or Temporary)



            9.   Banner Sign (Temporary)



         b.   Types of Ground Signs.



            1.   Monument Sign (Permanent)



            2.   Directional Sign (Permanent)



            3.   Dual Post Sign (Permanent or Temporary)



            4.   Banner Sign (Temporary)



            5.   Sandwich Board Sign (Temporary)



         c.   Other Types of Signs.



            1.   Under Canopy Sign (Permanent)



            2.   Address Sign (Permanent)



            3.   Manual Changeable Sign (Permanent)



            4.   Window Display (Permanent or Temporary)



            5.   Inflatables (Temporary)



      2.   Prohibited Signs. Except as specifically provided
otherwise within Section 6-307 of the Land Development Code, the following
signs and displays shall be strictly prohibited throughout the Village:







         a.    Any sign which constitutes a hazard to public
health or safety, including dangerous construction or sight obstructions, as
determined by the Development Services Department.



         b.   Signs which by color, location, or design resemble
or conflict with traffic control signs or signals.



         c.   Signs which contain advertising matter which is
untruthful, objectionable, or obscene, as determined by the Development
Services Department.



         d.   Signs which emit an audible sound, odor, or visible
matter such as smoke.



         e.   Signs which contain radio/microwave transmitters.



         f.   Abandoned or obsolete signs, including the posts or
other supports therefor, that are no longer being properly maintained by the
owner of the sign.



         g.   Commercial signs on a vehicle where said vehicle is
parked adjacent to or near the right-of-way for the purposes of identifying
or calling attention to the business, such as utilizing directional signage,
and is not used for daily operations or during the regular course of
business, or is not licensed, insured, or operational.



         h.   Any signs or attention getting devices visible from
the public right-of-way that rotate, revolve, or have any visible moving
parts or that gives the appearance of movement, including, but are not
limited to: searchlights, electronic screens, spinners, streamers, balloons
(other than temporary inflatable signs with a  valid permit), and other
similar devices, or ornamentation designed for purposes of attracting
attention, promotion or advertising, unless otherwise provided for in this
Section. However, such signs may be permissible and exempt from permit
requirements if the sign or attention getting device is:



            1.   Displayed through the interior side of a
window;



            2.   No closer than five feet (5') to said window;



            3.   Comprises no more than 50% of the area of the
window(s) that it is viewed through; and



            4.   The building is set back at least thirty feet
(30') from a public right-of-way.



         i.   Box (Cabinet) Signs.



         j.   Off-Premise Signs.



         k.   Roof Signs.



         l.   Electronic Changeable Signs, or signs that feature
blinking, flashing, or holograms.



         m.   Yard (Pin) Signs.



         n.   Feather/Flag Signs.



         o.   Pennants.



         p.   Signs which are painted directly onto any exterior
wall of any building or structure.



         q.   Signs which are incorporated directly into a ground
surface, including tiles and pavers.



         r.   Signs or displays which contain bare, unshielded
light or tubes (including neon) which are visible from a public right-of-way
or a private residence unless otherwise provided for in this Section.



         s.   Displays of lights along property lines, sales
areas, doors, windows, edges of a building, or similar.



   F.   Permanent Signs.



      1.   Appearance Standards.



         a.   Review. Signs shall be reviewed administratively
for appearance by the Development Services Department.



         b.   Standards.



            1.   Every sign shall be designed as an integral
architectural element of the building, structure, or site to which it
principally relates.



            2.   The colors, materials, and lighting of the
sign shall be harmonious with the building, structure, and/or site to which
it principally relates.



            3.   Every sign shall have appropriate scale and
proportion in its design.



            4.   No more than two (2) colors shall be used on
a single letter or character. Logos shall be exempt from this regulation.



            5.   Decorative light fixtures complimentary to
the architecture of the building shall be used for external illumination.



            6.   Projecting signs shall include durable
mounting hardware that is attractive and is an integral part of the sign
design. Guy wires and extension poles are prohibited.



            7.   Wall Signs:



               a.   Shall be centered within the tenant's
frontage unless otherwise deemed aesthetically appropriate by the Development
Services Department. Effort shall be made to not conflict with the
architectural elements of the building façade.



               b.   Wall signs upon multi-tenant structures
shall be mounted in accordance with an established center line.



               c.   Background color is included within the
measurement of sign face area for wall signs unless deemed appropriate as an
architectural feature by the Development Services Department.



               d.   All raceways shall be of a color that
matches the façade behind the sign.



            8.   Ground Signs:



               a.   For monument signs, the sign base shall
be at least thirty percent (30%) of the width of the sign face.



               b.   For dual post signs, each post shall be
at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total width of the sign.



               c.    Multi-t enant ground sign panels shall
be of the same backgr ound color and font color. Font face may differ from
tenant to tenant.







      2.   Permanent Sign Regulations by District. Signs shall be
permitted in accordance with the regulations by Sign District within the
subsequent tables. The following terms are used in the tables in order to
further explain or abbreviate the sign regulations.



            ROW         Right-of-Way



            SF         Square Foot/Square Feet



            SFA         Sign Face Area



            GFA         Gross Floor Area



            RES         Residential



            NON-RES      Non-Residential



         a.   Sign District #1: Residential. The following signs
shall be allowed in Residential Zoning Districts (E-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3,
R-3A, R-4, and RSB) with a valid permit from the Development Services
Department.



 

Sign District #1 – Residential Zoning Districts


 
 
Sign Type
 
Tenant Land Use
 
Maximum Sign Face Area
 
Maximum Number of Signs
 
Maximum Sign Height
 
Additional Regulations




WALL
 
Wall Sign/ Channel Letters/ Cloud Sign/ Push-Thru Letters
 
RES
 
2 SF
 
1 per tenant frontage; maximum of 2
 
-
 
-


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of tenant frontage
 
1 per tenant frontage
 
-
 
.   Shall not cover any part of a window;

.   Shall not extend more than 18" from the façade


Awning Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
10% of visible surface area of awning
 
1 per tenant awning
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Awnings shall be located above windows or doors;

.   Signage not permitted on valance


Canopy Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of canopy
 
1 per tenant canopy
 
24"
 
.   Canopy and attached signage must have a minimum 8' clearance


Projecting Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


 
 
NON- RES
 
10 SF
 
1 per tenant entrance
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Shall be located near the tenant entrance;

.   Shall be located below second story windows;

.   Maximum projection: 5'


GROUND
 
Monument Sign/ Dual Post Sign
 
RES
 
12 SF per acre; maximum of 32 SF
 
1 per entrance from ROW
 
6'
 
.   May be located within a public landscape median with Village approval;

.   If illuminated, the sign shall only be externally illuminated


 
 
NON- RES
 
40 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
Monum ent: 10'; Dual Post: 6'
 
.   Signs shall be spaced at least 75' apart;

.   Tenant panels shall cover no more than 80% of the allowable SFA


OTHER
 
Under Canopy Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


 
 
NON- RES
 
6 SF
 
1 per tenant entrance
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Shall be located near the tenant entrance


Manual Changea ble Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


 
 
NON- RES
 
25% of the ground sign SFA
 
1
 
-
 
.   Shall be installed within a ground sign




 



         b.   Sign District #2: Commercial. The following signs
shall be allowed in Commercial/Office Zoning Districts (BIZ, COR, VCD, LSPD,
RMC, and ORI) with a valid permit from the Development Services Department.
This Sign District excludes those properties within Sign District #3.



 

Sign District #2 – Commercial Zoning Districts



 
Sign Type
 
Tenant Land Use
 
Maximum Sign Face Area
 
Maximum Number of Signs
 
Maximum Sign Height
 
Additional Regulations






 

 

 

WALL
 
Wall Sign/ Channel Letters/ Cloud Sign/ Push-Thru Letters
 
RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of tenant frontage
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
-
 
.   Only allowed on multi-family buildings with ore than 10 dwelling units

.   Shall not extend more than 18" from façade


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of tenant frontage
 
1 per tenant frontage;

GFA 15,000- 50,000 SF: 2 additional signs;

GFA >50,000 SF:

4 additional signs
 
-
 
.   Shall not cover any part of a window;

.   The combined SFA of all signs shall not exceed the allowable SFA per
frontage

.   Shall not extend more than 18" from the façade


Awning Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
10% of visible surface area of awning
 
1 per tenant awning
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Awnings shall be located above windows or doors;

.   Signage not permitted on valance


Canopy Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of canopy
 
1 per tenant canopy
 
24"
 
.   Canopy and attached signage must have a minimum 8' clearance


Projecting Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


 
 
NON- RES
 
10 SF
 
1 per tenant entrance
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Shall be located near the tenant entrance;

.   Shall be located below second story windows;

.   Maximum projection: 5'


GROUND
 
Monument Sign

 
 
RES
 
12 SF per acre; maximum of 32 SF
 
1 per entrance from ROW
 
6'
 
.   May be located within a public landscape median with Village approval;

.   If illuminated, the sign shall only be externally illuminated


NON- RES
 
GFA<350,0 00 SF: 40 SF;

GFA 350,000- 500,000 SF: 100 SF;

GFA >500,000 SF: 125 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage; Lot frontage >300': 1 additional sign allowed along that
frontage
 
GFA < 500,000 SF: 10'; GFA > 500,000 SF: 18'
 
.   Signs shall be spaced at least 75' apart;

.   Tenant panels shall cover no more than 75% of the allowable SFA


Dual Post Sign
 
RES
 
12 SF per acre; maximum of 32 SF
 
1 per entrance from ROW
 
6'
 
.   May be located within a public landscape median with Village approval;

.   If illuminated, the sign shall only be externally illuminated


NON- RES
 
40 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
6'
 
.   Signs shall be spaced at least 75' apart;

.   Tenant panels shall cover no more than 75% of the allowable SFA


OTHER
 
Under Canopy Sign
 
RES
 
Prohibited


NON- RES
 
6 SF
 
1 per tenant entrance
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Shall be located near the tenant entrance


Manual Changeable Sign
 
RES
 
Prohibited


NON- RES
 
25% of the ground sign SFA
 
1
 
-
 
.   Shall be installed within a ground sign




 



         c.   Sign District #3: Eastern 159th Street Corridor.
The following signs shall be allowed on properties directly adjacent to 159th
Street between 71st Court and 94th Avenue with a valid permit from the
Development Services Department.



 

Sign District #3 – Eastern 159th Street Corridor



 
Sign Type
 
Tenant Land Use
 
Maximum Sign Face Area
 
Maximum Number of Signs
 
Maximum Sign Height
 
Additional Regulations






 

 

 

WALL
 
Wall Sign/ Channel Letters/ Cloud Sign/ Push-Thru Letters
 
RES
 
1 SF per dwelling unit; maximum of 40 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
-
 
.   Only allowed on multi-family buildings with ore than 10 dwelling units

.   Shall not extend more than 18" from façade


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of tenant frontage
 
1 per tenant frontage;

GFA 15,000- 50,000 SF: 2 additional signs;

GFA >50,000 SF:

4 additional signs
 
-
 
.   Shall not cover any part of a window;

.   The combined SFA of all signs shall not exceed the allowable SFA per
frontage

.   Shall not extend more than 18" from the façade


Awning Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
10% of visible surface area of awning
 
1 per tenant awning
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Awnings shall be located above windows or doors;

.   Signage not permitted on valance


Canopy Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of canopy
 
1 per tenant canopy
 
24"
 
.   Canopy and attached signage must have a minimum 8' clearance


Projecting Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


 
 
NON- RES
 
10 SF
 
1 per tenant entrance
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Shall be located near the tenant entrance;

.   Shall be located below second story windows;

.   Maximum projection: 5'


GROUND
 
Monument Sign

 
 
RES
 
12 SF per acre; maximum of 32 SF
 
1 per entrance from ROW
 
6'
 
.   May be located within a public landscape median with Village approval;

.   If illuminated, the sign shall only be externally illuminated


NON- RES
 
GFA<350,0 00 SF: 40 SF;

GFA 350,000- 500,000 SF: 100 SF;

GFA >500,000 SF: 125 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage; Lot frontage >300': 1 additional sign allowed along that
frontage
 
GFA < 500,000 SF: 10'; GFA > 500,000 SF: 18'
 
.   Signs shall be spaced at least 75' apart;

.   Tenant panels shall cover no more than 75% of the allowable SFA


Dual Post Sign
 
RES
 
12 SF per acre; maximum of 32 SF
 
1 per entrance from ROW
 
6'
 
.   May be located within a public landscape median with Village approval;

.   If illuminated, the sign shall only be externally illuminated


NON- RES
 
40 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
6'
 
.   Signs shall be spaced at least 75' apart;

.   Tenant panels shall cover no more than 75% of the allowable SFA


OTHER
 
Under Canopy Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
6 SF
 
1 per tenant entrance
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Shall be located near the tenant entrance


Manual Changeable Sign
 
RES
 
   Prohibited


NON- RES
 
25% of the ground sign SFA
 
1
 
-
 
.   Shall be installed within a ground sign




 



         d.   Sign District #4: Industrial. The following signs
shall be allowed in the Industrial Zoning District (MFG) with a valid permit
from the Development Services Department.



 

Sign District #4 – Industrial Zoning District



 
Sign Type
 
Tenant Land Use
 
Maximum Sign Face Area
 
Maximum Number of Signs
 
Maximum Sign Height
 
Additional Regulations






 

 

 

WALL
 
Wall Sign/ Channel Letters/ Cloud Sign/ Push-Thru Letters
 
RES
 

Prohibited



NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of tenant frontage
 
1 per tenant frontage
 
-
 
.   Shall not cover any part of a window;

.   Shall not extend more than 18" from the façade


Awning Sign
 
RES
 

Prohibited



NON- RES
 
10% of visible surface area of awning
 
1 per tenant awning
 
-
 
.   Minimum 8' clearance;

.   Awnings shall be located above windows or doors;

.   Signage not permitted on valance


Canopy Sign
 
RES
 

Prohibited



NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of canopy
 
1 per tenant canopy
 
24"
 
.   Canopy and attached signage must have a minimum 8' clearance


Projecting Sign
 
RES
 

Prohibited



NON- RES
 

Prohibited



GROUND
 
Monument Sign/Dual Post Sign
 
RES
 

Prohibited



NON- RES
 
40 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
10'
 
.   Signs shall be spaced at least 75' apart;

.   Tenant panels shall cover no more than 80% of the allowable SFA


OTHER
 
Under Canopy Sign
 
RES
 

Prohibited



NON- RES
 

Prohibited



Manual Changeable Sign
 
RES
 

Prohibited



NON- RES
 
25% of the ground sign SFA
 
1
 
-
 
.   Shall be installed within a ground sign




 



      3.   Permanent Sign Bonuses. Non-residential land uses within
Sign District #2, #3, and #4 shall be eligible for the following sign bonuses
in addition to the allowable signage within Section 6-307 .F.2. of the Land
Development Code:



         a.   Wall Sign/Channel Letter Bonuses for Sign Face
Area. The following bonuses shall apply to the calculation for SFA for wall
signs/channel letters. Note: The maximum formula for SFA is 2 SF per linear
foot of tenant frontage where the sign will be installed.



 


Tenant Gross Floor Area

 

Sign Face Area Bonus




25,000 – 50,000 SF

 
+ 0.25 SF per lineal foot of tenant frontage



> 50,000 SF

 
+ 0.50 SF per lineal foot of tenant frontage



 



 


Building Setback from Public Right-of-Way

 

Sign Face Area Bonus




150' – 300'

 
+ 0.25 SF per lineal foot of tenant frontage



> 300'

 
+ 0.50 SF per lineal foot of tenant frontage



 



         b.   Wall Sign/Channel Letter Bonuses for Quantity of
Signs. The following bonuses shall apply to the allowable quantity of
wall/channel letter signs. The total SFA of all wall/channel letter signs
shall not exceed the allowable SFA.



 


Tenant Gross Floor Area

 

Sign Quantity Bonus




15,000 – 50,000 SF

 
+ 2 Signs



> 50,000 SF

 
+ 4 Signs



 



         c.   Monument Sign Bonuses for Sign Height. Additional
sign height shall be allowed for monument signs directly adjacent to a
right-of-way where a road construction project increased the elevation of the
roadway. The base of the monument sign may be increased to allow for the sign
to be a maximum of ten feet (10') above the street elevation of the adjacent
roadway. The sign face shall not extend below the street elevation.







   G .   Temporary Signs. The following Temporary Signs shall be
allowed with a valid permit from the Development Services Department.



 

Temporary Signs



 
Sign Type
 
Tenant Land Use
 
Maximum Sign Face Area
 
Maximum Number of Signs
 
Maximum Sign Height
 
Allowable Duration of Display by Circumstance
 
Additional Regulations




WALL
 
Banner
 
RES
 
25 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
-
 
.Coming Soon: 14 days

.Grand Opening: 14 days

.Store Closing: 30 days .Temporary/Seasonal Use: 90 days or the duration of
the use; whichever is less

. Prior to Installing a Permanent Sign: 14 days before permanent sign
installation

.Special Event: Duration of Special Event
 
.Minimum 8' clearance; .Shall not cover any part of a window


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of tenant frontage
 
1 per tenant frontage
 
-
 
.Minimum 8' clearance; .Shall be centered within the tenant's frontage unless
otherwise approved by the Development Services Department; .Shall be
installed in accordance with an established center line


GROUND
 
Banner/Temporary Dual Post Sign
 
RES
 
25 SF
 
1 per ROW frontage
 
5'
 
.Coming Soon: 14 days

.Grand Opening: 14 days

.Store Closing: 30 days

.Prior to installing a Permanent Sign: 14 days before permanent sign
installation

.Special Event: Duration of Special Event
 
-


NON- RES
 
1 SF per linear foot of tenant frontage
 
1 per tenant frontage
 
8'
 
-


Inflatable
 
RES
 
-
 
1
 
-
 
.Grand Opening: 14 days
 
-


NON- RES
 
-
 
1
 
-
 
-




 



      1.   Types of Circumstances.



         a.   Coming Soon. For the purposes of this Section,
"coming soon" shall mean the time before a new business opens for the first
time at a physical location within the Village and work is being performed
within the tenant space to prepare for occupancy.



         b.   Grand Opening. For the purposes of this Section,
"grand opening" shall mean when a new business opens for the first time at a
physical location within the Village and receives a Certificate of Occupancy.
Expansions of tenant spaces are eligible for temporary grand opening signage.



         c.   Store Closing. For the purposes of this Section,
"store closing" shall mean when an existing business intends to cease
operations at a physical location within the Village.



         d.   Temporary or Seasonal Use. For the purposes of this
Section, "temporary or seasonal use" shall mean a new business at a physical
location within the Village that plans to operate for a specific period of
time which is typically less than ninety (90) days. Examples include, but are
not limited to, temporary offices, carnivals, and holiday-related retail
sales. Such use must be properly permitted/licensed by the Village.



         e.   Prior to Installing a Permanent Sign. For the
purposes of this Section, "prior to installing a permanent sign" shall mean
when a business at a physical location within the Village is in the process
of installing new permanent signage. A sign permit application for the new
permanent signage must be submitted in order to be eligible for temporary
signage.



         f.   Special Event. For the purposes of this Section,
"special event" shall mean an event held at a physical location within the
Village with a valid permit from the Village. Special events include, but are
not limited to, charitable events and tent sales.



      2.   Extensions for Display Period. The Development Services
Department may extend the allowable duration of display in special
circumstances, but a letter requesting additional time must be submitted for
consideration.



   H.   Special Areas of Control. The following signs shall be allowed
with a valid permit from the Development Services Department.



      1.   Construction Site Signs. Sign(s) meeting the following
requirements shall be permitted for sites with an active building permit on
file with the Development Service Department:



         a.   The sign shall meet all General Standards within
Section 6-307.C. of the Land Development Code;



         b.   The sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet
(5') from all property lines, walks/paths, and access drives;



         c.   One (1) sign is allowed per frontage along a public
right-of-way;



         d.   Sign(s) shall be displayed no earlier than thirty
(30) days before and removed no later than seven (7) days after issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy;



         e.   The sign is not above the roof line when located on
a building; and



         f.   The maximum sign face area shall be in accordance
with the following table:



 


Land Area/Location

 

Maximum Allowable Total Sign Face Area



(all signs combined)



Less than ten (10) acres
 
Twelve (12) square feet per acre;

maximum of forty (40) square feet


Greater than ten (10) acres
 
Sixty-four (64) square feet



 



      2.   Model Home Signs. One (1) sign meeting the following
requirements shall be permitted on real property which is registered as a
model home site with the Development Service Department:



         a.   The sign shall meet all General Standards within
Section 6-307.C. of the Land Development Code;



         b.   The sign shall be located on the ground;



         c.   The sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet
(5') from all property lines, walks/paths, and access drives;



         d.   One (1) sign is allowed per frontage along a public
right-of-way; and



         e.   The maximum sign face area for each sign shall no
larger than forty (40) square feet.



      3.   Gas Station Signs. On premises where gasoline is
dispensed:



         a.   Each service station island shall be permitted one
(1) sign meeting the following requirements:



            1.   The maximum sign face area shall neither
exceed six (6) square feet for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate
gross surface area of twelve (12) square feet.



            2.   Such signs shall be located adjacent to or
within the service station island to which it relates.



         b.   Each gas station canopy shall be permitted one (1)
canopy sign per right-of-way frontage. The gross surface area of such sign
shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the gross surface area of the canopy
to which the sign is to be affixed. Said canopy signage shall not extend
above or below the canopy.



      4.   Directional Signs.



         a.   Directional Signs, if deemed necessary by the
Development Services Department in the interest of public safety, shall be
permitted in accordance with the following requirements.



 


Gross Floor Area

 

Maximum Sign Face Area Per Sign

 

Maximum Sign Height



< 350,000 SF
 
10 SF
 
4'


350,000 – 500,000 SF
 
24 SF
 
7'


> 500,000 SF
 
70 SF
 
9'



 



         b.   Permanent off-site directional signs may be
permitted for medical facilities and senior housing facilities if located in
a non-residential area and within 1,000 feet of the facility.



         c.   Temporary off-site directional signs may be
permitted for special events as determined by the Development Services
Department.



         d.   The allowable quantity of directional signs shall
be determined by the Development Services Department.



   I.   Nonconforming Signs. Signs existing at the time of the
enactment of this Section, or any amendment thereto, or at the time of
annexation of the property on which they are located and not conforming to
the provisions of this Section, shall be regarded as nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs shall be of two types: legal nonconforming or illegal
nonconforming.



      1.   Legal Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs that were
lawfully permitted by the Village shall be considered legal nonconforming
signs. The following activities are allowed for legal nonconforming signs and
may require a permit from the Development Services Department:



         a.   Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance
and incidental repair are allowed for legal nonconforming signs, provided
that any repair or maintenance shall, whenever possible, eliminate or reduce
any nonconformity. The allowable scope of repair and maintenance for legal
nonconforming signs includes:



            1.   The replacement of non-load-bearing sign
elements and electrical wiring and fixtures; and



            2.   The replacing, repairing, or repainting of
any portion of a sign or its structural elements, provided that the sign is
not structurally altered to prolong its useful life.



         b.   Change in Display of Sign Content. The periodic
changing of tenant's sign panels or the renewing of copy that has been made
unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather, or accident is allowed on legal
nonconforming signs.



         c.   Alteration, Enlargement, and Relocation. Legal
nonconforming signs shall not be:



            1.   Changed or altered in any manner that would
increase the degree of its nonconformity;



            2.   Enlarged or expanded; and/or



            3.   Moved in whole or in part to any other
location where the sign would remain nonconforming.



      2.   Illegal Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs that do
not have a valid permit on file with the Village shall be considered illegal
nonconforming signs.



         a.   Removal. Illegal nonconforming signs shall be
immediately removed at the expense of the owner.



         b.   Alteration. The owner of an illegal nonconforming
sign may obtain a permit to alter the illegal nonconforming sign to conform
with all applicable Village codes.



   J.   Severability. If any portion of this document is to any extent
invalid, illegal, or incapable of being enforced, such term shall be excluded
to the extent of such invalidity, illegality, or unenforceability; all other
terms hereof shall remain in full force and effect.



   K.   Definitions. In the event of a conflict within this Section and
within Section 2-102 (Definitions) of the Land Development Code the
definitions herein shall apply.



      1.   Average Natural Grade: When measuring sign height, the
average natural grade shall mean the average grade measured ten feet (10') in
every direction from the sign location.



      2.   Frontage, Tenant: The horizontal distance between a
tenant's lease lines along a façade facing a public right-of-way, private
access drive, and/or parking lot. Tenant Frontage shall not include frontage
along outdoor sales areas and accessory structures.



      3.   Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part
thereof, which is used primarily to advertise, identify, display or direct or
attract attention to an object, person, establishment, product, service,
event or location by any means including, but not limited to: words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or
projected images, which are visible beyond the boundaries of the lot, parcel,
or tenant space on which they are situated or visible from any public
thoroughfare or right-of-way. This includes, but is not limited to, wall
signs, ground signs, window signs, awning or canopy signs, marquees, manual
changeable signs, message boards, illuminated signs, moving signs, temporary
signs, portable signs, pennants, banners, streamers or any other
attention-getting device, flag, or other display, whether affixed to a
building or erected elsewhere on the premises. The term "sign" excludes those
features of a building which are an integral part of the building's
architecture, design, and structure (i.e. an "architectural feature") as
determined by the Development Services Department.



      4.   Sign, Address: A sign displayed for the purpose of
identifying the address of the property.



      5.   Sign, Awning: Signage that exists on an awning.



      6.   Sign, Banner: A temporary sign with or without characters
or illustrations applied to cloth, flexible plastic, or fabric of any kind,
with no rigid material as a backing. A Banner Sign is installed on the wall
of the tenant space, mounted in the ground, or securely attached to an
existing ground sign.



      7.   Sign, Billboard: See Off-Premise (Outdoor Advertising)
Sign.



      8.   Sign, Box (Cabinet): A sign which contains all of the
advertising copy within a single enclosed cabinet (typically a standard
geometric shape such as a rectangle) and is mounted to a wall. Box Signs have
a translucent back-lit panel enclosed within a frame. An
internally-illuminated logo separate from other sign copy shall not
constitute a Box Sign. A two-dimensional non-illuminated wall sign shall not
constitute a Box Sign.



      9.   Sign, Canopy: A sign constructed or affixed to a
permanent portion of a building that serves as a canopy over the space below.
A canopy is an integral part of the building that uses similar materials,
whereas an awning is more temporary in nature and build.



      10.   Sign, Channel Letter: A sign comprising individual
letters that are independently mounted to a wall or other surface and have a
covered face with internal illumination. Channel letters may be
non-illuminated.



      11.   Sign, Cloud: A sign with a single cabinet that is not a
typical geometric shape but instead follows the curvature of the lettering or
artwork on the sign. A Cloud Sign is distinguished from a Box (Cabinet) Sign
by the shape of the sign and the outer edges forming a cloud around the
lettering or artwork on the sign. Typically the background of this type of
sign is not illuminated but the lettering is illuminated.



      12.   Sign, Directional: A sign used for providing direction
and navigation of a site. Such signs typically include arrows and identify
locations rather than advertising copy and/or logos.



      13.   Sign, Dual Post: A ground sign that utilizes two posts
that are used to mount the sign in the ground.



      14.   Sign, Electronic Changeable: Signage that features
changeable text and/or illustrations, using computer software or other
technology to automate the delivery schedule of the messages.



      15.   Sign Face: That part of the sign which is or can be used
to identify, to advertise, to communicate information, or for visual
representation which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose.
This shall include any background material, panel, trim, color, and direct or
self-illumination that differentiates the sign from the building, structure,
backdrop surface, or object upon or against which it is placed. This shall
not include any portion of the support structure for the sign, provided that
no message, symbol, or any of the aforementioned sign face criteria is placed
on or designed as part of the support structure.



      16.   Sign Face Area: The entire area of a sign face.



      17.   Sign, Feather/Flag: A temporary ground sign made of
typically taller than it is wide, made of non-rigid material, and attached to
a pole.



      18.   Sign, Flag: A sign attached to a pole on one side of the
sign.



      19.   Sign, Ground: Any sign supported wholly or in part by
some structure other than the building or buildings housing the use to which
the sign pertains. Ground signs shall also include monument, dual post, and
other freestanding signs.



      20.   Sign, Inflatable: A sign that requires air pressure to
maintain its volume.



      21.   Sign, Integral: Names of buildings, dates of erection,
monumental citations and commemorative tablets or other information that is
carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum
or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the
structure.



      22.   Sign, Manual Changeable: A sign or portion thereof with
characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
manually without altering the face or surface of the sign.



      23.   Sign, Marquee: A manual changeable sign with a
surrounding cache of light bulbs. Typical marquee signage is found at the
entry to theaters.



      24.   Sign, Monument: A two-sided sign attached to a permanent
foundation or decorative base and not attached or dependent on support from
any building, pole, posts, or similar uprights.



      25.   Sign, Off-Premise (Outdoor Advertising): A sign
providing display space for general commercial advertising not related to the
premises on site at which the sign is located; commonly referred to as
"billboards".



      26.   Sign, Outdoor Bulletin Board: A cabinet attached to the
wall of a structure at a pedestrian level for the purpose of displaying
periodically-changing messages printed on paper or other similar materials
inside the cabinet. Such messages may include announcements, advertisements,
or information about a business such as a menu or a brochure of services.



      27.   Sign, Pennant: A series of triangular non-rigid signs
that exist on a string or band.



      28.   Sign, Permanent: Any sign or advertising display
composed of durable materials intended to exist for the duration of time that
the use or occupant is located on the premises.



      29.   Sign, Political: Temporary signs that announce or
support political candidates, parties, issues, or causes in connection with
any national, state, or local election.



      30.   Sign, Portable: Any sign that is not permanently
attached to the ground, a structure, or a building and which is designed to
be easily transported or relocated to another location.



      31.   Sign, Projecting (Blade): A sign, other than a wall
sign, which projects (usually perpendicularly) from and is supported by a
wall of a building or structure.



      32.   Sign, Push-Thru Letters: A sign with individually
illuminated acrylic letters and/or a logo that appear to be pushed through
the sign's background panel/non-illuminated cabinet.



      33.   Sign, Roof: A sign erected, constructed, supported or
maintained in whole or part upon or above the highest point of the roof line,
parapet, or fascia of the building. For buildings with a hip, gambrel, or
gable roof this would be above the eave line; for mansard roofs, this would
be above the deck line for the roof, and for flat roofs it would be above the
edge of the wall.



      34.   Sign, Sandwich Board (A-Frame): Portable and relatively
lightweight signage constructed to stand independently, not mounted or
affixed to its location. This sign is fabricated as an A-frame, which is
characterized by having two boards connected together at the top. The boards
may have signage on one or both sides.



      35.   Sign, Temporary: A banner, pennant, poster or
advertising display constructed of less durable materials and that appears to
be intended to be displayed for a reasonable short or definite limited period
of time. If the sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is
subject to periodic manual changes, that sign shall not be regarded as a
Temporary Sign.



      36.   Sign, Under Canopy: A sign that is attached to the
underside of a canopy.



      37.   Sign, Wall: Signs mounted on the wall of a building that
are parallel to the face it is mounted on. Wall signs may be illuminated or
non-illuminated and may be two-dimensional or three-dimensional. Wall signs
include but are not limited to sign types such as box (cabinet), channel
letters, cloud, and push-thru. Signs on canopies, awnings, and windows may
also be considered wall signs.



      38.   Sign, Window: Signs or graphics that are adhered to the
inside or outside of a window, or signs, graphics, digital images, or
displays located within the interior of the building within three feet (3')
of a window or visible opening.



      39.   Sign, Yard (Pin): A temporary sign made of non-durable
materials that are typically staked in the ground by metal or plastic
supports.



      40.   Window Display: Signs, graphics, digital images, or
other displays of messages located within the interior of the building that
are not located on the surface of a window but are visible through a window
or other opening. Window displays are used to project a message to potential
outside viewers.



(Entire Section Amended Ord. 5316 – 8/6/18)



SECTION 6-308.   DESIGN STANDARDS.



   A.   Purposes.  The following are the purposes of the architectural
design standards set forth in this Section:



      1.   To create an architectural identity and to avoid
monotonous similarity or inappropriateness in exterior design and appearance
of property;



      2.   To promote the orderly and harmonious growth of the
Village, and to protect and enhance land values, investments, and the general
welfare of the citizens of the Village;



      3.   To protect and to stabilize the general appearance of
buildings, structures, landscaping, and open space areas throughout the
Village;



      4.   To insure adequate light, air and privacy for property
throughout the Village;



      5.   To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness,
cohesiveness and compatibility of new development so as to maintain and
improve the established standards of property values throughout the Village;
and



      6.   To aid prospective contractors, architects, designers and
developers in preparing their project plans for review by the Village.



   B.   Applicability.  The design standards shall apply to single
family residential developments of seven (7) units or more and to all other
types of developments, including privately and publicly owned properties,
except for those developments located in the Old Orland Historic (OOH)
District.



   C.   Administration. 



      1.   An applicant for development approval shall submit a site
plan, exterior elevations, and such other data deemed necessary by the
Department of Development Services to evaluate a proposed architectural
design, along with an application for development approval, as required by
Sections 5-101 (General Procedures) and 5-106 (Appearance/Site Plan
Review).  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      2.   Final plans and elevations shall be drawn to scale and
shall indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed. 



      3.   The Department of Development Services shall develop
graphic illustrations of the standards set forth in this Section.  The
Department shall also ensure that development within the district complies
with the guidelines established in the Old Orland Historic District
Guidelines, as amended from time to time, copies of which shall be kept on
file in the Department's offices.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      4.   The review of architecture and site plans provided for in
this Section is intended to be only a part of the whole review procedure laid
out in these regulations.  Approval of architectural design does not in any
way signify final approval of any portion of any project.



   D.   Pre-Application Conference. An applicant for architectural
design approval may request in writing that the Department of Development
Services hold an informal pre-application conference to review the
preliminary architectural design of a proposed development.  This
pre-application conference may be conducted concurrently with the
pre-application conference provided for in Section 5-101(A) and shall be
conducted pursuant to the same terms and conditions set forth in that
Section.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   E.   Review.  The Development Services Department shall review the
complete application for appearance review in conjunction with site plan
review provided for in Section 5-106. Recommendations of the Department shall
be based upon the criteria set forth in Subsections F through O, below. 
(Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   F.   Building and Structure Design.



      1.   Buildings and structures shall be consistent with the
established neighborhood character and with any adjacent residential property.



      2.   Building materials shall be selected for suitability to
the type of buildings and the design in which they are used.  Buildings
shall use the same materials, or those which are architecturally harmonious,
for all building walls and other exterior building components that are wholly
or partially visible from public ways.



      3.   Building materials shall be of durable quality.
Inappropriate materials or building methods, and those which will produce
inconsistency with the structure and architecture of the building, shall be
avoided.



      4.   Brick or other masonry materials shall be used for all
sides of all nonresidential development and shall be installed per Village
Building Code specifications.  At a minimum:



         a.   For single story structures, anchored brick, stone
or similar masonry materials as approved by Development Services Department
shall extend from the adjacent grade to the top of the window that is highest
on the subject façade, with minor accents allowed in place of masonry
subject to meeting building codes.



         b.   For two or three-story structures, anchored brick,
stone or similar masonry materials as approved by Development Services
Department shall extend from the adjacent grade to the top of each story with
minor accents allowed in place of masonry subject to meeting building codes.



         c.   For structures four stories or more in height,
anchored brick, stone or similar masonry materials as approved by Development
Services Department shall extend from the adjacent grade to the top of the
first three (3) stories, with minor accents allowed in place of masonry
subject to meeting building codes. Village approved non-masonry materials may
be used only on the uppermost story of structures that are four (4) stories
or more in height. See Village Code Title 5 Chapter 1 Section 501.3.2
Exception B. for additional requirements.  (Amd. Ord. 5126 – 9/19/16)



   No mansard roofs shall be permitted.  Brick shall not be painted,
except if approved under an Appearance Review. If an Appearance Review denial
is appealed to Plan Commission, resulting in permission to paint a masonry
surface, paint and painting procedure specifications shall be submitted to
the Development Services Department for review and approval prior to
initiation of any masonry paint-related work.



(Ord. 2462 - 10/18/93; Amd. Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00; Amd. Ord 3672 - 8/5/02; Amd.
Ord. 50611/18/16; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      5.   All residential dwelling units shall contain face brick
or stone on not less than fifty (50) percent of exterior walls and shall
contain face brick or stone on ninety (90) percent of each first floor
elevation or ground levels of such units.  All materials for the remaining
ground level wall surfaces shall be approved by the Building Director.  All
materials used shall be compatible as a group and with the surrounding
structures.  (Ord. 2570  - 5/2/94; Amd. Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



         a.   Exceptions. Existing residential developments
constructed where original buildings were of non-masonry exterior finishes
may permit the use of other code approved materials under the following
conditions:



            1.   Where the building’s total floor area is
not being increased by more than fifty (50) percent of the existing
building’s floor area;



            2.   Where the building’s fifty (50) percent
floor area allowance is regarded as the total combined floor areas of all
additions made to the residence within a forty- eight (48) month consecutive
time period;



            3.   Where the exterior finish materials meets the
design criteria standards referenced in the Land Development Code (Section
6-308) and the Village’s Building Code (5-1-3 item #105 for amended Minimum
Thickness of Weather Coverings).



(Amd. Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



      6.   Building materials should be selected with special
attention to energy conservation.  Materials and colors that reduce the
consumption of gas and electricity should be used wherever possible.



      7.   Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and
parapets, shall have good proportions and relationship to one another. 



      8.   While it is recognized that color is a very subjective
matter and that creativity should not be stifled, colors should nonetheless
be used harmoniously and with some restraint.  Color schemes should consider
and respect the character and quality of structures in the area. Excessively
bright or brilliant colors should be used only for accent.  Materials and
colors should withstand the weather well over a twenty-five (25) year
period.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      9.   Architectural style should be appropriate to the Chicago
area and evaluation of a project shall be based on the quality of design and
its relationship to surroundings.  The design of structures should display a
sensitivity to the best aspects of the character, quality and scale of those
structures already existing in the area of a proposed project.



      10.   Monotony of design shall be avoided, however styles
should be complementary and should relate to indigenous architecture.  In
residential districts no two (2) detached single family dwellings of
substantially similar or identical front elevation or facade shall be
constructed or located on adjacent lots.  Said changes may be major or minor
changes.



         a.   Major changes.  One major change and color change
shall constitute a substantial change:



            1.   Roof treatment - hip, gable, 25% or greater
change in slope.



            2.   Location of garage entry - side and front.



            3.   Type of brick treatment - extended porticos,
etc.



            4.   Material treatment - full brick vs.
half-and-half. 



            5.   Overall facade - mediterranean vs. colonial,
for example.



            6.   Brick arches



            7.   Brick bay projections



            8.   Balconies



         b.   Minor changes.  Three (3) minor changes constitute
a substantial change:



            1.   Vertical or horizontal siding



            2.   Colors of materials



            3.   Door treatment - garage and entry



            4.   Window styles - casements, bows and double
hung



            5.   Shutter treatment



            6.   Ornamental treatment - lighting fixture
location, or posts and fascia.



            7.   Reversing plan



            8.   Garage door design



            9.   Brick wing arms



      11.   On commercial buildings, facades greater than 100 feet
in length must incorporate recesses and projections along at least twenty
(20)percent of the length of the facade.  Windows, awnings, and arcades must
total at least sixty (60) percent of the facade length abutting a public
street.



      12.   Color, texture, and material module elements should be
repeated horizontally and/or vertically on commercial buildings.



      13.   Each commercial building must have a clearly defined,
highly visible customer entrance with features such as canopies or porticos,
arcades, arches, wing walls, and integral planters.  (Ord.2959-11/18/96)



      14.   Commercial and industrial buildings shall vary
architectural design elements in rooflines and include brick/masonry up to
the tops of the windows.  (Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03)



      15.   Except for single family residential homes, the
architectural design of street facing building facades shall have the
appearance of a primary façade and include transparency in the form of full
or clerestory windows.  (Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Relationship of Buildings to Site.



      1.   The height and scale of each building shall be compatible
with its site and adjoining buildings and neighboring development.  In
residential districts (E-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and RSB), the height shall not
vary by more than fourteen (14) feet from adjacent structures.



      2.   The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable
transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting,
pedestrian movement and parking areas.



   H.   Relationship of Building and Site to Adjoining Area.



      1.   Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles
shall be made compatible by such means as screens, site breaks and materials.



      2.   Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties
shall be provided.



      3.   Harmony in texture, lines and masses shall be required.



      4.   Buildings shall have similar scale to those in the
surrounding area.



   I.   Utility Services.  Newly installed utility services, and
service revisions that are necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be
located underground.



   J.   Screening.



      1.   Screening of service yards, utility meters and hardware,
overhead doors, mechanical equipment, refuse areas, and/or other potentially
unattractive places from public view, shall be accomplished by the use of
walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of all of the measures that
follow.  Screening shall be equally effective in the winter and the summer
seasons.  For rooftop equipment, parapet walls are required along street
frontages and bordering residential areas that parapet walls must be at
least  3 feet in height and constructed of matching building materials to
the principal structure.  (Ord. 2959 - 11/18/96; Amd. Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03)



         a.   Adjusting the architectural or landscape profile 
to screen those elements from view;



         b.   Placing those elements on service courts or other
locations not usable by the general public; or



         c.   Integrating those elements into the architecture or
landscaping of the site.



      2.   The degree of visibility and screening of service yards,
utility meters and hardware, mechanical equipment, refuse areas, and/or other
potentially unattractive places shall be evaluated using the following
criteria:



         a.   The degree of visibility from all adjacent public
ways;



         b.   The architectural compatibility of the design and
color of the yards, meters and equipment of the building;



         c.   Possible visibility from future buildings and
public ways; and



         d.   Internal overall appearance in relation to the site.



   K.   Parking Areas.  Parking areas shall comply with the provisions
of Sections 6-305 (Landscape and Tree Preservation) and 6-306 (Off-Street
Parking and Loading Requirements) of these regulations and shall be treated
with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other
innovative means so as to largely screen parking areas from view from public
ways.  All non-residential parking areas shall include concrete curbing
along pavement edges.  (Ord. 2959  11/18/96; Amd. Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



   L.   Lighting.  Outdoor lighting, where provided, should enhance
the building design and the adjoining landscape.  Lighting standards,
fixtures and all exposed accessories shall comply with the provisions of
Section 6-407 (Lighting) and 6-301(B) (Bulk Regulations) of these



regulations, and shall be of a design and size that are harmonious with the
design of the building and adjacent areas.  If external spot or flood
lighting is used, the light source should be shielded and restrained in
design.  Excessive brightness, flashing lights, and brilliant colors shall
not be permitted.



   M.   Miscellaneous Structures.  Miscellaneous structures located on
private property, public ways, and other public property, including light
standards, utility poles, newspaper stands, bus shelters, plants, traffic
signs and signals, benches, guardrails, rockeries, retaining walls,
mailboxes, awnings, tensile canopies and fire hydrants shall be designed to
be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape.  Materials
shall be compatible with buildings, scale should be appropriate, and colors
should be in harmony with nearby buildings and surroundings, and proportions
shall be attractive.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   N.   Landscape and Site Treatment.



      1.   Landscape treatment shall be provided in a manner so as
to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important axes, and
provide shade.  Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations
only.  All landscaping design shall comply with Section 6-305 (Landscape and
Tree Preservation) of these regulations.  (Amd. Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



      2.   Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute
to the beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and
developed.  Modification to topography shall be permitted only where it
contributes to good appearance.



      3.   Grades of walk, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved
areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking, and if
seating is provided, for sitting.



      4.   Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of
certain plant varieties and other materials, and by correlation with adjacent
developments.



      5.   Plant material shall be selected for interest in its
structure, texture and color, and for its ultimate growth.  Plants that are
indigenous to the area and plants that will be hardy, harmonious to the
design, and of good appearance shall be used.



      6.   In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury
by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs,
tree guards, or other devices, wherever possible.  Where building sites
limit planting, the placement of approved trees or shrubs in parkways or
paved areas shall be encouraged.



      7.   In areas where general planting will not prosper, other
materials such as fences, walls, and paving of wood, brick, stone, rocks, and
gravel shall be used.



      8.   Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with
landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groups.  Shrubs shall be used
only where they will not obscure vision and will not require excessive
maintenance.



      9.   In locations other than parking areas, shrubbery shall be
used with restraint.



   O.   Signs.



      1.   Signs shall be designed to comply with Section 6-307
(Signs) of these regulations.  Materials used in signs shall have good
architectural character and shall be harmonious with both building design and
the surrounding landscape.



      2.   Signs shall have good scale in their design and in their
visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.



      3.   Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. 
Excessive brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided.



      4.   Lighting shall be harmonious with the design.  If
external spot or floor light is used, it shall be arranged so that the light
source is shielded from view.



      5.   Wall signs shall be part of the architectural concept. 
Size, color, lettering, location, and arrangement shall be harmonious with
the building design, and shall be compatible with signs on adjoining
buildings.  Signs shall have good proportions.



      6.   Ground signs shall be designed to be compatible with the
architecture of the building.  The same criteria applicable to wall signs
shall apply to ground signs.



      7.   Identification signs of a prototype design shall conform
to the criteria for wall and ground signs.



SECTION 6-309.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION STANDARDS.



   CHAPTER DELETED (Ord. 4210, 12/18/06)



   The content of this chapter was incorporated into new chapters for the
Village Center District (6-212) and the Old Orland Historic District
(6-209). 



SECTION 6-310.   FENCES.



   A.   Fence Permit Application.



      1.   No person shall erect a fence within the Village without
first having received a fence permit from the Building Department.



      2.   Applications for a fence permit shall be submitted with
the appropriate fee to the Building Department on forms provided by that
department.



   B.   Prohibited Fences. 



      1.   Dangerous Fences. The following types of dangerous or
hazardous fences shall not be permitted to be either erected or maintained
within the Village:



         a.   Barbed wire fences, except for utility substations;



         b.   Electrical fences;



         c.   Spiked fences;



         d.   Fences with broken glass or other sharp points
imbedded;



         e.   Any other type of fence that could result in
injuries to persons climbing on or over such fences; and



         f.   Fences that are leaning in such a manner that an
angle of fifteen (15) degrees or more is produced when measured from the
vertical;



      2.   Temporary Fences.  The following temporary fences shall
not be permitted within the Village:



         a.   Any temporary fence that remains in place for
longer than 6 months.



         b.   Any temporary fence located around the lot
perimeter, except as permitted by the Village for construction or demolition.



         c.   Snow fences (wooden or plastic), except for use as
construction fencing or to direct snow drifts.



         d.   Silt and erosion control fences, except for the
purposes of erosion control during construction and soil stabilization.



(Ord. 4738 – 6/18/12)



      3.   Other Perimeter Fences.   The following fences shall not
be permitted to be either erected or maintained within five (5) feet of
property lot lines within the Village:



         a.   Aluminum board fences (or similar metal board);



         b.   Bramble/ wicker fences;



         c.   Cloth-based fences;



         d.   Mesh fences (metal, plastic or otherwise);



         e.   Netted fences;



         f.   Shake fences;



         g.   Slat based fences;



         h.   Reed fences;



         i.   Rod fences; and



         j.   Wire fences (except chain link for residential
properties). (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



(Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



   C.   General Construction Requirements.



      1.   Every fence to be erected within the Village shall be
designed and constructed to resist and withstand a wind pressure of at least
twenty (20) pounds per square feet of the gross proposed area of the fence,
less any openings from any angle of approach.



      2.   All fence posts used in the construction of a fence shall
be buried in the ground to a depth of at least one-third (1/3) of the total
length of said fence post.



      3.   All fence parts, anchors, and shavings of wood or other
organic materials shall be treated with a chemical treatment to protect them
from deterioration when they are placed in or upon the ground.



      4.   Alterations to the existing grade level preceding the use
of a fence for the purpose of altering the height of the fence shall not be
permitted.



      5.   No fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to
impede or alter the natural surface water drainage of the property upon which
the fence is constructed or any adjoining property.



      6.   If a fence is to be painted, it shall be painted with a
non-lead base paint.



      7.   The finished side of all fences shall face the street and
neighboring properties.



(Ord. 4610 – 12/20/10)



   D.   General Maintenance Requirements. Structurally maintain fences
in good repair, as originally designed and installed, and as depicted and
approved on a fence permit.



   E.   Design, Location and Height Requirements of Fences in
Residential Districts.



      1.   Except as provided in subsections (2) or (3), below, no
fence shall be constructed in a front yard past the front building line.
(Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      2.   In all residential districts, an ornamental fence may be
erected on a premise anywhere, as long as it is entirely within the property
where the permit is issued, including the front yard past the building line
and the front and side yard past the building lines in the case of corner
lots. The height of such fences shall not exceed four (4) feet and such
fences shall be an open-style fence consisting of wrought iron, galvanized
steel, aluminum, powder coated, vinyl, wood or similar materials that does
not block vision to an extent greater than 40% per lineal foot (60% open),
and shall not include chain-link or wire fences or fences of similar
construction.  (Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12; Amd. Ord. 4996 – 6/15/15; Amd. Ord.
5126 - 9/19/16)



      3.   Intermittent ornamental components such as decorative
metal posts, masonry bases, columns, and caps are allowed as part of
ornamental fences, but must comply with the open/closed ratio prescribed in
Section 6-310.E.2 above for each 10 feet length of fence.  These
intermittent elements are permitted to exceed the allowable fence height by
up to 12".



      4.   Open fences that do not block vision to an extent greater
than 40% per lineal foot (60% open) shall be permitted past the front setback
line if there is a patio in the front setback.  Such fences shall not exceed
5 feet in height, and shall extend only to the perimeter of the patio. 
Patio location shall comply with accessory structures regulations listed in
Section 6-302. (Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16)



      5.   Fences located in the rear or side yards in single family
residential districts shall be regulated as follows:



         a.   All perimeter fences shall be located behind the
front building line.



         b.   Perimeter fences located in the side or rear yards
not facing a public right of way shall be of any material and design allowed
in section 6-310 (B) and (C), shall not exceed 6 feet in height, and may be
located all the way up to the property line.



         c.   Perimeter fences located in the side yard facing a
public right of way (corner side yard, rear corner side yard) shall be of any
material and design allowed in section 6-310 (B) and (C), but shall not
exceed 6 feet in height and must be setback a minimum of 5 feet from the
corner side property line.



         d.   Ornamental open-style perimeter fences located in
the side yard facing a public right of way (corner side yard, rear corner
side yard) consisting of wrought iron, galvanized steel, aluminum, powder
coated, vinyl, wood or similar materials that does not block vision to an
extent greater than 40% per lineal foot (60% open), shall be allowed as close
as 12" from corner side property line as long as maximum height does not
exceed 5 feet.  Such fences shall not include chain-link or wire fences or
fences of similar construction. 



         e.   Perimeter fences may be required to be setback
further from the property line if after review by the Development Services
Inspector, if it is determined that the sight lines will be blocked by the
fence.



         f.   Perimeter fences are permitted to be installed back
to back. If a fence is installed so that an area exists between the property
line and the fence, it is the responsibility of the property owner on whose
property the fence is located to maintain said area. (Amd. Ord. 5126 -
9/19/16)



      6.   The following table summarizes the fence regulations
listed in sections 1 through 4 above:



Table 6-310.E.5



 


 

Front Yard

 

Side Yard

 

Corner Side Yard (Side Yard Facing Public Row)

 

Rear Yard

 

Rear Yard Facing Public Row

 

Maximum Height




 

Minimum Required setback from property line





All types of fences allowed by code.

(See LDC 6-310, B,C)
 

Not Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

6 FT




N/A

 

0 FT

 

5 FT

 

0 FT

 

0 FT



Open Style Ornamental Fences (60% open)
 

Not Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

5 FT




N/A

 

0 FT

 

1 FT

 

0 FT

 

0 FT



Open Style Ornamental Fences (60% open)
 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

Allowed

 

4 FT




0 FT

 

0 FT

 

0 FT

 

0 FT

 

0 FT





 



(Amd. Ord. 5126 - 9/19/16; Amd. Ord. 5221 - 9/18/17)



      6.   All fences in the Old Orland Historic District shall be
white picket fences and shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet.



      7.   Private fences and entry features must be located wholly
on private property.



(Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



      8.   Subdivision entryway features may not exceed nine (9)
feet in height.



(Ord. 3199 - 11/16/98)



      9.   Perimeter fences may be erected in side and rear setbacks
behind the front building line around multi-family residential uses.
Perimeter fences may be allowed in front yards when the front setback abuts
arterial and major collector streets. Perimeter fences around a single
multi-family development must be uniform in design, type, color and height. 
(Ord. 4769 – 12/3/12)



      10.   In all residential districts, no fence shall be
permitted to be constructed on a vacant lot unless said lot is immediately
adjacent to a lot improved with a residential principal structure under
common ownership with the vacant lot.



         a.   Said fence must enclose both lots so as not to
create a physical barrier between the two lots.



         b.   Said fence must be located at or behind the front
building line of the principal structure on the adjacent improved lot.



         c.   The authority herein granted shall expire within
one (1) year following the date on which ownership of either of the adjacent
lots is separated from the other, unless the owner of the vacant lot receives
a building permit and initiates construction of a principal structure on the
vacant lot during that one (1) year period. (Ord. 5336 – 9/17/18)



   F.   Design and Height Requirements of Fences in Nonresidential
Districts.



      1.   Fences in a non-residential district may be either solid
or up to 50% open and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.  However,
fences enclosing trash/dumpsters shall meet the requirements of Section 6-302
Accessory Uses and Uses, E. Dumpster and Trash Handling Areas.  (Ord. 3672 
- 8/5/02)



      2.   Fences that are erected to separate residential and
nonresidential properties shall meet the buffering requirements set forth in
Section 6-305.



      3.   Fencing required with Liquor Sales: At least 50% of the
boundaries of any outdoor seating area on private property that will serve
liquor shall be delineated, but not required to be fully enclosed, by a
fence, wall, landscaping or similar barrier not less than 24 inches in height
and not greater than 48 inches in height. A fence, wall, landscaping or
similar barrier not less than 24 inches in height and not greater than 48
inches in height shall also be provided to distinguish between neighboring
outdoor seating areas, where applicable. Additional protection may be
required based upon the relationship between an outdoor dining seating area
and the abutting vehicle zone. See the Village Code for additional
regulations associated with the use of a public sidewalk for outdoor dining
purposes.  (Amd. Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13; Amd. Ord. 5017 - 8/17/15)



   G.   Fences That Screen Parking Lots.  Any fences erected to screen
parking lots shall meet the buffering requirements set forth in Section 6-305.



   H.   Swimming Pool Barrier/Fences.



   Fences surrounding swimming pools, spas or other outdoor accessory
structures that contain water shall be at least five (5) feet in height. (See
Section 2-102 Definitions "Swimming Pools" and Section 6-310.1 Swimming
Pools).  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



      1.   Permits Application and Approval:



      A swimming pool or accessories thereto shall not be constructed,
installed, enlarged or altered until plans/documents have been submitted and
a permit has been obtained from The Village Code Official for construction of
a Swimming Pool Barrier (fencing etc.). 



  •   Section 6-310.1. of this code shall regulate pool permits and
construction



         a.   "Public Swimming Pool" Barrier/Fence Permit



         A Village permit for fencing of a "Public Swimming Pool"
will require an approval by county or state authorities having jurisdiction
over "public swimming pools".  These permit approvals shall be obtained
before applying to the code official for a permit.  Certified copies of
these approvals shall be filed as part of the supporting data for the permit
application.



         b.   Land Owner Responsibility



         Every swimming pool permit application shall include a
letter signed by the land owner, acknowledging the responsibility of required
site barrier with the intent of protecting the public from access during all
times of construction and final use of the pool.



      2.   Construction plans and Owners Responsibility:



      A swimming pool permit application must include details and
design for the construction of a pool and a pool "barrier" (fences walls or
enclosures) for the  protection of the public of at least five (5) feet in
height. A separate required fence barrier permit may be submitted with a
letter signed by the land owner as referenced in Section H 1 a of this
Section.



         a.   Above Ground Pool structure as a barrier.  Where
an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is
mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or
steps, then the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured
locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be
surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of a "Barrier". When the
ladder or steps are secured, locked, or removed, any opening created shall
not allow the passage of a 2 inch (102 mm) diameter sphere.   



         b.   Deck, Handrail and Guardrail construction adjacent
to a swimming pool must comply with the Village Building Code (5-1-13) See
Village diagram of "Typical Pool Decks For Above Ground Pools" using stairs
with a deck for an example. This is available from the Building Department.



      3.   Barrier Construction:



      Enclosure barriers shall be constructed so as to prohibit the
passage of a sphere larger than 2 inches in diameter through any opening or
under the fence. Fences shall be designed to withstand a horizontal
concentrated load of 200 pounds applied on a 1-square-foot area at any point
of the fence.



         a.   Fences that are constructed of wood shall be
protected against decay with openings no more than two (2) inches
horizontally, or solid masonry or wrought iron with openings of no more than
two (2) inches horizontally, or shall be constructed of minimum number
fourteen (14) gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant fence material with
maximum two (2) inch  diamond openings or openings not larger than two (2)
inches horizontal by four (4) inches vertical.  Basket weave fences are
prohibited.  All fence posts shall be decay or corrosion-resistant.



         b.   A temporary "barrier" (fence, wall enclosure) may
be installed to protect the public from access to the site during
construction.  If a temporary barrier is used during construction, the
temporary barrier must be least 4'-0" in height and structurally designed to
resist access from unauthorized persons using the specifications referenced
for Barrier Construction.  (See Section H 1 a of this Section)



         c.   A fence, barrier or enclosure wall shall be part of
the pool permit application.



      4.   Gates to such fences shall be self-closing and
self-latching.  Latches shall be placed four (4) feet above grade, or shall
otherwise be made inaccessible from the outside to small children.



      5.   Proper safety procedures for temporary fencing must be
taken during pool installation.  A permanent fence must be installed within
twenty one (21) days after pool is filled with water and must comply with
Section 6-310. H. 1, 2 and 3 of this section.  (Ord. 4125 – 4/17/06)



   I.   Waterfowl Barriers. Waterfowl barriers are horizontal or
vertical fences of two (2) or more posts and baling twine, poly-twine wire,
heavy monofilament fishing line, or ordinary string/ rope strung between
posts that may not exceed eighteen (18) inches in height. Private waterfowl
barriers shall be entirely placed on private property, six (6) inches from
the lot line, and only along those lot lines that parallel a pond or other
water body. Waterfowl barriers shall be allowed on a temporary basis during
peak waterfowl migration months from August 15 to November 15 in the fall and
from February 15 to May 15 in the spring.  (Ord. 4574 – 7/6/10)



SECTION 6-310.1.   SWIMMING POOLS.



   A.   Swimming Pools.  (Entire section revised by Ord. 2570 -
5/2/94; Amd. Ord. 4132 - 4/17/06 ; Entire Section moved from Section 6-302
Amd. Ord. 4574 - 7/6/10)



      1.   General Permit, Plan and Site Requirements



         a.   Permit(s)



            Every swimming pool hereafter constructed, installed,
altered, maintained, removed or demolished shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this Section.  No person shall construct, erect or alter an
inground swimming pool without having obtained a building permit. Pool
inspections, shall be as provided for in the Village Code (5-1-13), prior to
the use of a pool:



            1.   State and County Approvals



               Construction of a "Public Swimming Pool" will
require an approval by county or state authorities having jurisdiction over
"public swimming pools".  These permit approvals shall be obtained before
applying to the code official for a permit.  Certified copies of these
approvals shall be filed as part of the supporting data for the permit
application.



         b.   Plans and Specifications



            Applications for permits for swimming pools shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate and in sufficient detail
showing the following:



            1.         Survey and Site Plan



               A recent plat of survey and a site plan showing
lot lines, easements if any, pool area plan and elevations with dimensions
all drawn to scale of not less than one-eight inch to the foot. 



               a.   Proposed Final Site Grade Engineering



                  Site engineering plans must be submitted
to The Village by a State of Illinois licensed engineer.  Proposed plans
shall include grade topographies for; established streets, drainage easements
and proposed finished grades.  The design shall be to approved engineered
storm drainage elevations.



               b   Engineering Design Approval



                  Before a pool permit can be issued, The
Village Engineering Department must approve proposed grading plans prior to
the issuance of any swimming pool before a pool permit issuance.  Drainage
easements shall be verified and conform to recorded engineering grade
elevations.



               c.   Final "As Built" Location and Topography



                  After completion and before the use of a
`swimming pool, an "As Built" plan must be submitted by an Illinois licensed
professional engineer.  The final site grade elevations must conform to
engineering drainage and location standards. 



            2.   Location and Setbacks



               Swimming pools shall be allowed in rear and
side yards only with a minimum of ten (10) feet from side and rear lot
lines.  Pools placed within a side yard shall not be located within twenty
(25) feet of a front yard. If any part of the pool structure, pool deck or
required pool fencing encroaches on a recorded easement and damage results
when the easement is used for its stated purposes, then repair of said damage
is the sole responsibility of the homeowner. Pools shall conform to the
following conditions:



                 a.   Pools within a side yard shall not
be located within twenty (25) feet of a building front yard setback.



                 b.   No part of the pool shall be allowed
within the minimum required side yard building setback of each zoning
district. 



                 c.   Exterior pools shall provide a
minimum 48" clear access distance around the pool from other structures
located on the lot.



                 d.     Glass and glazing near a pool
shall meet the requirements of the Village Building Code for glass in
hazardous locations.



                 e.     The maximum total lot coverage
including the pool area must comply with the applicable zoning district
requirement.



                 f.     Swimming pool fence and barrier
enclosures shall comply with Section 6-310 H of this code. 



                 g.     The minimum side yard set back to
the edge of the pool (water) shall not be less than 10'-0".



            3.   Fences and Barriers



                 A swimming pool permit application must
include details and design for the construction of a pool “barrier”
(fences walls or enclosures) for the protection of the public. A separate
required fence permit may be submitted with a swimming pool permit
application provided a signed letter is received from the land owner
acknowledging the responsibility of required site barrier protection during
and after construction. See Section 6-310 H “Swimming Pool Fences” of
this code for fence regulations. A separate fence permit is not required for
spas and hot tubs with a lockable safety cover that complies with ASTM F
1346. In the event of abandonment, such barriers must remain with the
swimming pool, hot tub or spa and must comply with the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



            4.   Lot Coverage



                 The maximum lot coverage including the pool
areas shall be calculated and submitted with plans for each pool permit
application. This calculation shall comply with requirements of the
applicable zoning district.



            5.   Electrical Service



                 New residential construction service
location shall be on the side (side yard) of all buildings.  Wiring
locations above, below or near a pool shall conform to the Village Electrical
Code (Village Code 5-3). "JULIE" shall be called for locations of electrical
service wires before excavation.



      2.   Definitions:  (Also see Section 2-102 "Definitions" for
"Swimming Pool")



         The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this section, have the meanings shown herein.  Pools, swimming, hot tubs and
spas above-ground/on-ground pool:  See Definition of private swimming pool.



         Above-ground/On ground pool:



         Any pool of water installed completely above final exterior
grade elevations which have been approved by the Village.  Final exterior
grades are those approved by the Village Engineering Department.  See
definition of private swimming pool.



         Barrier:



         A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an
above-ground swimming pool or a combination thereof, which completely
surrounds the swimming pool that structurally obstructs access to the
swimming pool and is at least 60 inches in height.  A barrier includes
self-closing gates on openings to public access. 



         Temporary Barrier:



         A "barrier" surrounding the site during the construction of
any type of pool regulated by this code.  A temporary barrier may be reduced
in height to 48 inches above the ground level. (Section 6-310 H. references
"Swimming Pool Fences" details)



         Hot tub:



         See definition of private swimming pool.



         In-ground pool:



         Any pool of water installed below final exterior grade
elevations which have been approved by the Village.  Final exterior grades
are those approved by the  Village Engineering Department.  See definition
of private swimming pool.



         Power safety cover:



         A pool cover which is placed over the water area, and is
opened and closed with a motorized mechanism activated by a control switch.



         Private swimming pool:



         Any structure that contains water over 20 inches in depth
and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or recreational
bathing in connection with an occupancy in Residential Use Group and which is
available only to the family and guests of the householder. This includes
in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
See Village Code 5-1-13 Section 3109, "General Pools" regulations



         Private swimming pool, indoor:



         Any private swimming pool that is totally contained within
a private structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said
structure.



         Private swimming pool, outdoor:



         Any private swimming pool that is not an indoor pool.



         Public swimming pool:



         Any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool.



         Spa:



         See definition of private swimming pool.



      3.   In-ground Swimming Pools



         a.     Applications for permits for In-ground swimming
pools shall be accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate and in
sufficient detail showing the following:



            1.   The "General Permit, Plan and Site
Requirements" of Items 1.a., 1.b. and Definitions Item 2. of this Section
above shall apply to Inground Ground Swimming Pools.



            2.   Pool dimensions, depths and volume in gallons.



            3.   Type and size of filter systems, filtration
and backwash capacities.



            4.   Pool piping layout, with all pipes and valves
shown, and types of materials to be used.



            5.   The rated capacity of the pool pump in
gallons per minute, and its working head at filtration and backwash flows.



            6.   The size and type of waste disposal system.



            7.   Location and type of waste disposal system.



            8.   Type and location of walk and fence   
construction as required.  All swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply
and drainage      systems shall be constructed in conformity with approved
plans.  If deviation from such plans is desired, a supplementary plan shall
be filed with the Village and all work shall stop until the supplementary
plan has been approved.



         b.   Design and Construction.



            1.   Pools shall be constituted of concrete, steel
or other approved materials, and shall have an impervious finish which
provides an easily cleaned surface.



            2.   Swimming pools shall be engineered and
designed to comply with all applicable provisions of the building ordinances
of the Village of Orland Park including those ordinances relating to the
specific materials used where not in conflict with this ordinance.  A
temporary private residential swimming pool shall be engineered and designed
to withstand all anticipated forces to which it will be subjected.  Wood
shall not be used at or below grade as an integral part of the structure of
both types of residential swimming pools.  All wood used in swimming pool
structures shall be protected against deterioration.



            3.   The bottom surface shall be smooth, to
facilitate cleaning, and shall slope to the main drain.  The slope of the
bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five (5) feet in
depth shall not be more than one (1) foot in each ten (10) feet.  The
maximum slope where water is five (5) feet or more in depth shall not exceed
one (1) foot in two (2) feet.



            4.   The side and end walls of a pool shall
present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six (6)
feet.  The pool walls may be vertical for thirty (30) inches from the water
level below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any
point equal to the difference between the depth, at that point, and thirty
(30) inches.  The slope of the pool walls to a depth of six (6) feet shall
not be more than one (1) foot horizontal in six (6) feet vertical.



            5.   Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand
the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when
the pool is empty, to a pressure of twenty-two hundred (2200) pounds per
square foot.



         c.   Recirculation and Filtering.



            1.   Every pool shall be equipped with a
recirculating system capable of filtering the entire contents of the pool in
eight (8) hours.



            2.   Filters shall be capable of maintaining the
clarity of the water to permit the ready identification, through an eight (8)
foot depth of water, of a disc two (2) inches in diameter, which is divided
into four (4) quadrants in alternate colors of red and white.



            3.   Sufficient surface area shall be provided in
pressure type filters (sand or diatomaceous earth) to filter pool contents in
eight (8) hours or less at a maximum rate of three (3) gallons per square
foot per minute.  In vacuum type filter-aid filters, the filtration rate
shall not exceed two (2) gallons per square foot per minute.  The quality of
the filters shall be such that under normal operating conditions backwashing
for cleaning purposes shall not be necessary more frequently than once every
four (4) days for pressure sand filters and once every two (2) days for
pressure or vacuum diatomaceous earth filters.



            4.   All pressure filters shall be equipped with
influent and effluent pressure gauges to determine the pressure differential
and frequency of cleaning.  All other filters shall be equipped with at
least one (1) pressure, vacuum, or compound gauge, as applicable, which shall
be positioned in such a way as to determine the differential across the
filter and the need of cleaning.



            5.   All pressure filter systems shall be equipped
with an air release at the high point in the system.  Each sand filter shall
be provided with a visual means of determining when the filter has been
restored to original cleanliness.



            6.   Operating instructions shall be posted on
every filter system.  All valves shall be properly designated, indicating
their purpose.



            7.   The filters, and their installation and
operation, shall conform to the requirements of the National Swimming Pool
Institute "Minimum Standards for Residential Pools".



            8.   The recirculating pump shall have a
sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for the
required turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculation
system.  The pump shall be capable of backwashing pressure sand filters at a
rate of fifteen (15) gallons per square foot of filter area.  An approved
hair and lint strainer, except on vacuum type filters, shall be provided on
the suction side of the recirculating pump.  Hair and lint catchers shall be
so designed that they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection. 
The basket of the strainer shall be non-corrosive; shall not have openings
more than one-eighth inch (1/8") in width or diameter; and have the area of
strainer openings not less than five (5) times the cross-sectional area of
the inlet pipe.



         d.   Pool Piping.



            1.   The piping shall be sized to permit the rated
flow for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the maximum head available
from the pump at the flow.



            2.   Where the water velocity exceeds ten (10)
feet per second, calculations shall be provided to verify correct operation
with the pump and piping provided.



            3.   The recirculating piping and fittings shall
meet the following requirements:



               a.   The vacuum fittings shall be located in
an accessible position below the water line.



               b.   All materials, and their installation,
shall conform to the requirements of the Plumbing code Ordinance of the
Village of Orland Park.



            4.   Valves with full size ports shall be
installed throughout the system and on the main suction line in an accessible
place.



         e.   Inlets, Outlets and Make-up Water.



            1.   Inlets.  The recirculation inlets shall be
so located as to produce uniform circulation of water throughout the pool. 
The inlets shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten (10) inches below the
pool overflow level, and a minimum of one (1) recirculation system inlet
shall be provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface
area of the pool.



            2.   Make-up Water.  Every pool shall be equipped
with facilities for adding make-up water as needed.  There shall be no
physical connection between the water supply line and the pool system.  If
the make-up water is added directly to the pool, the outlet shall be at least
six (6) inches above the upper rim of the pool, and if it discharges to a
surge or balancing tank, the outlet shall be at least six (6) inches above
the rim of the tank.  If a hose connection from a sill cock or the plumbing
fixture is to be used for supplying make-up water, then an approved in-line
vacuum breaker or back flow preventer shall be installed between the sill
cock or control valve at the fixture and hose connection.



            3.   Outlet.  A main outlet shall be provided at
the deepest point in every pool, for recirculating and for emptying the
pool.  If the pool is more than thirty (30) feet in length, multiple outlets
shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty (30) feet apart, nor closer
than four (4) feet to any wall.  One (1) outlet shall be provided for each
eight hundred (800) square feet of surface or area.  All pool drain outlets
shall be equipped with gratings having an effective or net area of not less
than then ten (10) times the area of the outlet pipe.  The grating shall be
of such a design that they cannot be readily removed by bathers.  The
recirculating piping shall be so arranged that the pool can be emptied to the
sewer through a six inch (6") air gap.  No direct connection shall be made
to the sewer. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying
the pool and the discharge of the pool water, if to the sewer system of the
Village, shall be at a rate not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) gallons per
minute.



         f.   Overflow Gutters.



            1.   A pool with a water surface area of eight
hundred (800) square feet or more shall be provided with overflow gutters on
all vertical walls and extending around the entire perimeter of the pool.



            2.   The overflow gutter shall be of the open,
roll-over, or semi-recessed type with a smooth finish and a level lip.



            3.   The gutter shall be at least four (4) inches
deep and shall pitch at least one-quarter inch (1/4") per foot to the drain.



            4.   Drains shall be spaced at least every twenty
(20) feet in the gutter and shall have at least two (2) inch connections to
the drainage system.



            5.   The drainage system shall have an indirect
connection to the sewer, with at least a six (6) inch air gap.



            6.   Satisfactory proof shall be furnished to the
Village Building Director that adequate run off capacity will be obtained by
other arrangements or modifications in gutter design proposed for use in
closed or reverse flow systems of recirculation.



         g.   Skimmers.



            1.   On pool surface area up to 500 square feet at
least one (1) skimmer; 500 square feet to 800 square feet two (2) skimmers;
800 square feet to 1100 square feet three (3) skimmers; and 1100 square feet
to 1500 square feet four (4) skimmers.  Skimmers shall be located at least
thirty (30) feet apart.



            2.   The skimming device shall be built into the
pool wall and shall develop sufficient velocity on the pool water surface to
induce floating oils and wastes into the skimmer from the entire pool area.



            3.   The piping and other parts of a skimming
system shall be designed for a total capacity of at least eighty (80) percent
of the required filter flow of the recirculation system, and no skimmer shall
be designed for a flow-through rate of less than thirty (30) gallons per
minute or 3.75 gallons per minute per lineal inch of water.



            4.   The skimmer weir shall be automatically
adjustable and shall operate freely with continuous action to variations in
water level over a range of at least four (4) inches.



            5.   An easily removable and cleanable basket or
screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap
large solids.



            6.   The skimmer shall be provided with an
automatically controlled equalizer pipe to prevent air lock in the suction
line.  The equalizer pipe shall be not less than two (2) inches in diameter
and be located at least one (1) foot below the lowest overflow level of the
skimmer.  The automatically controlled valve or equivalent device shall
remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions of the skimmer, but
shall automatically open when the skimmer becomes starved and the water level
drops below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer.



         h.   Water Supply and Conditioning.



            1.   All water used in connection with the filling
and operation of a private residential swimming pool or a public swimming
pool shall come from the Village of Orland Park water distribution system or
from the private wells now used for said purpose existing on the effective
date of this ordinance; provided, however, that if a private residential
swimming pool shall be constructed as herein provided in a part of the
Village not served by the Village water distribution system, a private well
may be used.



            2.   The source of water supply to all pools shall
be equipped with approved backflow protection.



            3.   Over-the-rim filling spouts shall not be
permitted unless located under a diving board or installed in a manner
approved by the Director of the Building Department.



            4.   Equipment shall be provided for disinfection
through the use of an effective germicide and algicide (such as high test
calcium hypochlorite or sodium hypochlorite) and shall allow for pH factor
control.  Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine
compounds shall be subject to the approval of the Building Department.



            5.   Disinfection equipment shall be capable of
maintaining a disinfectant of 0.5 parts per million.



            6.   The disinfectant shall be introduced into the
recirculation system ahead of the filters.



            7.   Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be
used for private residential swimming pools.



         i.   Electrical Equipment.



            1.   All electrical work shall comply with Article
680 of the National Electric Code currently enforced by the Village.



            2.   All electrical work must be performed by
Registered Electrical Contractors.  No work is to be started before Building
Permit is approved and issued.



            3.   All work must be inspected before any
enclosures of any type are made.



            4.   All equipment used must bear Underwriters
Laboratories (UL) label or other nationally recognized testing agencies and
inspected before installation.



            4.   Reinforcing rods, ladders, diving boards and
all non-current conveying metal parts in swimming pool area must be grounded
with #8 copper wire using approved clamps and lugs that will require a tool
for installation or removal.



            6.   An unbroken #12 green insulated copper wire
shall be used for grounding to distribution panel.  Grounding of all
equipment related to swimming pool such as deck boxes, transformers, filters,
heaters must be grounded and visible for inspection.



            7.   The use of metallic raceways will not satisfy
the requirements for grounding.



            8.   Rigid steel conduit from pool boxes to
distribution panel shall be of ample size to accommodate wiring as per code
requirements.



            9.   Only twelve (12) volt underwater light shall
be used and it must bear UL label or other nationally recognized testing
agency label.  Light and transformer wiring shall be of ample capacity to
carry current no smaller than #10 copper.  Distance must be considered for
determination of any voltage drop.



            10.   Deck box must be elevated no less than eight
(8) inches from deck of the pool, and no less than four (4) feet from edge of
the pool of sufficient size to accommodate all wiring.  These boxes shall be
so located as to avoid any tripping or damage hazard and it is recommended to
be installed under diving board or some permanent structure such as fences,
benches, observation tower, or similar structures with approved raceway to be
of copper or brass or other corrosion resisting metal of threaded type
fittings.  Junction boxes shall have provisions for effective grounding by
using threaded brass screws and lugs.



            11.   Service drop conductors or any other open
overhead wiring shall not be located above swimming pool, surrounding area
ten (10) feet horizontally from pool edge, diving observation tower, or other
similar structures.



         j.   Steps or Ladders.



            1.   At least two (2) means of egress in the form
of steps, ladders, or step holes shall be provided for each private swimming
pool.



            2.   At least one (1) means of egress shall be
located at the deep end and one (1) at the shallow end of the pool.



            3.   Treads of steps, ladders, or step holes shall
be constructed of non-slip material and shall be at least three (3) inches
wide for their entire length.



            4.   Ladders or step holes shall have handrails on
both sides.



         k.   Heaters and Boilers.   Swimming pool heaters and
boilers, when  installed, shall comply with applicable requirements of the
American Standards Association (ASA), American Gas Association (AGA),
American Society of Mechanical engineers (ASME), Underwriters' Laboratories
(UL), or other nationally recognized testing agencies.



         l.   Walks.



            1.   The pool shall have an unobstructed walk area
not less than three (3) feet wide and extending entirely around the pool.



            2.   The walk area shall be constructed of
impervious material and shall have a non-slip surface.



            3.   The walk shall be sloped away from the pool
at a pitch of at least one-quarter inch (1/4") per foot.



         m.   Diving Boards.  No diving board or platform more
than three (3) feet above water level shall be installed for use in
connection with any private residential swimming pool.  No diving board
shall be permitted over any portion of the pool that is less than seven (7)
feet in depth.



         n.   Water Drainage.



            1.   Water drained from the pool shall not be
discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms.  At no time
shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred fifty
(250) gallons per minute.



            2.   Water drained from the pool shall not be
drained over an adjacent owner's property but must be drained to streets with
curb and gutters or to street drainage ditches, provided it is transported
from the street right-of-way line to the street with a closed header, hose or
pipeline.  Any prohibited drainage shall constitute a nuisance.



         o.   Cleanliness and Health.



            1.   All swimming pools shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition and all equipment shall be maintained in a
satisfactory operating condition during periods when such pools are in use.



            2.   No swimming pool shall be used, kept,
maintained or operated in the Village of Orland Park if such use, keeping,
maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance, danger to
life, or detriment to health.



         p.   Water Condition.



            1   The water in a swimming pool shall be
conditioned so that the pH is between 7.2 and 7.6 at all times.



            2.   A chlorine residual of between 0.5 ppm and
2.0 ppm as free available chlorine shall be maintained whenever swimmers are
present in the pool.  At no time shall the chlorine residual be less than
0.5 ppm combined.



            3.   Chlorinated cyanurates if they are used for
disinfection shall meet the following requirements:



               a.     1.0 to 2.0 ppm free available
chlorine; and



               b.     cyanuric acid concentration of
between 25 ppm to 100 ppm.



            4.   The water shall be free of any organic
materials.



         q.   Protective Covering.  A suitable substantial
protective cover shall be provided and installed over all private residential
swimming pool surfaces during the non-swimming season.



         r.   Presence of Swimmer.   A responsible adult shall
be present at all times that private residential swimming pools are in use.



         s.   Life Saving Equipment.  Every private residential
swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more
than fifteen (15) inches in diameter and having a three-sixteenth inch
(3/16") manila line, or other line as approved by the Building Director,
attached to a length equal to the diameter or width plus the maximum depth of
the pool but not more than sixty (60) feet total, and one or more light but
strong poles with blunted ends and not less than twelve (12) feet in length,
for making reach assists or rescues.  Life saving equipment, as required by
the Director, shall be provided and maintained so as to be immediately
available for use.



         t.   Abandoned Pools.  Unused pools on residential
premises not occupied or dwelt in for periods of thirty (30) days or more
shall be completely drained or equipped with an approved pool cover (at
minimum it must be a mesh safety cover).  Abandoned pools shall be removed
or filled to the grade of adjacent land.  Such unused or abandoned pools
shall not create an attractive nuisance.  They shall not become a breeding
ground for mosquitos. Such unused or abandoned pools not treated in the
manner prescribed in this section shall be deemed a public health and safety
hazard.  (Amd. Ord. 4839 – 9/16/13)



         u.   Infectious Disease.  It shall be unlawful for any
person having an infectious or contagious disease to use any swimming pool,
and no person in charge of any pool shall knowingly permit such use. 



      4.   ABOVE-GROUND SWIMMING POOLS



         a.   Applications for permits for swimming pools shall
be accompanied by.



            1.   Lot or plot plan showing lot lines, easements
if any, and location of pool.  Swimming pools shall be allowed in rear yards
only with a minimum of ten (10) feet from side and rear lot lines.  If any
part of the pool structure, pool deck or required pool fencing encroaches on
a recorded easement and damage results when the easement is used for its
stated purposes, then repair of said damage is the sole responsibility of the
homeowner.  (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00)



            2.   Type and location of fence construction as
required.



         b.   Recirculation and Filtering.



            1.   Every pool shall be equipped with a
recirculating system capable of filtering the entire contents of the pool in
eight (8) hours.



            2.   The filters and their installation and
operation shall conform to the requirements of the National Swimming Pool
Institute "Minimum Standards for Residential Pools".



         c.   Inlets, Outlets and Make-up Water.



            1.   There shall be no physical connection between
the water supply line and the pool system.  If the make-up water is added
directly to the pool the outlet shall be at least six (6) inches above the
upper rim of the pool.  If a hose connection from a sill cock or the
plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying make-up water, then an approved
in-line vacuum breaker or back flow preventer shall be installed between the
sill cock or control valve at the fixture and hose connection.



         d.   Skimmers.



            1.   The skimming device shall be built into the
pool wall and shall develop sufficient velocity on the pool water surface to
induce floating oils and wastes into the skimmer from the entire pool area.



            2.   The piping and other parts of a skimming
system shall be designed for a total capacity of at least eighty (80) percent
of the required filter flow of the recirculation system, and no skimmer shall
be designed for a flow-through rate of less than thirty (30) gallons per
minute or 3.75 gallons per minute per lineal inch of water.



            3.   The skimmer weir shall be automatically
adjustable and shall operate freely with continuous action to variations in
water level over a range of at least four (4) inches.



            4.   An easily removable and cleanable basket or
screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap
large solids.



         e.   Electrical Equipment.



            1.   All electrical work shall comply with Article
680 of the National Electrical Code currently enforced by the Village.



            2.   Service drop conductors and any other open
overhead wiring shall not be located above swimming pool.



         f.   Water Drainage.



            1.   Water drained from the pool shall not be
discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms.  At no time
shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred fifty
(250) gallons per minute.



            2.   Water drained from the pool shall not be
drained over and adjacent owner's property but must be drained to streets
with curb and gutters or to street drainage ditches, provided it is
transported from the street right-of-way line to the street with a closed
header, hose or pipeline.  Any prohibited drainage shall constitute a
nuisance.



         g.   Cleanliness and Health.



            1.   All swimming pools shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition and all equipment shall be maintained in a
satisfactory operating condition during periods when such pools are in use.



            2.   No swimming pool shall be used, kept,
maintained or operated in the Village of Orland Park if such use, keeping,
maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance, danger to
life, or determent to health.



         h.   Water Condition.



            1.   The water in a swimming pool shall be
conditioned so that the ph is between 7.2 and 7.6 at all times.



            2.   A chlorine residual of between 0.5 ppm and
2.0 ppm as free available chlorine shall be maintained whenever swimmers are
present in the pool.  At no time shall the chlorine residual be less than
0.5 ppm combined.



            3.   Chlorinated cyanurates if they are used for
disinfection shall meet the following requirements;



               a.   .10 to 2.0 ppm free available chlorine;



               b.   cyanuric acid concentration of between
25ppm to 100ppm.



               c.   The water shall be free of any organic
materials.



         i.   Abandoned Pools.  Unused pools on residential
premises not occupied or dwelt in for periods of thirty (30) days or more
shall be completely drained or equipped with an approved pool cover. 
Abandoned pools shall be removed or filled to the grade of adjacent land. 
Such unused or abandoned pools shall not create an attractive nuisance. 
They shall not become a breeding ground for mosquitos.  Such unused or
abandoned pools not treated in the manner prescribed in this section shall be
deemed a public health and safety hazard.



         j.   Infectious Disease.  It shall be unlawful for any
person having an infectious or contagious disease to use any swimming pool,
and no person in charge of any pool shall knowingly permit such use.



The Swimming Pool section was moved from 6-302.I to 6-301.1  (Ord. 4574 -
7/6/10)



SECTION 6-311.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND SATELLITE DISHES



   A.   Purpose and Intent.   To ensure the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Village, all wireless communication facilities in the
Village must comply with the following standards and regulations.



   B.   Definition. Wireless communication facility means
infrastructure such as antenna, support structures, equipment, accessory
buildings, parking, and other uses associated with and ancillary to wireless
communication transmission.



   C.   Exceptions.  Dish antennas less than one meter in diameter,
private residence antennas, and private residence amateur radio equipment are
not regulated by this Code Section.



   D.   Authorization. No Person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust
or other legal entity shall install or modify a wireless communication
facility without obtaining Village authorization as described below.



   E.   Application.



      1.   An application or petition submitted to the Development
Services Department for a wireless communication facility will require an
administrative review for wireless communication co-locations, or a special
use permit for new monopoles or utility sub-stations (e.g. communication
shelters). See Section 5-101 General Procedures, Requirements and Regulations
for process details. The following required documentation must be submitted
as part of any petition:



         a.   As-built plat of survey of the subject lot showing
the exact location and dimensions of the proposed wireless communication
facility;



         b.   Complete description of the proposal.



         c.   A scaled elevation drawing showing all proposed
visible equipment.



         d.   Structural plans and a structural analysis report
prepared and stamped by a licensed Structural Engineer. No approvals or
permits shall be issued until all engineering reviews have been completed and
approved by the Village.  All plans must meet all applicable building codes
and current industry standards.



         e.   Letter of authorization from the property owner.



      2.   No project shall be constructed without meeting all
required building codes and obtaining necessary building permits.



   F.   General Standards of Wireless Communication Facilities.



      1.   Wireless communication facilities shall whenever and
wherever possible co-locate on existing vertical infrastructure (e.g. towers,
buildings etc.) and use stealth techniques and technologies to minimize their
visual and physical presence on a tower or building and shall employ methods
that blend wireless infrastructure into the surroundings so that they are not
visible or noticeable, particularly from neighboring rights-of-way, parks and
single family homes.  Wireless communication facilities must minimize or
avoid whenever possible any adverse aesthetic and visual impacts to the land,
property, building or tower on which they locate and neighbor.



      2.   Landscaping and opaque fences shall be used to mitigate
the effects of any ground equipment and/or utility sub-stations per the
design standards for new freestanding wireless communication facilities of
Section 6-311.G.3.g below.



      3.   Wireless communication facilities shall comply with all
site and structural requirements as outlined in the Land Development Code
unless otherwise stated in this Code section, and shall be compatible in
terms of architecture and site design with the surrounding neighborhood.



      4.   No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise
above 45 dB as measured from the nearest property line of the lot on which
the wireless communication facility is located.



      5.   Wireless communication facilities shall not be
artificially lighted or marked except as required by law.



      6.   The color and materials of wireless communication
facilities shall blend with the surrounding environment for visual harmony
and to reduce physical masses. This may include matching or complementing
building colors and facades, rooftop units or infrastructure, and/ or more
generally the sky.



   G.   Location and Standards of Wireless Communication Facilities.



      1.   Wireless communication facilities may co-locate as a
permitted use via administrative review on existing vertical infrastructure
such as towers (e.g. existing lattice towers & monopoles), utility
transmission towers (with ComEd approvals), and on water towers provided they
do not include accessory buildings like shelters, which are considered
utility sub-stations.  Monopoles and existing legal non-conforming lattice
towers hosting co-locations shall be allowed a single increase in height of
not more than 50 feet over the original tower height via administrative
review to accommodate co-locations. If a tower is existing legal
non-conforming because it is within 500 feet of a residential building, the
height shall not be increased.  Water tower co-locations shall be allowed a
single increase in height of not more than fifty (50) feet over the first
co-location, which is considered the original height.



         a.   Placement of additional equipment on a
non-conforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the
non-conformity provided all building code safety and structural requirements
are met.



      2.   Wireless communication facilities may co-locate as a
permitted use via administrative review on non-residential buildings outside
of the Old Orland Historic District and on non-landmarked buildings using
stealth techniques and technologies provided they do not include accessory
buildings like shelters, which are considered utility sub-stations. The
co-location shall not increase the height of the building more than 15 feet
in any zoning district and shall meet all building code and structural
requirements.



      3.   Wireless communication facilities may locate as a new
freestanding monopole via a special use permit on any non-residential parcel
located in the VC Village Center District, BIZ General Business District, MFG
Manufacturing District, COR Mixed Use District or ORI Mixed Use District, or
on institutional parcels in any zoning district provided proximity
requirements to residential buildings are met.



         a.   The parcel must meet the minimum lot size
requirement of the zoning district in which it will be located.  (Ord. 3837
- 12/1/03)



         b.   Freestanding wireless communication facilities must
meet all setback requirements of the zoning district in which they will be
located.



         c.   Freestanding wireless communication facilities can
not be located in the required landscape buffers of the zoning district in
which they will be located.



         d.   Freestanding wireless communication facilities must
be a minimum of 500 feet from any residential building.



         e.   Freestanding wireless communication towers shall be
no taller than 100 feet.



         f.   All new wireless communication towers shall be
self-supporting monopoles.  Guyed or lattice towers are prohibited.  All
towers shall be constructed with at least one release point so as to bend and
fold over on themselves when necessary and meet current industry standards
for engineering.



         g.   The base and ground equipment of new freestanding
wireless communication facilities shall be screened with an 8 foot tall
solid, opaque fence enclosure constructed of either wood or neutral colored
(e.g. non-white) vinyl material. The base and ground equipment enclosure
shall be landscaped using Type 2 Bufferyard requirements as outlined in
Section 6-305, “Landscape and Tree Preservation,” of this Code. If the
required bufferyard cannot be accomplished due to spatial constraints, other
incremental improvements or a fee in lieu of landscaping may be required to
mitigate the visual impact to the surrounding area.  (Amd. Ord. 5061 -
1/18/16)



         h.   Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved or
enhanced where possible, and disturbance of existing topography shall be
minimized, unless such disturbance would reduce the visual impact on the
surrounding area.



      4.   A special use permit shall not be granted for a new
freestanding wireless communication facility unless one or more of the
following reasons is found to support it:



         a.   The planned wireless communication equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of an existing or approved tower or structure
within the search radius, as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional structural engineer, and the existing or approved tower or
structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate the
planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost;



         b.   The planned wireless communication equipment would
cause interference impacting the usability of other existing or planned
wireless infrastructure, as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost;



         c.   Existing or approved towers and structures within
the search radius cannot accommodate the planned wireless communication
equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer.



      5.   Freestanding wireless communication towers and accessory
structures shall avoid environmentally sensitive areas and historically,
culturally, or architecturally significant areas and their associated
view-sheds.



      6.   New freestanding wireless communication facilities not
within the jurisdiction of the Village of Orland Park but within the one and
one-half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Orland Park
shall fully comply with the standards and regulations of this Section
concerning proximity to residential lots.



      7.   A small wireless facility (as defined in Section 3-10-3
of Ordinance Number 5314 entitled "An Ordinance Amending The Municipal Code
Of The Village Of Orland Park Relative To The Permitting, Regulation And
Deployment Of Small Wireless Facilities") shall be a permitted use in all
rights-of-way in any zoning district established by Section 6-101 of this
Land Development Code and a permitted use on private property in the BIZ
General Business, MFG Manufacturing and ORI Mixed Use Office, Research &
Industrial Districts.  In addition, to the extent of any conflicts or
inconsistencies between the provisions of this Subsection G and the
provisions of said Ordinance Number 5314, the provisions of Ordinance Number
5314 shall govern and control.  (Ord. 5336 – 9/17/18)



   H.   Removal of Facility .



      1.   The Village, through proper legal procedures, may require
the owner of a wireless communication facility or owner of the land where the
facility is located to remove it upon occurrence of any of the following
events:



         a.   The facility was not constructed in accordance with
the Village requirements.



         b.   The facility has deteriorated from lack of
maintenance.



         c.   The facility has been inactive for a period of at
least six months, which shall be considered abandoned.



      2.   The Village reserves the right to retain the authority to
remove a freestanding wireless communication facility when the above events
occur and when the owner and/or the land owner do not comply with these
regulations. The facility and all associated ancillary equipment, batteries,
devices, structures or supports for that system will be removed at the
owner's and/or land owner's expense and the costs of removal shall be a lien
against the property.  The owner shall be notified via a violation notice
and must comply within 60 days from the time of notification.



(Entire Section updated Ord. 4442 - 12/15/08; Amd. Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



SECTION 6-312.   CONGREGATE ELDERLY HOUSING.



          The Land Development Code of the Village of Orland Park, as
amended, is hereby further amended to delete Section 6-312, "Congregated
Elderly Housing" in its entirety.  (Ord. 4647, 5/16/11)



SECTION 6-313.   POLLUTION CONTROL STANDARDS.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to ensure that
industrial, research, and other business activities are good neighbors to
adjoining properties by controlling the emission of noise, odors, glare,
vibration, smoke, dust, liquid wastes, radiation, radioactivity, and similar
pollutants.  Accordingly, this Section sets forth performance standards and
conditions with which the Village expects the construction and operation of
industrial, research, and other business activities to comply.  In many
cases, the relation of a prospective use to all of these standards cannot be
judged properly at the time that a building permit is issued or some other
form of development approval is granted.  In such cases, the recipient of
the permit or approval should note that these performance standards, like all
the other provisions of these regulations, are continuing obligations and
that all industrial, research and other business uses shall be expected to
operate in compliance with these standards.  Any land use which fails to
comply with these standards shall be in violation of these regulations.



   B.   General Standards and Measures of Compliance.



      1.   All uses shall be conducted so as to preclude any
nuisance, hazard or commonly-recognized offensive condition or
characteristics of the use, including the creation or emission on other
properties of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, particulate
matter, chemical compounds, toxic matter, fire, explosions, electrical
disturbance, heat, glare, or excessive night illumination.  At any time
before or after a building is used or occupied, the Director of the Building
Department may require that adequate control measures be provided in
accordance with the requirements or standards of the appropriate state or
federal government agency responsible for regulating that condition or
pollutant, in order to protect the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare from any such nuisance, hazard, condition or
pollutant.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      2.   Federal and state environmental regulations may also
apply to one or more of the features governed by the standards in Subsection
C, below.  It is not the intent of this Section to supersede or replace
those federal or state regulations.  Rather, the intent is for the standards
of this Section to supplement and complement any applicable federal and state
regulations.  If any standards herein conflict with an applicable federal or
state standard, then the federal or  state standard shall control.



   C.   Performance Standards.  All uses and structures permitted in
Article 6, Part I (Districts) of these regulations shall meet the following
standards, except as otherwise provided by these regulations:



      1.   Noise.  Noise shall be muffled so as not to become
objectionable at or beyond the property line due to intermittent beat
frequency, shrillness, or intensity.  Each land use shall conform to the
noise standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.



      2.   Vibration.  No activity or operation shall cause or
create earthborne vibrations that are discernible at or beyond the property
line to the human sense of feeling for three (3) minutes or more duration in
any one (1) hour.



      3.   Smoke.  Smoke emissions shall not exceed the maximum
limits established by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



      4.   Dust and Other Particulate Matter.  Solid or liquid
particulate matter shall not be emitted at any point in a concentration
exceeding three-tenths (3/10) grains per cubic foot of the conveying gas or
air.



      5.   Gases.  Fumes or gases shall not be emitted at any point
in concentrations or amounts that are noxious, toxic, corrosive, or in excess
of any applicable maximum limits established by state or federal regulations.



      6.   Toxic Matter.  Each land use shall conform to the toxic
matter standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.



      7.   Odors.  Odors from any use shall not be discernible at
or beyond the property line.  Each land use shall conform to the odorous
matter standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.



      8.   Fire and Explosion Hazards.   All operations shall be
carried out in accordance with the Village's Fire Code and with reasonable
precautions against fire and explosive hazards.



      9.   Glare.  Direct or reflected glare, such as from
floodlights or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general
illumination, shall not be visible at or beyond the property line.



      10.   Radiation and Radioactivity.   Operations shall cause
no radiation or radioactivity at or beyond the property line which exceeds
any applicable standards or regulations established by the U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission or by other federal or state agencies or laws.



      11.   Electrical Radiation.  Any electrical radiation shall
not at any point adversely affect or interfere with any operations or
equipment other than those of the person, company or other entity emitting
the radiation.  Avoidance of adverse effects or interference from electrical
radiation by appropriate single or mutual scheduling of operations shall be
permitted.



      12.   Wastewater and Industrial Wastes.   All wastewater and
industrial wastes shall be treated and disposed of in such a manner as to
comply with the water quality standards applicable to the classification
assigned to the receiving waters by the State of Illinois.  Approval by the
State of Illinois of all plans for waste disposal facilities shall be
required before the issuance of any building permit.



      13.   Storage Tanks.  all storage tanks which are placed
above or below the ground shall be designed and installed so as to prevent
the infiltration of their contents into groundwater or surface waters, and to
comply with all applicable state regulations.



   D.   Effects of Concurrent Operations on Different Properties.  
The sum total of the effects of concurrent operations on two (2) or more
parcels measured at any property line shall not be greater or more offensive
to the senses than the standards contained in this Section.  Compliance with
the provisions of this Section may occur by independent or mutual changes in
operational levels, scheduling of operations, or other adjustments.



SECTION 6-314.   ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS.



(Entire Section added by Ord. 4594, 10/18/10)



   A.   Purpose of Environmental Technology Standards.



      Environmental Technology Standards (ETS) are established to
ensure that environmental and clean technologies are good neighbors to
adjoining properties by controlling their appearance and site placement, and
the emission of noise, glare, vibration and liquid wastes; to provide
stewardship for localized energy generation; to permit the installation,
construction, maintenance and use of clean technologies in the community; and
to promote their safe, effective and efficient use. In addition to the
purpose here stated, the Environmental Technology Standards strive to promote
and accomplish the following:



      1.   Promote Energy Efficiency and Conservation. Reduce the
environmental impact of energy consuming buildings and facilities through the
investment in energy upgrades to building systems and infrastructure; Offset
the energy draw of existing buildings from the energy utility grid; Create
opportunities for net zero energy building systems;



      



 



      



Renewable energy technologies integrated on existing buildings. Examples from
other communities. Above: Geo-thermal energy; Right and Below: Roof-top solar
energy; Bottom Right: Wind energy;



      2.   Promote Sustainable Energy Production. Promote the
production of energy from sources other than fossil fuels, nuclear fission,
or any other fuel source that is not renewable; Use energy derived from the
sun, closed and open loop geothermal systems, wind flows, and installations
and measures taken to retrofit buildings to improve energy and resource
efficiency and conservation;



      3.   Conserve Resources. Conserve the prior investment of
resources and energy of exist- ing buildings or sites; Conserve and preserve
open space, monuments, landmarks, and the built and natural environments;



      4.   Promote High Performance Buildings. Provide for new and
alternative methods to build high performance building facilities;



      5.   Ensure or Increase Property Values. Ensure and increase
property values through continued investment in sustainable energy
technologies that provide lower utility costs for residents and businesses in
the Village;



      6.   Promote Jobs and Economic Development. Promote job
creation and retention and general economic development through the sale,
manufacturing, installation and maintenance of renewable energy and high
performance systems that will in turn reduce utility costs for residents and
businesses in the Village;



   B.   Terms.



      Definitions for the below terms can be found in Section 2-102
Definitions of the Land Development Code.



      1.   Building Mounted/ Co-Location.



      2.   Environmental/ Clean Technology (ECT).



      3.   Renewable Energy.



      4.   Renewable Energy Conversion System (RECS).



      5.   Sustainable Development.







Opposite: Wind turbines integrated into existing architecture in Chicago.



   C.   Environmental Clean Technology Review and Notification Process.



      The following outlines the development review process required
for installing an environmental clean technology (ECT). ECTs include but are
not limited to renewable energy systems such as wind energy conversion
systems (WECS), solar energy systems (SES) and geothermal energy systems
(GES). See Section 2-102 Definitions for more information. Unless otherwise
noted in these regulations, the following shall apply:



      1.   Petition. Petitioners seeking to construct or install an
ECT must submit a complete appearance review application to the Development
Services Department and apply for building permits.



      2.   Review. The application shall be reviewed in accordance
with these regulations and, if necessary, shall be deliberated at the next
available meeting of the Plan Commission.



      3.   ECT Review. An ECT Review is a review at Plan Commission
that requires notification of neighboring properties. There are two
categories of ECT Review: Residential and Commercial. For Residential ECT
projects, all residential uses within three hundred thirty (330) feet of an
ECT development shall be notified. For Non-Residential ECT projects, all
residential uses within five hundred (500) feet of an ECT development shall
be notified. Notification shall be issued via certified mail, with return
receipt requested, at least fifteen (15) to thirty (30) days in advance of
the Plan Commission meeting. If no residential uses are within the stated
buffers, notices are not necessary for the review at Plan Commission.



         a.   The notice shall be titled "Environmental Clean
Technology Review Notice". The notice shall include the date, time and place
of the Plan Commission meeting and the contact information of the Development
Services Department. The notice shall describe the type of ECT system that is
proposed for the property and that the intent is to, for example, generate
renewable energy in the case of WECS etc.



         b.   A contributing structure in the Old Orland Historic
District or an Orland Park Landmark shall require a Certificate of
Appropriateness (COA) review at the Plan Commission for an ECT. The same
notification requirements shall be under taken for a COA. (Amd. Ord. 4996 –
6/15/15)



      4.   Exemption. Subject to Development Services Department
approval, the ECT projects listed below are exempt from the public
notification, Plan Commission/Committee review and Board approval
requirements detailed in Section 6-314.C.3. An appearance review and
compliance with all other ECT and Building Code requirements are still
required for projects which are granted such an exemption:



         a.   All geothermal energy system (GES) projects, both
residential and non-residential;



         b.   Small scale solar projects, which are defined as
solar energy system (SES) projects comprised of a solar collector panel or
panels with a combined area of less than or equal to twenty (20) square feet.
Only one (1) exempt solar energy system shall be permitted per parcel without
requiring a full ECT review, as detailed in Section 6-314.C.3.  (Amd. Ord.
5221 – 9/18/17)



   D.   Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) Regulations.



      A WECS consists of a wind turbine and blades (nacelle and rotor),
one tower, support system and associated controls and conversion electronics
for the purpose of converting kinetic energy from the wind into electrical
energy. WECS have a wide range of rated capacities from less than one (<1)
kilowatt (kW) to 1.5 megawatts (MW) and can have a height of up to
two-hundred fifty (250) feet.







Image Source: European Commission http://ec.europa.eu



   The following regulations apply to the four classes  of  WECS 
recognized  by the Land Development Code:



      RESWECS, MINIWECS, SWECS, and UWECS.



      Lattice or guyed WECS towers are not permitted for any WECS type
or in any zoning district. The exception to this rule includes lattice towers
under thirty (30') feet, towers with a rotor diameter of five (5') feet or
less, and towers that generate power for pond aerators or farm well pumps.



      1.   RESWECS. Residential Scale Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(0 kW to 10 kW) are accessory uses mounted directly on residential rooftops
and are permitted via an ECT Review in the E-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A and
R-4 zoning districts, subject to these regulations. In OOH a Certificate of
Appropriateness is required per Sections 5-110 and 6-209. Freestanding WECS
are prohibited in residential districts.



         a.   Height. RESWECS shall not increase the height of a
building by more than twelve (12') feet from the roofline. They shall not be
attached to chimneys.



 

Table 6-314.D.1.a
 



Zoning
 
Height Permitted w/ RESWECS


E-1 & R-1
 
47 feet


R-2 thru R-3A
 
42 feet


R-4
 
64 feet


OOH
 
47 feet



 







Top: Wind turbine diagram;



Top right: Rendering with residential rooftop turbine from Honeywell;



Bottom: Wall-mounted and roof mounted monopole rooftop turbines;



      2.   MINIWECS. Mini Wind Energy Conversion Systems (0 kW to 10
kW) are accessory uses mounted directly on buildings or are freestanding
towers and are permitted via an ECT Review if applicable, or otherwise an
appearance review, in the BIZ, COR, MFG, and ORI zoning districts, subject to
these regulations. Only MINIWECS mounted on buildings are permitted in the VC
district.



         a.   Height. The maximum height of a MINIWECS shall not
exceed fifty-five (55) feet from ground level to the top of the rotor blade.



         MINIWECS are intended to provide a small scale appli-
cation of wind technologies on non-residential proper- ties in the Village.
They are adaptable systems that can easily be retro-fitted onto existing
infrastructure and provide opportunities for distributed energy generation
without large monopoles, turbines, new infrastructure or much visual or
acoustic impact.



         MINIWECS such as those in Figures A and B at left
demonstrate rooftop turbines for non-residential and mixed-use buildings.
Figure A is a horizontal "aeroturbine" that lays on rooftops. Such turbines
usually require a minimum amount of rooftop square footage to obtain the
necessary capacity. They also need open spaces that are not blocked by
rooftop mechanicals, parapets or other potential wind obstructions. Large,
wide and tall rooftops are appropriate locations for these. Figure B is a
stand-up roof-mounted turbine that extends higher than the roofline. This
turbine is more adaptable as it can be raised vertically to access wind above
any potential obstructions.



         MINIWECS can also on occasion be freestanding re- newable
energy systems as depicted in Figure C.



         Mixed-use districts are often diverse areas that can
accommodate infrastructure that is typically not found in single-use
districts. In Figure C, the monopole stands among mixed-use and multi-family
residential structures.



         Figures D and E demonstrate concepts to utilize existing
vertical infrastructure for MINIWECS distribution. Mounted on parking lot or
street light poles, MINIWECS can take advantage of height and wide-open
spaces. Such infrastructure can offset the energy used to light parking lots
or streets at night or to generate power to sell back to the utility and
reduce peak energy demand.



         In some cases, existing light poles may not structurally
accommodate wind turbines. Such light poles will have to be re-built to
accommodate the extra height and wind loads associated with turbines. The
re-built systems would be MINIWECS with parking lot or street lights rather
than street lights with MINIWECS. Such a conversion would be a co-location
since the new infrastructure would replace similar infrastructure.







 



      3.   SWECS. Small Scale Wind Energy Conversion Systems (10 kW
to 100 kW) can be accessory uses. They are free standing towers and are
permitted via a site plan and elevation review in the E-1 and VC- for
institutional uses only and BIZ, COR, MFG and ORI zoning districts, subject
to these regulations. A special use is required when a SWECS is within five
hundred (500') feet of a residential use. All residential uses within 500
feet must be notified.



         a.   Height.  The  maximum  height  of  a  SWECS 
shall  not  exceed  one-hundred twenty (120') feet to the top of the rotor
blade. The Development Services De-



         SWECS are more intense than MINIWECS. They are intended for
a higher capacity of energy output. SWECS tend to be larger in scale and can
often be incorporated into site plans and building designs. In Figures F and
G, below left, SWECS with parallel rotation to the ground are spread across
parking lots and green spaces.



         In Figure H, below, an onsite SWEC is shown in the more
familiar and traditional wind turbine appearance. SWECS like these are
typically associ- ated with a higher rated energy output. These sys- tems are
for onsite energy production and are usu- ally net-metered with the utility.
They are not rec- ommended in dense settings. Appropriate locations for such
SWECS are in MFG or ORI districts where there is an industrial scope and
scale.



         SWECS like Figures F and G are recommended in more
commercial areas and open places like, park- ing lots, plazas, and common
areas.







 







      4.   UWECS. Utility Scale Wind Energy Conversions Systems (100
kW to 1.5 MW) are free standing utility-owned towers and permitted via
special use in the MFG and ORI zoning districts, subject to these
regulations. UWECS may locate with a special use within one- hundred fifty
feet (150') of Interstate 80. UWECS are not permitted in OS, OOH, E-1, R-1,
R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, VC, BIZ, and COR zoning districts or within five
hundred (500') feet of a residential use.



         a.   Height. The maximum height of a UWECS shall not
exceed 200 feet from ground level to the top of the rotor blade. The
Development Services Department may grant additional height subject to the
findings of a wind energy analysis.



         UWECS are intended only for utility companies like ComEd.
UWECS are the familiar wind turbines that are often found in farmlands or in
distant locations. They are most recognizable when grouped together in
clusters that can stretch from a few acres to multiple square miles. These
are known as wind farms (as seen at right).



         There are only a few areas that may be suitable for a UWECS
in Orland Park and they must lo- cate near transmission lines to be effective.



         UWECS are not permitted to locate within 500 feet of
residential uses due to their scale. Height is often determined by
surrounding obstructions and prevailing wind patterns. The height of these
turbines, however, is often no greater than some existing wireless
communication/ cell towers, water towers and radio antennas.



         Setbacks from specific land uses typically mitigate visual
and acoustic impacts of turbines. They tend to be no more of a nuisance than
wireless communication towers.







      5.   General Requirements.



         a.   Setbacks. A WECS must be located a minimum distance
equal to 1.1 times the total height from any property line in a
non-residential zoning district. In a residential zoning district, a WECS
must locate according to the established building setbacks and cannot locate
between the front or corner side building façade and the street.



         b.   Spacing Parameters and Wind Accessibility. The
following are spacing parameters and requirements for freestanding WECS
towers and co-located WECS equipment.



            1.   A WECS tower must be located a minimum
distance of twenty (20) feet from any principal structure(s) on a parcel.



            2.   Co-located WECS equipment must be located a
minimum distance of five (5) rotor lengths from non-WECS mechanical,
electronic, telecom- munication or other equipment on a tower, building or
other structure.



            3.   Multiple WECS on a site must be spaced a
minimum distance equal to five (5) rotor lengths, based upon the size of the
largest rotor, from adjacent WECS.







 



Figure 6-314.D.6: Five rotor lengths. This general diagram depicts a rotor
length measured as the length of the blade plus the diameter of the nacelle
or nose of the turbine. This type of measurement should be used for all wind
turbine types.



         c.   Safety. The following are minimum safety
requirements for WECS.



            1.   All WECS must have a manual and automatic
braking system device capable of halting operation to prevent damage in high
winds.



            2.   For freestanding towers, the structural
engineer shall prescribe at a minimum two (2) 5/8 inch diameter ground rods
installed to a depth of eight (8) feet.



            3.   Non-RESWECS must be designed to withstand a
minimum wind velocity of one hundred (100) miles per hour, with an impact
pressure of forty (40) pounds per square foot.



            4.   All WECS structures including towers,
buildings and their related foundations, footings, anchors and electrical
connections must meet the requirements of the Village Building Code and be
engineered by a licensed structural engineer and meet all necessary
engineering code related requirements.



            5.   The minimum distance between the ground and
any protruding blades utilized on a WECS shall be twenty (20') feet as
measured at the lowest point of the arc of the blades.



            6.   Wind turbines must meet the most recent AWEA
Small Wind Turbine Performance and Safety Standards and the International
Electrotechnical Commission IED 61400 standards. Turbines must be certified
by the Small Wind Certification Council or other certification program recog-
nized by the American Wind Energy Association.



               d.   Security. All WECS ground equipment
(e.g. batteries, boxes etc.) shall be en closed  within a lockable six (6)
foot high fence enclosure constructed of either wood or non-white vinyl
material, or in a masonry utility building. All climbing apparatuses affixed
to a WECS must terminate twelve (12) feet above the ground.



               e.   Electromagnetic Interference. No WECS
shall cause electromagnetic degradation or radio frequency interference in
performance of other electromagnetic radiators or receptors of quality and
proper design.



                  1.   The determination of degradation
of performance, quality and proper design shall be made in accordance with
best engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards
of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE), the Institute of
Radio Engineers (IRE) and Electrical Industries Association (EIA). In case of
conflict between these standards, precedence is given to the AIEE.



                  2.   WECS shall use non-metallic rotor
blades unless documentation is supplied from an appropriate testing
laboratory certifying that a proposed metallic blade rotor will not cause
electromagnetic interference.



                  3.   Any ordinance that grants a WECS
operation, whether special use or otherwise, may be repealed or revoked
whenever electromagnetic interference from a WECS is evident.



               f.   Interconnectivity and Transmission.
SWECS and UWECS may connect to the electric transmission grid using the
public right-of-way following the neces- sary permission from ComEd and
compliance with the Village Code. Transmis- sion conduits/lines providing
connections to the grid or to buildings/batteries must be installed
underground. RESWECS and MINIWECS shall provide power to the property on
which it is located and shall not be used for the sale of energy to other
users offsite. Excess power generated by these may be sold to the grid. ComEd
shall determine grid interconnection and net metering policies. Trans-
mission lines and appurtenances may locate on public right-of-way or on any
other real property provided the necessary licenses, easements, leases,
rights- of-way or other similar land rights for access and maintenance are
obtained.



               g.   Sounds and Vibrations. A WECS shall be
installed and operated such that sound pressure levels do not exceed the
definitions of nuisance "noise" and "vibrations" as established by the
Village Code. During short term events such as storms and utility outages,
when WECS equipment can potentially create nuisance "noise" and "vibrations",
a WECS may exceed the Village Code nuisance requirements if it cannot be
manually shut down by the owner. In the event a full battery bank is causing
a WECS to exceed Code noise and vibration requirements, the WECS must be shut
off until the battery bank is depleted.



               h.   Decommissioning. The Village, through
proper legal procedures, may require the owner of a non-residential WECS or
owner of the land where the non- residential WECS is located to remove the
WECS upon occurrence of any of the following events:



                  1.   The WECS was not constructed in
accordance with the Village require- ments;



                  2.   The WECS has deteriorated from
lack of maintenance;



                  3.   The WECS has been inactive for a
period of at least six months and shall be considered abandoned;



                  4.   The WECS creates irresolvable
electromagnetic interference;



                  The Village shall be authorized to remove
a WECS when the above events oc- cur and when the WECS owner and/ or the land
owner do not comply with these regulations. The WECS and all associated and
ancillary equipment, batteries, devices, structures or supports for that
system will be removed at the owner's and/or land owner's expense and the
costs of removal shall be a lien against the property.



         i.   Letter of Credit or Other Security Method. SWECS
and UWECS will require a letter of credit or other security method to assure
for the proper construction of public improvements associated with the WECS.
The letter of credit or other security method is determined according to
Section 5-112 of these regulations.



         j.   Signage, Lights, Colors and Other Advertisements.
No letters, insignia, logos, flags, banners, balloons, ribbons, tinsel,
streamers, pennants, reflectors, spinners or signs shall be affixed to a
WECS. WECS shall not be lit and commercial lighting fixtures shall not be
attached. WECS shall be painted white, gray or another non-reflective,
unobtrusive color. The only advertising sign permitted on the WECS shall be a
manufacturer's label, not exceeding one square foot in size.







Far Left: WECS signage that identifies manufacturer in a small area per code
requirements.



Left: WECS signage that is not permitted per the Land Development Code.



         k.   Historic Preservation. WECS permitted in OOH or on
Orland Park Landmarks require a Certificate of Appropriateness per Sections
5-110 and 6-209 in addition to any other required approvals, prior to
submission of a building permit.



         l.   Test WECS. A Test WECS is permitted following a
site plan and elevation review at Plan Commission and with formal approval by
the corporate authorities of the Village. Test WECS must be dismantled within
three (3) years of installation and are subject to the requirements of
Section 6-314.D.12. For the purposes of this Section, Test WECS are trial
SWECS and UWECS that are designed solely to collect wind generation data and
are subject to these regulations. RESWECS and MINIWECS are not permitted to
have Test WECS status.



         m.   Aviation Rules and Regulations. The proposed WECS
must be in compliance with all Federal Aviation Administration regulations
and shall comply with the notification requirements of the FAA.







WECS are adaptable to the existing environment and can be incorporated into
new developments as functional elements, stylistic statements or innovative
reforms.



   E.   Solar Energy System (SES) Regulations.



      A SES consists of an array of collector panels that is angled
toward the sun and con- tains photovoltaic (PV) or other solar cells (e.g.
solar thermal) that capture solar energy and convert it directly to
electricity or use it to heat/ cool gases, solids or liquids. Typi- cally
installed on rooftops or in large open spaces on the ground, SES energy
output capacities depend on the number of solar collectors or arrays
installed.



      The following regulations apply to the four classes of SES
recognized by the Land De- velopment Code: PV, SLH, SAH and CSPS.







Top Right: Solar panels on a non-residential rooftop; solar roofing on a
single family home; Mixed-use/ multi- family district equipped with solar
panel systems; and solar power panels applied to parking lot lights. Opposite
Top: Wall mounted SES. The far right depicts a solar curtain preserving
transparency with panels.



      1.   Photovoltaic (PV). Photovoltaic solar energy systems are
mounted directly on rooftops, walls or installed on the ground and are
permitted in all the zoning districts via an ECT Review including for
non-residential uses when the SES is wall mounted or visible from a public
right-of-way, subject to these regulations.



         a.   Height. PV collector panels shall not increase the
visual height of a building. In no instance shall any part of the PV extend
beyond the edge of the roof or parapet. PV collector panels on residential
rooftops must be in line with the plane of the roof and shall not be attached
to chimneys. For flat roofs, the system shall be setback such that it is not
visible from the street or neighboring property.



         b.   Rooftop Coverage. No more than seventy-five percent
(75%) of a residential rooftop may be covered by PV collectors or arrays. A
non- residential rooftop may be covered by as many PV collectors or arrays as
may be spatially or structurally feasible.



         c.   Wall Mounted Setbacks and Height. Wall mounted PV
collector panels shall not extend more than five (5') feet from the wall and
shall be a minimum seven (7') feet from the ground.







      2.   Solar  Liquid  Heating  (SLH).   Solar  liquid 
or  water  heating  systems  are mounted on rooftops or installed on the
ground and are permitted in all zoning districts via an ECT Review including
for non-residential uses when the SES is wall mounted or visible from a
public right-of-way, subject to these regulations.



         a.   Height. SLH solar energy systems shall not increase
the visual height of a building. In no instance shall any part of the SLH
extend beyond the edge of the roof or parapet. SLH collector panels on
residential roof- tops must be in line with the plane of the roof and shall
not be attached to chimneys. For flat roofs, the system shall be setback such
that it is not visible from the street or neighboring property.



         b.   Liquid Storage Tank. Upright-standing SLH systems,
where the liquid storage tank is attached to the solar panel, are not
permitted on resi- dential rooftops. Tanks must be detached and stored inside
the build- ing. For non-residential buildings, SLH tanks must be behind a
parapet wall, other rooftop mechanical equipment, or on the ground. Liquid
stor- age tanks on the ground must be screened by landscaping and a fence
enclosure.







SLH systems should be flat on rooftops or walls. Systems with attached tanks
(left) should be aero- dynamic and light-weight. Upright SLH, such as the one
at right, is prohibited



      3.   Solar Air Heating (SAH). Solar air heating systems are
mounted on rooftops or on walls and are permitted in all zoning districts via
an ECT Review including for non-residential uses when the SES is wall mounted
or visible from a public right-of-way, subject to these regulations.



         a.   Height. SAH solar energy systems shall not increase
the visual height of a building. In no instance shall any part of the SAH
extend beyond the edge of the roof or parapet. SAH collector panels on
residential rooftops must be in line with the plane of the roof and shall not
be at- tached to chimneys. For flat roofs, the system shall be setback such
that it is not visible from the street or neighboring property.



         b.   Rooftop  and  Wall  Coverage.   No  more 
than  seventy-five  percent (75%) of a residential rooftop may be covered
by SAH collectors or arrays. A non-residential rooftop may be covered by as
many SAH collectors or arrays as may be spatially or structurally feasible.
No more than forty percent (40%) of a non-residential building wall facing a
public right-of-way, may be covered by SAH collectors or arrays.



         c.   Wall Mounted Setbacks. Wall mounted SAH solar
energy systems shall not extend more than five (5') feet from the wall.







Above: Solar air heating systems attached to the façades of residential
buildings. Light screening is recommended when facing public right-of-ways.
Wall-mounted SAH units should face south for greatest exposure. Below: PV and
SAH on a multi-family, mixed-use building.







      4.   Concentrated Solar Power Systems (CSPS). CSPS are solar
energy systems that collect solar energy in concentrated amounts through the
use of concave collectors, reflectors or other similar arrays or panels with
the intention of concentrating sun light to heat objects, water, gas or other
substance or matter. CSPS are prohibited in the E-1, OL, LSPD, OOH, R-1, R-2,
R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, BIZ, COR, and VC districts. CSPS solar energy systems
are typically rooftop or ground mounted systems that require a special use in
MFG and ORI.



         a.   Height. The maximum height of a CSPS shall not
exceed fifty (50') feet from ground level to the top of the concave
collector. In no instance shall any part of a rooftop CSPS extend beyond the
edge of the roof or parapet.



         b.   Rooftop Coverage. No more than fifty percent (50%)
of a building roof- top may be covered by CSPS collectors or arrays.



         c.   Fire Protection. A CSPS must be registered with the
Village and meet the necessary fire rating and other specifications required
by the Village Building Code and other governing bodies.











Concentrated solar power systems are intended for industrial purposes. CSPS
are not allowed in residential or commercial districts. The intent of this
section is to encourage the use of CSPS technologies in existing industrial
processes for heating or cooling systems or to promote the manufacturing of
such systems in the Village.



      5.   General Requirements.



         a.   Setbacks. A solar energy system must be located
within the established building setback according to the zoning district. A
SES cannot locate between the building façade and the street, unless it is
wall mounted as in the case of a solar awning.



         b.   Solar Access.  A solar energy system, as the sum
of all panels, must be located on a property such that it is not shaded by
buildings, structures or trees of southerly properties by more than fifteen
percent (15%) on the Winter Solstice (December 21) between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m.
(Winter Solstice Threshold). Southerly properties are properties south of
true east or west that subject an SES property to shade. Solar en- ergy
systems should be sited at the northern most feasible location on a property.







Figure 6-314.E.6: Solar shade during the Winter Solstice (Dec. 21-22) at 12
p.m. noon, where the angle of the sun is 25.1?, "x" is the minimum distance
from buildings or vegetation that will allow 85% solar exposure, and "y" is
the minimum height of the SES that will allow 85% solar exposure. A SES must
be positioned such that only 15% of its surface area is shaded on the Winter
Solstice.



         c.   Solar Access Easement. See Land Development Code
Section 6-404.E.



         d.   Solar Sharing Agreement. A solar sharing agreement
may be pre- pared between property owners to preserve, protect and share
solar energy  access.  Property  owners  may  share  an  SES  under 
mutual terms, conditions and agreements. Such an agreement may include:
optimizing SES solar exposure between properties; relocating SES to access
solar energy; provisions for shared access, transmission and use; and
provisions for expanding the SES to increase capacity for the benefit of both
parties.



         e.   Solar Assurance. These regulations make no
assurance of solar ac- cess other than the provisions of this section. The
petitioner may pro- vide evidence of covenants, easements, agreements or
similar documentation from neighboring property owners providing access to
solar energy for the operation of a SES.



         f.   Lot Coverage. The surface area of a ground mounted
system regardless of the mounted angle shall be calculated as part of the
overall lot coverage. Ground mounted systems shall not constitute more than
two percent (2%) of the allowable lot coverage, or 360 square feet, which-
ever is less.



Ground mounted SES lot coverage is measured by the surface area of the
panels, even if the system stands on a post or pedestal. The surface area
cannot exceed 2% of the lot size (or 360 square feet, whichever is less) and
is counted toward the total permitted lot coverage in the zon- ing district.







Figure 6-314.E.11 (above): Diagram of solar lot coverage in a typical R-3
10,000 square foot lot.







Right: Non-residential lot coverage example. SES carports do not count toward
total lot coverage because the land is already covered by the pavement of the
parking lot.



         g.   Solar Glare and Concentration. SES collector panels
shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be
directed onto nearby properties, roadways or public right-of-ways.



         h.   Interconnectivity and Transmission. A SES shall
provide power for the principal and/or accessory use of the property on which
it is located and shall not be used for the generation of power for the sale
of energy to other users. Excess power generated by a SES may, however, be
sold to Commonwealth Edison (ComEd). ComEd shall be contacted to determine
grid interconnection and net metering policies. Cables, wires and other
transmission conduits or lines providing connections to the electric
transmission grid or to buildings or batteries must be installed indoors or
underground when applicable.



         i.   Design and Permitting. The design of the SES shall
conform to applicable in- dustry standards. The necessary building permits
shall be obtained for a SES per the Village Building Code (e.g. electrical,
plumbing, mechanical etc.). All wiring shall comply with the latest
applicable version of the National Electric Code (NEC) as amended by the
Village. See Section 6-314.C for further required information.



         j.   Accessory Use. Solar energy systems are accessory
uses to the primary or principle use on a property in all zoning districts.



         k.   Transparency. Wall-mounted solar energy systems
cannot replace or be substituted for street-level windows, multi-story
windows, clerestory windows or other type of fenestration or transparency.







While south facing walls may receive optimal sunlight for a SES, building
transparency should be preserved as much as possible both at street level and
elsewhere. SES should be installed at the next best locations, particularly
on rooftops or non-fenestrated walls. The image at left demonstrates "solar
awnings" over existing street level windows and doors. The image at right
demonstrates rooftop mounted solar panels, preserving window/ transparent
area on the building façade.



         l.   Decommissioning. The Village, through proper legal
procedures, may require the owner of a non-residential SES or owner of the
land where the non-residential SES is located to remove the SES upon
occurrence of any of the following events:



            1.   The SES was not constructed in accordance
with the Village require- ments;



            2.   The SES has deteriorated from lack of
maintenance;



            3.   The SES has been inactive for a period of at
least six months and shall be considered abandoned;



            4.   The SES creates irresolvable glare, solar
radiation or concentration on neighboring properties;



            The Village shall be authorized to remove a SES when
the above events occur and when the SES owner and/ or the land owner do not
comply with these regulations. The SES will be removed at the owner's and/or
land owner's expense and the costs of removal shall be a lien against the
property.



         m.   Signage, Lights, Colors and Other Advertisements.
No letters, insignia, logos, flags, banners, balloons, ribbons, tinsel,
streamers, pennants, reflectors, spinners, signs or similar materials shall
be affixed to a SES.  SES colors shall be colored to match existing roof
materials (e.g. shingles) or a color that camouflages it with surrounding
building colors. The only advertising sign permitted on the SES shall be a
manufacturer's label, not exceeding one-half square foot in size.



         n.   Historic Preservation. Solar energy systems are
permitted in historic districts as long as they are in line with the plane of
the roof, treated as architectural features, colored to match roof shingles,
or ground mounted. SES permitted in the Old Orland Historic District or on
Orland Park Landmarks require a Certificate of Appropriateness per Sections
5-110 and 6-209 in addition to any other required approvals, prior to
submission of a building permit.







Solar roofs, such as the one at left, can be retro-fitted on historic
buildings such that the SES appear as if they were asphalt shingles. Section
6-209 Old Orland Historic District permits asphalt shingles as an appropriate
roofing materials in the historic district.



   F.   Geothermal Energy System (GES) Regulations.



      A GES is a central renewable heating and cooling exchange system
that uses heat generated beneath the earth's surface to heat or cool
buildings via underground or underwater systems that pump heat energy into a
building or visa versa. Geothermal energy systems use the earth as a heat
source in the winter or a heat sink in the summer.



      The following regulations apply to the small scale GES recognized
by the Land Development Code: GHPS.







 



Above Left: Types of Geothermal Energy Systems. There are four types of GES:
vertical loop systems that reach deep into the earth; horizontal loop systems
that stay near the surface but are below the frost line; slinky loop systems
that maintain a moderate depth and increase the length/ capacity of the
system on a compact lot; pond loop systems that sink geothermal cables into
detention ponds; and open loop systems (not pictured) that are cables in the
ground. Above Right: Demonstration images indicating the use of GES during
winter months (top: using the earth as a heat source) and summer months
(bottom: using the earth as a heat sink).



      1.   Geothermal Heat Pump System (GHPS). Geothermal heat pump
energy systems, or ground source heat pumps, are installed indoors and
underground via a system of looped coils or piping and invisible after
installation and are permitted in all zoning districts via an ECT Review,
subject to these regulations.



         a.   Depth. GHPS loop fields, coils, piping or other
similar and associated underground infrastructure must be below the frost
line. A geotechnical and engineering study is required to determine
appropriateness and depth on a case by case basis.







GHPS Diagram and infrastructure.



         b.   Setbacks. GHPS loop fields, coils, piping or other
similar underground infrastructure shall not encroach into public
right-of-ways, ComEd trans- mission easements and right-of-ways, access
roads, natural gas, fuel and other pipeline easements, floodplains, wildlife
habitats and naviga- ble waters of the United States. GHPS may be built up to
the property line and, upon acquiring a geothermal access easement or similar
agreement, encroach under neighboring properties to acquire an efficient
scale or tonnage for heating and cooling in a building or site. GHPS must
maintain a minimum distance of ten (10') feet from existing storm water,
sewer and water main utilities, and twenty (20') feet from neighboring
buildings or structures (except parking lots).



         c.   Ground Source Subsidence. Geothermal heat pump
systems shall not cause underground subsidence to the subject or neighboring
properties during installation or any time thereafter. Subsidence is the
process of pit or sag formations in the earth's crust due to undermining or
trenching and filling of the surface and sub-surface. Correction of
subsidence is the responsibility of the GHPS owner.



      2.   Irrigated Geothermal Heat Pump Systems. Irrigated
geothermal heat pump systems consist of any system which uses a thermal
exchange using ground water, surface water, heat pipes or tubes and are
installed in and access underground aquifers (ground water) or storm water
detention/ retention basins (surface water) and are permitted in the BIZ,
COR, MFG, ORI, R-4 and VC zoning districts via an ECT Review, subject to
these regulations.



         a.   Depth. Loop fields, coils, pipes or other similar
and associated underground/ underwater infrastructure must be below the frost
line and a minimum of eight (8') feet below the normal water line of a
detention/ retention basin. Also, see Section 6-314.F.1.a.



         b.   Width and Setbacks. Loop fields, coils, piping,
tubing or other similar underwater system shall not extend above the surface
of the normal water line of a storm water detention/ retention basin. Such
systems must maintain a minimum distance of ten (10') feet from existing
storm water infrastructure, such as culverts, and sewer utilities.



         c.   Detention/ Retention Basin Volume Displacement.
Loop fields, coils, pipes or other similar underwater infrastructure shall
not displace the volume of a storm water detention/ retention basin without
providing necessary compensational storage.



      3.   Small Scale Geothermal District Heating. Geothermal
district heating technology may be used in non-residential and multi-family
home developments to heat multiple buildings on a single site, such as office
campuses and condo and town home developments and between building owners.



Left: Renderings that show residential and non- residential applications of
hydrothermal heat pump systems using detention ponds.



 







Above: Pond loop coils prior to being submerged into a pond. Orland Park has
many residential and non- residential detention ponds that can be used as
heat sources and sinks for improved energy efficiency.



      3.   General Requirements.



         a.   Access. A GES shall access the earth's thermal
energy below grade and shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or
neighboring properties. Access to neighboring properties may be granted by
property owners via Geothermal Access Easements and Geothermal Sharing
Agreements.



            1.   Tree Removal. Tree removal for a GES is not
permitted. GES technology  permits  vertical  thermal  systems  that 
can  avoid trees and other planted areas.



         b.   New Construction Mitigation. New construction that
impacts a GES must move the GES to a new location not impacted or bury it
deeper than the impacted depth, subject to these regulations.



         c.   Geothermal Access Easement. See Land Development
Code Section



6-404.F.



         d.   Geothermal Sharing Agreement. A geothermal sharing
agreement may be prepared between property owners to preserve and protect
geothermal energy access. Property owners may share a GES under mutual terms,
conditions and agreements. Such an agreement may include: optimizing GES
field sizes and well depths; provisions for shared access, transmission and
use; provisions for heat and coolant exchange and transmission rates;
relocating a GES; expanding a GES to increase capacity for multi-building
district heating; and provisions for subsidence control.



         e.   Geothermal  Assurance.   These  regulations 
make  no  assurance  of geothermal access other than the provisions of
this section. The petitioner must provide evidence of covenants, easements,
agreements or similar documentation from property owners and neighboring
property owners providing access to geothermal energy or geotechnical studies
indicating feasibility for the operation of a GES.



         f.   Design and Permitting. The design of the GES shall
conform to applicable industry standards. The necessary building permits
shall be obtained for a GES per the Village Building Code (e.g. electrical,
plumbing, mechanical etc.). All wiring and heating components shall comply
with the latest applicable version of the National Electric Code (NEC) and 
the  American Society  of Heating,  Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers (ASHRAE) as amended by the Village. See Section 6-314.C for further
required information.



         g.   Accessory Use. Geothermal energy systems are
accessory uses to the primary or principle use on a property or district in
all zoning districts.







Above: Other geothermal options: geothermal use of underground aquifers and
buried geothermal systems.



   G.   Biomass: Waste to Energy Strategies.



      1.   Onsite Commercial Composting. An onsite commercial
composting facility is the portion of a site or facility that is used for
composting of food scrap or food waste and is permitted in non-residential
areas of the BIZ, COR, MFG, ORI and VC zoning districts provided that they do
not locate within 300 feet of a residential property, hospitals, primary and
secondary school properties, and daycare centers.



         a.   Setbacks. Onsite commercial composting facilities
must locate within the established building setbacks within the local zoning
district.



         b.   Enclosure  and  Screening.   Onsite 
commercial  composting  facilities shall be co-located within existing
onsite waste collection enclosures and shall be screened by a fence
constructed of either solid masonry, wooden or non-white vinyl fence
materials and screened by native land- scaping following the requirements of
Section 6-302.D of the Land Development Code. A composting container shall
not exceed the size of the largest waste collection dumpster or container
within the waste col- lection enclosure or an eight (8) yard container
whichever is less.



         c.   Composting Rules.



            1.   All food scrap or food waste must, by the end
of each operating day, be processed and placed into an enclosed vessel in
which air flow and temperature are controlled pursuant to Illinois Pub- lic
Act 096-0418 (415 ILCS 5/3.330).



            2.   All food scrap or food waste must be covered
in a manner that prevents scavenging by birds and animals and that prevents a
visual, odor or other nuisance(s) at all times.



            3.   Onsite commercial composting facilities shall
not be located in storm water detention or stream setbacks.



            4.   Onsite commercial composting facilities must
be flood-proofed.



            5.   A regular schedule of onsite composting
collection must be maintained. Compost cannot remain on site more than one
week.



         d.   Sale of Biomass and Biofuel. Commercial composting
may be sold to biomass and or biofuel energy plants, biomass facilities,
agricultural industries, distributors etc. as a commodity.



SECTION 6-315.   EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   A.   Purpose.



      1.   Exterior lighting is used to illuminate residential,
commercial, industrial and public uses; parking lots, sidewalks, signs, and
other elements within the Village. When well designed and properly installed,
exterior lighting is very useful in improving visibility and safety,
providing a sense of security, and complementing the character of the
Village. If exterior lighting is not well designed and properly installed it
can be inefficient, cause glare, and create light trespass and sky glow.
Light trespass falling over property lines can illuminate adjacent grounds or
buildings in an objectionable manner. In order to insure that exterior
lighting is well designed with limited impacts on adjacent properties, the
following requirements are set forth to control exterior lighting in both
residential and non-residential zoning districts.



      2.   Standards and Requirements.



         a.   Lighting Classes. The standards and requirements
set forth in the following tables shall regulate and govern the use of,
design of, construction or modification of any lighting system for the
purpose of illuminating exterior areas including, but not limited to, signs,
parking areas, buildings, landscaping, porches, and driveways. Each Lighting
Zone is comprised of and defined by the correlated Land Uses listed in Table
6-315.2.a (A).



Table 6-315.2.a (A)



 

Lighting Class1
 
Auto-Dealerships and Large Retail Centers  500,000 sf


Lighting Class 2
 
Manufacturing and Storage, Commercial, and Mixed Use


Lighting Class 3
 
Civic and Institutional, Multi- Family Residential, and Office


Lighting Class 4
 
Single-Family Residential



 



            1.   Lighting Class 1. Land uses for Lighting Zone
1 include Auto-Dealerships and Large Retail Centers (over 500,000 sf).



Table 6-315.A.2.a.1 (A)



 


Lighting Class 1



Foot Candles at lot line
 
Non-Residential to Non-Residential
 

5.0



Non-Residential to Residential
 

0



Lumens Per Square Foot
 
Maximum lm/sf
 

7.0



Internal Footcandles
 
Maximum fc level permitted
 

40 fc




 



            2.   Lighting Class 2. Land uses for Lighting Zone
2 include Manufacturing and Storage, Commercial, and Mixed Use.



Table 6-315.A.2.a.2 (A)



 


Lighting Class 2



Foot Candles at lot line
 
Non-Residential to Non-Residential
 

5.0



Residential to Residential
 

2.0



Non-Residential to Residential
 

0



Lumens Per Square Foot
 
Maximum lm/sf
 

3.0



Internal Footcandles
 
Maximum fc level permitted
 

15 fc




 



            3.   Lighting Class 3. Land uses for Lighting Zone
3 include Civic and Institutional, Multi-Family Residential, and Office.



Table 6-315.A.2.a.3 (A)



 


Lighting Class 3



Foot Candles at lot line
 
Non-Residential to Non-residential
 

2.0



Residential to Residential
 

1.0



Non-Residential to Residential
 

0



Lumens Per Square Foot
 
Maximum lm/sf
 

2.5



Internal Footcandles
 
Maximum fc level permitted
 

10 fc




 



            4.   Lighting Class 4. Land use for Lighting Zone
4 is Single-Family Residential.



Table 6-315.A.2.a.4 (A)



 

Lighting Class 4


Foot Candles at lot line
 
Non-Residential to Non-Residential
 

2.0



Residential to Residential
 

0.5



Non-Residential to Residential
 

0



Lumens Per Square Foot
 
Maximum lm/sf
 

1.0



Internal Footcandles
 
Maximum fc level permitted
 

10 fc




 



         b.   Total Height and Height of Luminaire (See
definition in 6-315.A.3.m). Table 6-315.1.2.b (A) below determines the
required setback of a fixture based on the height of the luminaire and extent
of its cutoff shielding. Any minor deviation from the regulations listed in
Table 6-315.1.2.b (A) may be approved at the discretion of the Development
Services Department. Luminaire height shall be rounded to the closest
correlated height listed in Table 6-315.1.2.b (A) when determining required
luminaire setback.



Table 6-407.1.A.2.b (A) - Required Luminaire Setbacks



 


 

Luminaire Cutoff Degree




Full Cutoff

 

Cutoff

 

Semi- Cutoff

 

No Cutoff






Luminaire Height
(in feet)

 

25

 

10ft

 

20ft

 

40ft

 

Not Permitted




20

 

8ft

 

16ft

 

32ft

 

Not Permitted




15

 

6ft

 

12ft

 

24ft

 

30ft




10

 

4ft

 

8ft

 

16ft

 

20ft




5

 

2ft

 

4ft

 

8ft

 

10ft




 

Setback Required (in feet)





 



(Table data displays required setback in feet based on luminaire cutoff and
height)



         c.   Standards for Luminaires under a Canopy (for
non-residential uses).  Luminaires mounted to the underside of a canopy,
which provide overhead illumination, shall be recessed such that no part of
the luminaire or the lamp shall extend below the exterior edge of the canopy.



         d.   Standards for Patio Lighting (for non-residential
uses).



            1.   Permitted Lighting. Permitted patio lighting
shall include, but not be limited to lanterns, sconces, lighting posts,
flameless torches, festoon or string lights, and pendant lighting.



            2.   Prohibited Lighting. All attention-seeking,
blinking, flashing and color changing lights shall not be permitted.



            3.   Light Trespass. All patio lighting shall be
contained to the extent of the property on which the patio is located.



      3.   Definitions.



         a.   Canopy: Any overhanging shelter or shade or other
protective structure constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians or
vehicles to pass underneath.



         b.   Cutoff: Intensity at or above 90° (horizontal) no
more than 2.5% of lamp lumens, and no more than 10% of lamp lumens at or
above 80°. (See Figure 6-315.A.3 (A)).



         c.   Cutoff Angle: The angle formed by a line drawn from
the direction of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to
the ground from the light source, above which no light is emitted.



         d.   Entrance Drive Lighting: Lighting produced solely
for illumination of a drive entering into an establishment.



         e.   Exterior Lighting: The illumination of an outside
area or object by any man-made device that produces light by any means.



         f.   Fixture: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps
and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting
bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror,
and/or a refractor or lens.



         g.   Flood or Spot Light: Any light fixture or lamp that
incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into
a directed beam in a particular direction.



         h.   Footcandle (FC): A unit of illumination produced on
a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source
of one (1) standard candle.



         i.   Footcandle - Horizontal Measurement (HFC): The
measurement of footcandles utilizing a direct reading, portable light meter
mounted in the horizontal position.



         j.   Footcandle - Vertical Measurement (VFC): The
measurement of footcandles utilizing a direct reading, portable light meter
mounted in the vertical position.



         k.   Full Cutoff: Zero intensity at or above horizontal
(90° above nadir) and limited to a value not exceeding 10% of lamp lumens at
or above 80°. (See Figure 6-315.A.3 (A)).



         l.   Glare: Light emitting from a luminaire with an
intensity great enough to reduce a viewers' ability to see, cause discomfort
and, in extreme cases, cause momentary blindness.



         m.   Height of Luminaire Including Total Height: The
height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly
below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting
part of the luminaire. The total height shall be the height of the pole,
including the base and any mounting arms or other attachments to which the
luminaire is attached, as measured from the ground directly below the highest
part of the pole or any of its attachments, to the top of the pole or
luminaire, whichever the case may be.



         n.   Illumination System: The totality of the equipment
installed to provide exterior lighting on a developed property. The
illumination system shall include all building, canopy, pole and ground
mounted luminaires including all wiring, circuitry, and other devices
installed to create exterior lighting.



         o.   Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces
the actual light.



         p.   Light, Direct: Light emitted directly from the
lamp, off a reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or
diffuser lens of a luminaire.



         q.   Light, Indirect: Direct light that has been
reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces.



         r.   Light Loss Factor: A factor applied to lamps, which
estimates the lumen output of a lamp sometime after installation. (For
example, a lamp with an initial lumen rating of 10,000, which has a light
loss factor of 0.7, is estimated to put out 7,000 lumens. A lamp with an
initial lumen rating of 10,000, which has a light loss factor of 1.0, is
estimated to put out 10,000 lumens.)



         s.   Light Trespass: Any light that exists beyond the
boundaries of the property on which its source is located.



         t.   Lumen: A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is
one lumen per square foot. For the purpose of this Section, the lumen value
shall be the initial lumen output rating of a lamp.



         u.   Luminaire: A complete lighting unit consisting of a
light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.



         v.   Luminaire, Cutoff Type: A luminaire containing
elements such as shields, reflectors, or refractor panels that direct and
cutoff a direct view of the light source at a cutoff angle.



         w.   Non-Cutoff: No limitations on light distribution at
any angle. (See Figure 6-315.A.3 (A)).



         x.   Patio Lighting: Any form of permanently installed
lighting that is used for the sole purpose of patio illumination or
decoration.



         y.   Semi-Cutoff: Intensity at or above 90°
(horizontal) no more than 5% of lamp lumens and no more than 20% at or above
80°. (See Figure 6-315.A.3 (A)).



         z.   Temporary Exterior Lighting: The specific
illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device that
produces light by any means, consistent with the requirement for Temporary
Uses in Subsection 6-304.



         aa.   Wall or Building Mounted Fixture: A fixture
attached to an exterior wall, roof, or other exterior surface of a building.
No wall mounted fixture shall be allowed to produce light trespass and shall
be included in the calculation on photometric plans.



Figure 6-315.A.3 (A) - Luminaire Cutoff Overview (Figure for Illustrative
Purposes Only)







 



   B.   Regulations & Procedures.



      1.    Regulations .



         a.   All public and private exterior lighting installed
in the Village of Orland Park shall be in conformance with the requirements
established by this Section.



         b.   The installation of, or the additional installation
of, exterior lighting for aesthetic, safety or general purposes, may be
required, as determined by the Development Services Department.



         c.   All exterior lighting must be maintained and kept
in proper working order.



      2.   Procedures.



         a.   Lighting Plan Required. A lighting plan is required
for all non-residential uses in or adjacent to residential zoning districts,
multiple family developments other than duplexes, commercial/retail,
industrial, institutional, and public uses including uses developed by other
units of local government.



            At the time any exterior lighting is installed or
substantially modified, a lighting plan shall be submitted to the Development
Services Department in order to determine whether the requirements of this
Section have been met. A lighting plan shall be required for all special
uses, planned unit developments, and requests for variations from the
standards imposed in this Section.



            Where a lighting plan is required, said plan shall
include the following:



            1.   A site plan showing pole locations, building
mounted lights (e.g. wall-packs), bollard lights with schematic wiring layout
and power source connection;



            2.   Specifications for luminaires and lamp types,
poles, wiring, conduit and appurtenant construction including photographs or
drawings of proposed luminaires. Manufacturer catalog sheets shall be
provided in order to demonstrate specific style/type and dimensions of
equipment;



            3.   Site-specific pole, luminaire, and foundation
details including pole height, height of building mounted lights, mounting
height and height of the luminaire;



            4.   Overall site plan inclusive of a fifty-foot
perimeter which shall include buildings, luminaires and other structures
sufficient to determine the total cutoff angle of all luminaires and their
relationship to abutting parcels;



            5.   Initial Luminaire Lumens of all light sources
proposed;



            6.   Photometric plans that shows the footcandle -
horizontal measurement internal to the site and at the property lines.
(Footcandle - horizontal measurements shall be taken along a horizontal plane
at a height of three and one-half (3.5) feet above the ground. Photometric
plans shall be based on a light loss factor of 1.0.



            7.   Other information and data reasonably
necessary to evaluate the required lighting plan pursuant to the request of
the Development Services Department.



      3.   Measuring Light Levels.



         a.   Metering Equipment. Light levels of both direct and
indirect light shall be measured in footcandles with a direct reading,
portable light meter. Readings shall be taken only after the cell has been
exposed long enough to provide a constant reading.



         b.   Method of Measurement. Footcandle - horizontal
measurements shall be taken along a horizontal plane at a height of three and
one-half (3.5) feet above the ground. If lighting metering levels are
inconclusive on conformance to the above methods, the measurement will be
taken by focusing the metering equipment directly at the light source.



      4.   Exceptions.



         a.   Public Roadway Lighting. Luminaires used for public
roadway illumination by a public transportation agency are exempt from the
requirements of this Section but may be subject to the regulations of
Federal, State or County agencies, or by other intergovernmental agreements.



         b.   Entrance Drive Lighting. Luminaires used for the
sole purpose of illuminating an access drive and other similar uses may be
determined by the Director of Development Services to be exempted from
certain illumination and other standards of the requirements of this Section.



         c.   Emergency Lighting. All temporary emergency
lighting needed by the Police or Fire Departments or other emergency
services, as well as all vehicular luminaires, shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Section.



         d.   Recreational Facilities. Because of their unique
requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation,
outdoor recreational facilities (public or private) such as, but not limited
to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, tennis
courts, golf driving ranges, auditorium areas and other similar uses as may
be determined by the Director of Development Services are exempted from
certain illumination and other standards as follows:



            1.   The uses set forth herein are specifically
exempted from the maximum footcandle requirements - internal to the site.
These uses are required to submit a lighting plan and shall be processed as
special uses under the applicable procedures. These uses shall seek to meet
the requirements for maximum footcandles at the property line or apply for a
special use modification if they are unable to meet those requirements.



            2.   The uses set forth herein shall be exempt
from the height requirements as set forth in this Section. The Plan
Commission and Village Board shall review the proposed pole heights during
the special use permit review process.



         e.   Temporary Uses. Non-residential temporary uses
shall install temporary lighting using these standards as guides and obtain
an electrical permit subject to Section 6-304.B of these regulations.



   C.   Prohibited Lighting.



      1.   Flickering or Flashing Lights. The Village Board of
Trustees shall permit no flickering or flashing lights unless authorized in a
lighting plan approved as a special use or planned unit development.



      2.   Searchlight and Laser Source Lights. No searchlights,
laser source lights, or any similar high intensity light shall be permitted.



      3.   High Intensity Discharge Lamps. No lamps that are
classified as high intensity discharge are permitted, other than Metal Halide
Lamps which shall be permitted.



      4.   High Color Temperature Lamp. The correlated color
temperature (CCT) of any exterior light shall not exceed 4100 K.



   D.   Non-Conforming Uses.



      1.   Luminaires lawfully in place prior to the date of this
Section but which do not conform to the requirements and standards of this
Section shall be considered legal non-conforming uses.



      2.   Legal non-conforming luminaires that meet the performance
standards for footcandle levels and screening requirements of this Section
but exceed the physical standards such as height or setbacks herein may
continue and are not subject to amortization requirements unless they are
part of an illumination system that is to be changed as follows:



         a.   Illumination systems developed as part of a Planned
Unit Development, Special Use, Annexation Agreement, Variation or other
specific Village approval which, as of the date of these regulations, have an
approved lighting plan and meet the performance criteria of their specific
agreements but do not meet the requirements of this Section shall be
considered legal non-conforming uses and shall be brought into conformity
with the criteria and standards set forth herein when the illumination system
is to be completely replaced.



         b.   Legal non-conforming illumination systems which
were not part of a specific Village-approved lighting plan shall be brought
into conformity with the criteria and standards set forth herein when the
illumination system is to be replaced or modified by greater than 50 percent
of its number of light fixtures, based on the total number of fixtures within
the project limits.



         c.   Legal non-conforming luminaires that exceed the
footcandle standards and/or direct light or glare towards streets, parking
lots, residences or property lines and result in a problematic or dangerous
condition shall be shielded, redirected or otherwise modified to meet the
requirements of this Section.



   E.   Special Uses and Variations.



      1.   Special Use Permits. Lighting improvements that are part
of a planned unit development or special use permit shall conform to these
regulations or to any modifications determined via the public hearing process
outlined in Section 5-101 of these regulations.



      2.   Variations. Lighting improvements that are part of
by-right/permitted development shall conform to these regulations or to any
variations determined via the public hearing process outlined in Section
5-101 of these regulations.



Figure 6-315.E (A) - Light Standard Detail







 



PART 4: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS



SECTION 6-401. GENERAL.



   Except as provided in Section 5-109, all subdivisions shall comply with
the standards set forth in this Part and other applicable provisions of these
regulations.



SECTION 6-402. LOT STANDARDS.



   A.   Insofar as practical, all side lot lines shall be at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.  For
unusual shaped lots, the Village may require the subdivider or developer to
submit building location plans.



   B.   Except as otherwise part of a planned development, lot
dimensions, area and setbacks shall comply with the requirements of Article 6
for the district in which the property is situated.  In the case of property
located in an unincorporated area of the county, lot dimensions, area and
setbacks shall comply with the requirements of the Village's zoning district
that is most similar to the county's zoning district in which the property is
situated.  All lots within the corporate boundaries of the Village shall be
of the size required by the zoning district within which the lot is
located.  In no event shall any residential lot located within the
Village’s one and one-half (1-1/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction be
less than 10,000 square feet. (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



   C.   The area of each lot in an approved single family subdivision
shall not include any street right-of-way, whether public or private
right-of-way.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



   D.   Lots shall not block any street extensions which are set forth
in the Village’s Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



   E.   All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street, private
street or private access.



   F.   Vehicular access from a residential street between or through a
double frontage lot to a collector or arterial street is prohibited.



   G.   Where lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved road or street
having a radius of two hundred (200) feet or less, the minimum width of the
frontage of the lot may be measured at the building set back line, with width
at said right-of-way line to be not less than fifty percent (50%) of the
width required by these regulations, the width being measured on the chord of
the street right-of-way line.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



   H.   Lots facing upon major street intersections and at all other
acute angle intersections shall have a minimum safe curb radius of twenty
(20) feet at the street corner as determined by the Village.  Where grade
separation structures are proposed at an intersection with a major street,
the lots and required improvements shall be arranged to make adequate
provision for such structure.  (Ord. 2570 -  5/2/94)



   I.   Lots abutting or including a water course, designated open
space preservation area, drainage way, channel or stream shall have
additional minimum width or depth in order to provide an adequate building
site and provide the minimum usable area required in these regulations or the
Zoning Ordinance for front, rear and side setbacks, outside of these areas of
preservation.



SECTION 6-403. BLOCK STANDARDS.



   A.   Residential Block Standards.



      1.   The maximum length of a single family residential block
shall be as follows:



         R-4 Residential District - - one thousand (1000) feet



         R-3 Residential District - - one thousand (1000) feet



         R-2 Residential District - - twelve hundred (1200) feet



         R-1 Residential District - - eighteen hundred (1800) feet



         E-1 Estate Residential District - - eighteen hundred (1800)
feet blocks over one thousand (1000) feet may require a pedestrian way or
bikepath easement or right-of-way.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      2.   No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made
by these regulations, but blocks must fit easily within the platted area and
their design must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow, and
public areas.



   B.   Business and Industrial Block Standards.



      1.   The maximum length of a block shall be as follows within
the respective Zoning District:



         MFG    Manufacturing District - - thirteen hundred (1300)
feet



         COR    Mixed Use District - - one thousand (1000) feet



         ORI      Mixed Use District - - thirteen hundred (1300)
feet



         BIZ      General Business District - - one thousand
(1000) feet



         RSB    Residential and Supporting Business District - -
one thousand (1000) feet



      Blocks over one thousand (1000) feet may require a pedestrian way
or bikepath easement or right-of-way.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      2.   No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made
by these regulations, but blocks must fit easily within the platted area and
their design must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow and
public areas.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



SECTION 6-404. EASEMENTS.



   A.   Utility Easements.  Easements across lots or centered on rear
or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities and street lighting,
electronic cable, drainage or other public use, and shall be at least ten
(10) feet wide.  Easements shall be laid out so that proper continuity is
provided from lot to lot and from block to block.  Provisions for extensions
of easements to adjacent areas shall be made by the Director of
Engineering.  Utility easements shall not be located in an area designated
as an open space preservation area unless a one (1) foot topographic location
plan is approved by the Development Review Committee which shows all
topography, trees, native vegetation and watercourses as well as the location
of the proposed easements.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



   B.   Storm Water Easement.  Where a development is traversed by a
water course, drainage way, channel or stream, a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way shall be provided which conforms substantially with the
lines of such water course, has a width adequate for construction and
maintenance, and which shall not interfere with a designated open space
preservation area. 



   C.   Pedestrian/Bikepath Easement.  Easements containing pedestrian
ways or bikepaths must be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width, in
accordance with Section 6-415, unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Development Services.  (Ord. 2570 – 5/2/94; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   D.   Scenic Corridor Easements.



      1.   Purpose.  The purpose of the scenic corridor easement
requirement is to protect natural corridors of land so that they remain
undeveloped on each side of certain roads.  The purpose is also to reduce
traffic noise which may have a deleterious  impact on residents within the
vicinity.  The requirement of scenic corridor easements shall serve to
protect and maintain a rural/suburban atmosphere in certain sections of the
Village and its one and one-half (1 1/2) mile jurisdiction.  The Corridor
will also provide a refuge for native trees, shrubs and prairie plant life
and  an excellent natural buffer between more-developed areas.



      2.   Provisions. 



         a.   A scenic corridor easement shall be depicted on the
final plat of subdivision and shall constitute an easement infavor of the
Village, the terms of which are as follows:  All scenic corridor easements
shall be kept in their natural condition.  All significant natural
vegetation shall be preserved and maintained and shall not be mowed,
cultivated, sprayed or in any way disturbed, either by the Village, the
developer, the owner upon whose lot the easement exists, or any other person,
except vegetation which is unique and harmful to the health and welfare of
the community or property owner, as determined by the Village, may be
excised, controlled and/or destroyed in accordance with the written direction
of the Village.



         b.   Existing woodlands and hedgerows within the scenic
corridor easement perimeter shall not be destroyed or, if no significant
natural vegetation exists and where suitable top soil from road, lake or
other excavation exists, berms may be constructed in accordance with the
written instructions of the Village.  Said instructions shall be prepared in
accordance with the overall Comprehensive Plan of the Village and shall pay
particular attention to the aesthetic aspects of the vicinity in which the
berms are to be located.  These berms, when approved by the Village, shall
be planted with trees and shrubs and native wildflowers and prairie
grasses.  Non-native flowering plants and evergreen trees may be utilized if
approved in writing by the Village.  It is the intent of this subsection (D)
that the vegetation, whether it be native and natural or whether it be
planted in accordance with this subsection, shall constitute a suitable
screen between the development of the lot upon which the scenic corridor
easement exists and the adjacent road right of way to insure that evidence of
human occupancy is minimal.



      3.   Standards.  On all property sought to be subdivided
which is designated as Critical and Sensitive Areas on the Village's
Comprehensive Plan and which lies adjacent to State, County, Township and
Village streets, there shall be a fifty (50) to one hundred (100) foot scenic
corridor easement measured from the right of way, on either side of said
roads.



      4.   Development Plan.  As a condition of approval of a final
plat, a subdivider or developer shall submit a development plan of all scenic
corridor easements, showing the dimensions thereof, the extent and nature of
all significant natural vegetation, both forest and prairie, all berms sought
to be constructed, the amount and size and type of all planting sought to be
installed.  Such plan shall be reviewed by the Director of Development
Services with written comments being forwarded for consideration by the Plan
Commission.  The Plan Commission shall approve, disapprove or suggest
whatever modifications are necessary in keeping with this subsection.  (Amd.
Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   E.   Solar Access Easement



      1.   Purpose.  The purpose of a solar access easement is to
protect solar accessibility between parcels of land so that solar
sunlight/energy may be equitably maintained among the owners of all lots in a
development or between owners of adjacent or neighboring lots.  The purpose
is also to promote all feasible means of energy conservation and all feasible
uses of alternative energy sources.  In regards to plant material, the
Village encourages the planting and maintenance of trees and shrubs to create
shading, moderate outdoor temperatures, and provide various economic and
aesthetic benefits.  However, there are certain situations in which the need
for widespread use of alternative energy devices, such as solar collector
panels, requires specific and limited controls on trees and shrubs.



      2.   Solar Access Easement.  A solar access easement may be
recorded on plats of subdivision in accordance with the provisions of Section
5-112, specifically 5-12.G.3.  Dedicated easements for solar access are for
the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall
have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent panels or units in the
subdivision for any SES, as defined by Section 6-314. In establishing such
easements, consideration shall be given to feasibility, contour,
configuration of the parcel to be divided, equitability and cost. Required
easements shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage
of a lot which may be occupied by a building or a structure.



      3.   Standards.  As a condition of approval of a subdivision
map, there may be imposed, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-112
that the developer or subdividing applicant dedicate solar access
easements.  During the development review process, the Development Services
Department and/or the Plan Commission shall specify the following:



         a.   The standards for determining the exact dimensions
and locations of such easements.



         b.   Any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other
objects which would obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement.



         c.   The terms or conditions, if any, under which an
easement may be revised or terminated.



         d.   Solar access easements cannot be recorded against a
property where the permitted development is taller than forty (40') feet or
in the ORI, BIZ, COR and VC zoning districts.



(Ord. 4594 - 10/18/10)



   F.   Geothermal Access Easement



      1.   Purpose.  The purpose of a geothermal access easement is
to protect thermal accessibility between parcels of land so that the earth's
thermal energy may be equitably maintained among the owners of all lots in a
development or between owners of adjacent or neighboring lots.  The purpose
is also to promote all feasible means of energy conservation and all feasible
uses of alternative energy sources.  In regards to district heating, the
Village encourages the utilization of existing geothermal energies to heat
and cool buildings at a district scale such as a new multi-lot subdivision,
to reduce the overall draw on fossil fuels for building heating.  In some
situations, in which geothermal/hydrothermal district heating systems are
involved, development requires specific and limited controls for the
preservation of the system.



      2.   Geothermal District Heating Access Easement.  A
geothermal access easement may be recorded on plats of subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of Section 5-112, specifically 5-112.G.3, for
district heating purposes.  Dedicated easements for geothermal access are
for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall
have the right to receive geothermal energy across adjacent parcels or units
in the subdivision for any GES, as defined by Section 6-314.  In
establishing such easements, consideration shall be given to feasibility,
contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided, equitability, subsidence
and cost.  Required easements shall not result in reducing allowable
densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or a
structure.



      3.   Standards.  As a condition of approval of a subdivision
map, there may be imposed, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-112
that the developer or subdividing applicant dedicate geothermal district
heating access easements. During the development review process, the
Development Services Department and/or the Plan Commission shall specify the
following:



         a.   The standards for determining the exact dimensions
and locations of such easements.



         b.   Any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other
objects which would regulate proximity to a GES.



         c.   The terms or conditions, if any under which an
easement may be revised or terminated.



(Ord. 4594 - 10/18/10)



SECTION 6-405.   STREETS AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   A.   Streets.



      1.   General.  Streets shall be installed by developers or
owners as designated on the Transportation Element of the Village?s
Comprehensive Plan in accordance with the following criteria and as required
by the Village Engineer.  (Ord.2746 - 6/5/95)



      2.   Traffic Studies.  Traffic studies shall be required of
all proposed residential developments of fifty (50) dwelling units or more,
for all commercial and industrial developments of 40,000 square feet of floor
area or more and for businesses with drive-through facilities.  The traffic
study shall be prepared by firms with demonstrated competence in traffic
engineering and traffic studies related to development.  The traffic study
will be submitted to the Village for review.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



      3.   Roadway Design Criteria.



         a.   The minimum widths of right-of-ways for streets to
be dedicated or established shall conform to standards set out in this
section.



         b.   Local streets shall be designed to evenly disperse
traffic and minimize concentrations of through traffic.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



         c.   Proposed streets which are in alignment or are a
continuation of existing streets already named shall bear the name of such
existing streets.  A different name shall be used if a street is in the same
alignment, but is discontinuous, unless that street has a numbered name.  No
street names may be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names
of existing streets in the Postal District(s) serving Orland Park.  Names of
local origin are preferred.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



         d.   If the tract of land proposed to be developed, or
any part thereof lies adjacent to a highway over which the Department of
Transportation of the State of Illinois, or the Counties of Cook and Will
have jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof and an
entrance or entrances are desired from such highway to lots, streets, roadway
or alleys in the proposed development, the developer shall submit a written
permit application to the appropriate jurisdiction granting permission to
construct such an entrance or entrances after preliminary plan approval by
the Village Board.  The developer shall obtain the written permission from
the Village and all other appropriate jurisdictions for all required
permits.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



         e.   Proposed developments that are adjacent to existing
development shall be designed to accept the alignment and corresponding
widths of existing pavements. The Village Engineer shall determine the proper
adjustment where the widenings merge with the existing narrow pavement at the
boundary of the property, and shall require the lanes to be painted to
designate driving and parking lanes.



         f.   All street intersections and confluences must
encourage safe traffic flow.



         g.   The minimum standards for a street system based on
functional design criteria shall conform to those set forth in Table
6-405(A)(2).



         h.   Turn lanes.  The need for turn lanes shall be
determined by a traffic study commissioned by the developer or as determined
by Village staff.  The traffic study shall use established standards of the
American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
(Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



         i.   Stub streets.  Stub streets shall provide
continuity between adjoining subdivisions, and shall not exceed  1,000 feet
in length.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



         j.   Perimeter streets.  If it is determined that a
perimeter street is necessary, it shall be designed thirty (30) feet in
width, back-to-back of curb.  Minimum right-of-way on the perimeter street
shall be forty-six (46) feet.  The street shall be constructed with a
fifteen (15) foot parkway on the side of the street where development will be
taking place.  Upon development of the adjacent parcel, the adjacent
developer will contribute an additional fourteen (14) feet of right-of-way
along the perimeter street.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



         k.   Access control standards.  No more than one access
on each major or minor arterial will be permitted unless a traffic study
indicates that additional access points are necessary.  The access point
will be located, if possible, a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the
nearest intersection and the nearest curb cut.  Shared access should be
considered between adjacent parcels.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



         l.   Transit design standards.  Developments located
near existing or planned commuter train stations and bus routes shall be
designed in such a manner as to encourage pedestrian and bicycle linkage to
these facilities.  Pace Development Guidelines may be used as a resource for
developments located along fixed route bus lines.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



         m.   Cross-Access.  Connections between adjacent
developments shall be provided to facilitate traffic at locations determined
by Village staff.          (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      4.   Alley Design Criteria.  Alleys may be required in
business, office and research, and industrial districts unless provisions are
made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking,
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Public alleys shall be
prohibited in residential areas except where topographic or other conditions
may necessitate their use.  The minimum width of an alley right-of-way shall
not be less than twenty-five (25) feet.  The minimum alley pavement width
shall be twenty (20) feet. Dead end alleys are prohibited.



      5.   Cul-De-Sac Design Criteria.   Each cul-de sac shall have
a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum right-of-way diameter of
120 feet (Table 6-405 (A) (2). Each cul-de-sac, in single-family residence
districts, shall be not more than 500 feet in length, measured along its
center line from the center line of the street of origin to the end of its
right-of-way.  In multi-family residential areas, cul-de-sac streets shall
not exceed 400 feet in length.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94; Amd. Ord. 3837 -
12/1/03)



      6.   Full Streets.



         [Reserved.]



 

TABLE 6-405 (A) (2)


MINIMUM STREET STANDARDS BASED ON FUNCTIONAL DESIGN CRITERIA



 
MAJOR & MINOR ARTERIAL*
 
MAJOR COLLECTOR
 
MINOR  COLLECTOR
 
LOCAL STREET
 
CUL-DE-SAC




6 LANE
 
5 LANE
 
4 LANE
 
2 LANE
 
4 LANE
 
2 LANE
 

 

 



PAVED SECTION, BACK TO BACK OF CURB (FT.)
 
91
 
67
 
67
 
30
 
51
 
40
 
36
 
24 to 30
 
90**


MEDIAN WIDTH (FT.)
 
16
 
16
 
16
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


MINIMUM RIGHT-OF-WAY (FT.)
 
120
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
80
 
60
 
120**


MINIMUM CENTERLINE RADIUS (FT.)
 
1200
 
1000
 
1000
 
1000
 
700
 
700
 
350
 
175
 
175


ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:


1.  Sidewalks 5' in width are required on both sides of all public roads
within subdivisions with an average lot size of one-half acre or less.


2.  In certain locations, a bicycle path with a minimum width of 8 feet
shall be required in lieu of a sidewalk on one side of the road in
conformance with the                bikeways element of  the
Comprehensive Plan.


3.  Left-turn lanes, right-turn deceleration lanes and traffic signals will
be required when determined necessary. 


*On State and County roads, geometric design standards of the State and
County will prevail.
**Minimum diameter of bulb




 



(Ord.2570-5/2/94 & Ord.2959-11/18/96)



   B.   Pavements.



      1.   General.  The arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all streets to be dedicated to the public, all parking
lots, and all private streets shall be compatible and complimentary to
existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic within any
development and adjoining lands, to topographical conditions, to runoff of
storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their relations to the
proposed uses of the area to be served.  All traffic intersections and
confluences must encourage safe and efficient traffic flow.



      2.   Design References.  All pavements shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the following references as they apply:



         a.   "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction," Illinois Department of Trans-portation, latest edition.



         b.   "Manual for Structural Design of Portland Cement
Concrete Pavement," Illinois Department of Transportation, latest edition.



         c.   "Manual of Instructions for the Structural Design
of Flexible Pavements on Projects Involving MFT, FAS and FAUS Funds,"
Illinois Department of Transportation, latest edition.



         d.   "Design Manual," Illinois Department of
Transportation, latest edition.



         e.   AASHTO design standards.



      3.   Pavement Design Requirements. Pavement design shall
relate to the street classification as set forth on the Official Map and as
described in this Section.  The proposed roads indicated on the Official Map
are desired to be eventually constructed, but their actual alignment will be
decided upon when a preliminary plan is submitted to the Plan Commission and
the Board of Trustees for review and approval. The classification of new
streets, as well as variations to street classifications for a given street,
shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for review when the preliminary
plan is submitted.



 



Table 6-405(B)(4)
TABLE OF PAVEMENT DESIGN.


STREET CLASSIFICATION
 
MINIMUM CROWN
 
MINIMUM STRUCTURAL NUMBER


MAJOR ARTERIAL
 
5"-2 lane
 
4.0


MINOR ARTERIAL
 
6"-3 lane
 
4.0


NON-RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR
 
6"
 
3.0


LOCAL (RESIDENTIAL)
 

 



   1.   Major and Minor Collectors and local streets
 
5"
 
2.35


   2.   Cul-de-sac
 
8"
 
2.35


   3.   Private
 
5"
 
2.35


   4.   Rural/Suburban
 
5"
 
2.35


LOCAL INDUSTRIAL WITH PARKING
 
6"
 
3.68


LOCAL INDUSTRIAL WITH NO PARKING
 
5"
 
3.68


FRONTAGE ROAD (Dedicated)
 
5"
 
3.0




 



      4.   Pavement Construction Design. All new streets, public or
private, shall be improved and con-structed with pavement that complies with
the requirements of this Section as follows:



         a.   Subgrade. All subgrade material shall have a
minimum Illinois Bearing Ratio (IBR) of 3.0.  All unsuitable subgrade
material, including subgrade material having an IBR less than 3.0, shall be
removed and replaced with a suitable fill material, or the pavement must be
designed to compensate for the soil condition.  The soil support IBR values
selected for use by the engineer shall represent a minimum value for the soil
to be used.  Soil tests must be provided to verify suitability of subgrade
material.



         b.   Pavement Design. The pavement design standards
shall conform to those set forth in Table 6-405(B)(4), Table of Pavement
Design.  A copy of all design assumptions and compu-tations on which the
proposed pavement design is based shall be submitted to and accepted by the
Village Engineer. 



         c.   Composite Pavement Strength.



            1.   The pavement shall be designed and
constructed so as to obtain a fifteen (15) year service life with only
minimal maintenance before a resurfacing is required.



            2.   Prior to the installation of the bituminous
surface course, but after the installation of the binder course, the
developer shall notify the Village Engineer that he intends to surface the
street.  The Village Engineer may obtain a Dynaflect Pavement Evaluation
Program Report of the completed pavement improvements at developer's expense.



            3.   The Dynaflect Pavement Evaluation Program
shall be performed according to the Dynaflect Pavement Evaluation
Specification on file in the office of the Village Engineer.  The program
shall generally embody the following testing/pavement evaluation techniques:



               a.   Environmental study (frost cycle,
drainage, etc.).



               b.   Pavement surface evaluation.



               c.   Soil borings at approximately one
location per mile.



               d.   Dynamic pavement deflection analysis
(Dynaflect machine or equal corre-lated with Benkelman beam or equal).



            4.   The program shall evaluate the existing
condition of the base and binder course in maximum two hundred (200) foot
sections, and shall determine whether or not the pavement section with the
addition of the surface course of design thickness will be projected to meet
a fifteen (15) year pavement life or greater.



            5.   If the pavement section is projected to meet
a life expectancy of fifteen (15) years or more, then the developer may
proceed as indicated in Subsection 11(d) and 11(e).



            6.   If the pavement section is not projected to
meet a life expectancy of fifteen (15) years or more, then the report shall
propose asphalt overlays in excess of the surface course design thickness or
pavement reconstruction to bring the new pavement section to a fifteen year
life expectancy.  The Village Engineer shall evaluate the results of the
report and shall inform the developer of any required pavement repair for
each section.  These repairs shall be completed before the final surface is
applied.



            7.   The Dynaflect Pavement Evaluation Program
shall not be considered valid unless the wearing service was applied during
the same construction season.  Any costs of additional Dynaflect Pavement
Evaluation shall be paid in advance by the developer.



            8.   In the case of rigid pavements, the developer
shall notify the Village Engineer that he is ready for final inspection on
the streets.  The Village Engineer will obtain a Dynaflect Pavement
Evaluation Program report of the complete improvements as outlined in
Subsection B(4)(c) above.



            9.   The program shall evaluate the existing
condition of the pavement in two hundred (200) foot sections and shall
determine whether or not the pavement section will be projected to meet a
fifteen year pavement life or greater.



            10.   If the pavement section is projected to meet
a life expectancy of fifteen (15) years or more, then the developer will be
so notified.



            11.   If the pavement section is not projected to
meet a life expectancy of fifteen (15) years or more, then the report shall
propose pavement reconstruction to bring the new pavement section to a
fifteen (15) year life expectancy.  The Village Engineer shall evaluate the
results of the report and shall inform the developer of any required pavement
repair for each section.



      5.   Pavement Construction Materials.  Pavement materials
approved for street construction shall comply with the minimum requirements
as tabulated in Table 6-405(B)(5), Table of Approved Street Pavement
Construction Materials.  Coefficients to be used for computing the pavement
structural number are listed with these materials.  The coefficients will
yield the structural number when they are multiplied by the thickness of the
materials (measured in inches).



 



Table 6-405(B)(5)
TABLE OF APPROVED STREET PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS


STRUCTURAL MATERIALS
 
STRENGTH REQUIREMENTS
 
STRUCTURAL LAYER COEFFICIENT


M.S. * I.B.R. P.S.I.


Bituminous Surface:
 

 



Class I
 
1700
 
0.40


Base Course:
 

 



Aggregate, Type B
 

 




Uncrushed

 
50
 
0.10



Crushed (100%)

 
80
 
0.13


Aggregate, Type A
 
80
 
0.13


Waterbound Macadam
 
110
 
0.14


Cement Aggregate,
 
650**
 
0.23


Bituminous Aggregate, Mixture
 
900 -1900
 
0.24 - 0.33


Bituminous Mixture, Class I
 
1700
 
0.33


Portland Cement Concrete
 
4000***
 
0.50




 



*Marshall Stability



**7-Day Design Compressive Strength



***28-Day Design Compressive Strength



      6.   Subgrade Preparation.



         a.   The subgrade of all paved areas shall be graded and
rolled in accordance with SSR & BC, Section 200.  Embankment shall be placed
and compacted in accordance with SSR & BC, Section 207.



         b.   At least one Standard Proctor Density Test,
performed in accordance with AASHTO T99,  shall be taken in each embankment
section, with the maximum distance between tests of three hundred (300)
feet.  One standard proctor density test shall be taken from each different
source of borrowed material.  The density tests must be submitted for review
to the Village Engineer.  Upon review of these tests, an inspection of the
subgrade shall be made by the engineer and a report of acceptable subgrade
and preparation must be submitted to the Village Engineer prior to placing
any curb and gutter or base material.



      7.   Grading.



         a.   Gradients of streets shall be a minimum of one (1)
percent where possible and in no case less than seven-tenths (0.7) percent
and shall not exceed seven (7) percent, unless approved by the Village. 
Street grades shall be such as to provide natural surface drainage of storm
water regardless of the presence of storm sewer facilities.



         b.   Where the grade of the street warrants installation
of vertical type curb and other special design of improvements because of
right-of-way conditions, such as double inlets, the Village Engineer is
authorized to require such design.



         c.   The minimum length of vertical curves shall be one
hundred (100) feet for one and one half (1.5) percent difference of grade. 
For each additional one (1.0) percent difference in grade over one and
one-half (1.5) percent, a fifty (50) foot increment shall be added to the
length of a vertical curve.  If the grade differential is less than one and
one-half (1.5) percent, a vertical curve is not required.



      8.   Sight Distances.  At points of intersection of proposed
roads with existing roads, the minimum stopping sight distance indicated
below for the legal speed limits shall be provided on existing roads.  Clear
visibility, at any point of movement along the road measured along the center
line of the street, shall be provided for at least three hundred fifty (350)
feet on all major streets, two hundred (200) feet on collector and local
streets, or as designated by an engineering study.



 

Legal Speed Limit (MPH)*
 
Minimum Stopping Sight Distance


25-30
 
200 Ft.


35-40
 
275 Ft.


45-50
 
350 Ft.


55
 
475 Ft.



 



*If the Village Engineer determines that the projected future legal speed
limit established in accordance with the State of Illinois "Policy for
Establishing and Posting Speed Limits" is higher than the existing legal
speed limit, the higher speed limit shall be used to determine the minimum
stopping sight distance.



      9.   Curb and Gutter.



         a.   Combination curb and gutter shall be constructed on
both sides of all street pavements and shall comply with the requirements of
Construction Standards Governing Public Improvements, as adopted by the
Village Engineer, and as updated from time to time.



         b.   Two (2) No. 4 reinforcing bars shall be placed
continuously between expansion joints.  Expansion joints shall be doweled
and spaced no more than sixty (60) feet on center and at tangent points of
all radii.  Control joints shall be provided at least fifteen (15) feet on
center and shall consist of an actual saw cut, at least one and one-half (1
1/2) inches deep.  If curb machines are used, doweled sections are not
required.



         c.   Curbs installed by slip joint machines shall be
allowed.



         d.   Flow testing:  Before final pavement surface is
installed, the contractor shall run water down the curb lines to check for
"low" and "high" spots that may impede storm water flow.  The Village shall
verify flow line acceptance prior to final acceptance of roads.  Curb
replacement shall be required at all standing water locations.



         e.   Unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer
pursuant to IDOT standards, a barrier curb, as denoted as Type 3 on Exhibit
No. STR-04, shall be provided on all major streets.  All other streets shall
be provided with curbs as denoted as on Exhibit No. STR-03. Depressed curbs
shall be provided at all bikepath and sidewalk crossings.  Materials shall
comply with those specified in Section 6-406.



      10.   Design of Pavement Thickness.



         a.   The following minimum structural numbers and
minimum pavement thickness shall be required in the design of pavements:



 



FLEXIBLE AND RIGID PAVEMENTS


FLEXIBLE PAVEMENTS
 
THICKNESS*
 



Minimum Structural Number
 
Binder Course
 
Surface


2.00 to 3.00
 
3"
 
1"


3.01 to 3.99
 
3 1/2"
 
1"


4.00 and greater
 
4"
 
1"


(Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03)
 

 




 

 



RIGID PAVEMENTS**
 
THICKNESS***
 



3.00 to 3.99
 
6" to 8"
 



4.00 to 4.99
 
8" to 10"
 





 



*Bituminous Concrete Binder and Surface Course, Class I (SSR & BC, Section
406).



**Concrete pavement shall be reinforced with 6" x 6", #6 steel fabric.



***Thickness shall be rounded up to the nearest one-half (1/2) inch.



         b.   Flexible pavement materials can be used until
November 1, weather permitting. Any work done after November 1, shall require
written  authorization from the Village Engineer.  Such authorization, if
obtained, will not void the contractor's and the developer's guarantee on the
work done.



         c.   Flexible pavements must set for a minimum of nine
(9) months, including a winter and a spring.  After this setting period has
passed, one pavement core per nine hundred (900) lineal feet of measured
pavement must be taken.  A report must be submitted to the Village Engineer
that lists the thicknesses of base and binder courses and the type and
condition of subgrade material as determined from the cores.  If the results
of the cores indicate pavement deficiencies, additional cores will be needed
at intervals required by the Village Engineer.  All cores taken shall be
numbered and delivered to the Village Engineer.



         d.   Upon receipt of the report and cores, the Village
Engineer will review the report and will perform an inspection of the
existing base and binder courses.  All base and binder course failures will
then be repaired to the Village Engineer's satisfaction.



         e.   Upon completion of all construction within any
development, the Village Engineer will conduct a deflection test as specified
in Subsection 4(c) above.  All deficiencies outlined in the report shall be
repaired as specified in the report and to the Village Engineer's
satisfaction prior to the installation of the final surface course.



   C.   Traffic Signals.  The need for traffic signals will be
determined by a traffic study commissioned by the developer or as determined
the Village staff.  The traffic study shall use established standards of the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), and the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.  (Ord. 2570 -
5/2/94)



   D.   Emergency Vehicle Access.  Emergency vehicles access shall
conform to the codes of the appropriate Fire District.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



   E.   Fire Lanes.  Fire lanes shall conform to the codes of the
appropriate Fire District.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



   F.   Exhibits .  Exhibits labelled STR-01 through STR-04 are
typical specifications of street standards that shall be applied to any
improvements required by these regulations.  (Copies are available at the
Engineering Department).  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



   G.   Street Identification Signs .



      1.   The developer/property owner shall submit the list of
street names approved by the Village Engineer and a map for the installation
of street identification signs immediately after the approval of engineering
drawings.



      2.   The Village shall order signs and mounting hardware in
accordance with its present design standards.  Identifications signs shall
be installed as soon as work schedules and weather conditions permit after
all the signs and mounting hardware are reserved.  Signs shall not be
installed until the first lift of pavement and street light poles are
installed. (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      3.   The Village shall invoice the contractor an amount equal
to the cost of the signs and mounting hardware plus twenty-five percent (25%)
for handling and installation of the signs.  The developer/property owner
shall make payment in full to the Village within thirty (30) days of the date
of the invoice.



(Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



SECTION 6-406.   SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, AND PARKING LOTS.



   A.   Sidewalks.



      1.   General.  Sidewalks shall be constructed by developers/
property owners along all roads, except as otherwise provided in section
6-406.  If a road is planned for widening within five (5) years of the date
of final development approval, the developer/property owner shall provide
security for sidewalk construction with the Village.  All developments shall
provide a sidewalk to connect buildings with public sidewalks, and must
feature landscaping, benches and other such materials/facilities for no less
than 50 percent of its length. (Ord.2959 - 11/18/96)



      2.   Public Roads.



         a.   Sidewalks on both sides of a roadway shall be
required for all arterial, collector and local streets in the Village of
Orland Park. Sidewalks shall delineate the parkway of a right-of-way and
shall be at a minimum five (5) feet in width with eight (8) feet of planting
strip between the sidewalk and the roadway's back of curb. In the VC Village
Center District and OOH Old Orland Historic District and those areas
comprising the Downtown Planning District of the Comprehensive Plan (except
for residential single family homes attached and detached), sidewalks may
extend from building frontage to back of curb, respecting building setback
requirements and may replace bufferyard requirements with appropriate
applications of street trees (spaced according to parkway standards) and
planter beds, as determined via an approved landscape plan, without variance
to Section 6-305 Landscape and Tree Preservation.  (Amd. Ord. 5061 - 1/18/16)



         b.   Multi-use paths, such as bicycle paths, shall
replace sidewalks in those areas of the Village indicated by the
Comprehensive Plan's Recommended Bikeway System subject to review by the
Development Services Department. Multi-use paths shall use IDOT standards in
IDOT or County rights-of-way or be a minimum of eight (8) feet wide with a
maximum of four (4) feet of planting strip between the path and the roadway's
back of curb. In cases where paths terminate, provisions shall be made to
loop the sidewalk and multi-use path network. In cases where the network is
divided between off-street paths and on-street routes, provisions shall be
made to safely transition from either medium and ensure continuity of travel.



         c.   Sidewalks or multi-use paths as identified by the
Comprehensive Plan's Recommended Bikeway System, as reviewed by the
Development Services Department, shall be required for arterial and collector
rights-of-way on the perimeter of subdivisions or developments (e.g.
sidewalks on roadways where the backs of properties front the right-of-way).



         d.   Either sidewalks or multi-use paths per the
Comprehensive Plan's Recommended Bikeway System are required on both sides of
any roadway within a 1/4  mile radius of a school, park or public building,
subject to review by the Development Services Department.



         e.   New streets shall have sidewalks or multi-use paths
per the Comprehensive Plan's Recommended Bikeway System on both sides of the
right-of-way. When one side presents grade challenges or other development
challenges that inhibit sidewalks or paths, such as the requirement for
retaining walls, provisions shall be made to loop the sidewalk or path that
would dead-end to the existing network (e.g. cross the street via signed and
marked crosswalks and connect).  For new streets that connect to existing
streets with sidewalks or paths on one side of the right-of-way, provisions
shall be made to loop the sidewalk that would dead-end on the new street to
the network (e.g. cross the street via signed and marked crosswalks and
connect).



         f.   Sidewalks and multi-use paths per the Comprehensive
Plan's Recommended Bikeway System, as reviewed by the Development Services
Department, are required for streets and rights-of-way that are below
standard widths. Such streets and rights-of-way shall be subject to review by
the Development Services Department and shall consider such options as
carriage walks, reduced parkways, bike lanes, woonerfs etc. to accommodate
pedestrian and cyclist mobility. (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      3.   Private Roads.  The same sidewalk standards are required
for private roads as for public roads, unless other design guidelines are
applied for planned developments.



      4.   Location.  The location of sidewalks shall generally be
one (1) foot inside of the right-of-way.  The location may be modified,
depending on factors that include but are not limited to: relationship to
drainage ditches, easements, Commonwealth Edison right-of-ways and towers,
handicapped ramps, existing trees and landscaping, and topography.



      5.   Construction. Sidewalk width shall be a minimum of five
(5) feet in width, subject to Village Engineer approval.  Thickness shall be
a minimum of five (5) inches reinforced with 6" x 6" wire mesh, or other
reinforcement methods subject to approval of the Village Engineer.  All
sidewalks at curb depressions shall include a detectable warning for the
vision impaired consisting of truncated domes.  The warning area shall begin
six (6) inches from the back of the curb and continue two (2) feet in the
direction of pedestrian travel for the entire width of the waking surface. 
The detectable warning shall also present a contrast in color from the
adjacent sidewalk with integrally colored concrete or other means subject to
Village Engineer approval. (Ord. 3130 - 5/18/98; Amd. Ord. 4125 - 4/17/06)



   B.   Driveways and Driveway Aprons.



      1.   Driveways Across Sidewalks and Parkways.   No person,
firm or corporation shall construct or alter any driveway over, across or
upon any public sidewalk or parkway without first obtaining a permit from the
Building Division.  Where ingress and egress is to be made from adjoining
real estate to a public street and where Section 6-306 requires off-street
parking, such off-street parking shall be made accessible to the public
street and the ingress and egress shall be made across the parkway and
sidewalks by means of a driveway constructed in accordance with this Section.



      2.   Permit Application.  Application for a permit to
construct a driveway shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and filed
with the Building Department.  The application shall designate the location
of the proposed driveway, the name and address of the applicant, the name and
address of the owner of the property to be served by the proposed driveway,
and the address of the applicant, if other than the owner, and a plat of
survey indicating the driveway location and sizes proposed.  In those
instances where a driveway is required to comply with the requirements of
Section 6-306, the permit application shall accompany the application for the
issuance of a building permit authorizing the new building construction. 



      3.   Permit Issuance and Fees.   The Building Department
shall issue a permit to construct a driveway provided that the permit
application is complete and is in accordance with these regulations and that
the permit fee has been paid.



      4.   Permit Revocation.  All permits for driveways issued
pursuant to this Section may be revoked at any time without the consent of
the permittee by order of the Board of Trustees and the Director of the
Building Department.  Upon such revocation, all rights granted under the
permit shall be revoked, and the sidewalk, space, parkways and curbs shall be
restored to their former condition, at the expense of the permittee or of the
owner of the property served by the driveway at the time of such revocation.



      5.   Maximum Number.  Single family residences shall be
permitted to have only one (1) driveway per lot except if the lot has a
minimum lot frontage of ninety (90) feet, then a circular driveway consisting
of two (2) drives may be allowed.  All other uses shall be allowed the
number of driveways as approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation
of the Building Department.  Any single family lot which has a driveway
exiting on to an arterial or major collector street shall have a turn-around
driveway. (Ord. 3130 - 5/18/98)



      6.   Widths and Lengths. Single-family residential driveways
and driveway aprons shall have a maximum width of twenty (20) feet for one
(1) car garages, twenty-six (26) feet for two (2) car garages, and thirty-six
(36) feet for three (3) car garages. The maximum width of a driveway is
applicable to the entire driveway length between the building line and
sidewalk. The maximum width of a driveway apron is applicable to the entire
driveway length between the sidewalk and the street. The maximum width for
driveway lane for single family residences shall be forty (40) percent of the
lot width up to thirty six (36) feet, applicable to the entire driveway
length between the building line and curb line. The maximum width for circle
driveway lane shall be twenty (20) feet, applicable to the entire driveway
length between the building line and curb line. The minimum driveway length
shall be eighteen (18) feet, excluding right-of-way and sidewalks. No
driveway shall encroach upon any portion of the parkway in front of the
adjoining parkway.  The maximum width for driveways for all other uses shall
be as approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the Department
of Engineering.  (Ord. 2959 – 11/18/96; Amd. Ord. 3281 – 8/16/99; Amd.
Ord. 5061  1/26/16; Amd. Ord. 5126  9/19/16)



      7.   Grades and Curbs.   Driveways shall conform to the
existing sidewalk grade.  Where it is necessary to break the existing curb
for the driveway opening, the curb and gutter shall be completely removed and
a new section constructed or as approved by the Village Engineer.  Each such
driveway shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit free and
unobstructed passage on, over or across the sidewalk and in such a manner as
not to interfere with the proper drainage and safe grading of the streets. 
Each such driveway shall be so constructed and maintained that its surface at
the point of crossing any sidewalk pavement shall be flush with the adjoining
sections of such sidewalk.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      8.   Driveways Connecting to Arterial Streets.   Driveways
connecting to arterial streets must provide on site turn around.  (Ord. 2570
- 5/2/94)



      9.   Residential Shared Driveways Connecting to Streets . Up
to three (3) residential lots may share a single private driveway connecting
to any street. (Ord. 4880 - 2/3/14)



      10.   Lots Fronting a Local Street and an Arterial .  In
subdivisions where lots front both a local street and an arterial street, no
driveways shall be installed along the property line of the lot which fronts
the arterial street.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      11.   Portland Cement Concrete Driveway Aprons .  Portland
Cement concrete driveway aprons shall be constructed according to the
standards described in this Section.



      12.   All Other Driveway Aprons.  Multi-family developments,
business, office research, and industrial district driveway aprons shall be
constructed with a ten (10) foot radius return unless otherwise required by
the Department of Engineering.  Driveways shall not be closer than five (5)
feet to adjacent driveways at the curb line. (Ord. 2570 – 5/2/94; Amd. Ord.
3672 – 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 5126  9/19/16)



      13.   Driveway Thickness.  All residential driveways and
driveway aprons shall have a minimum concrete thickness of five (5) inches
with (6) inch by (6) inch welded wired mesh or fiber mesh concrete additive
and a granular bedding base of two inches. (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94; Amd. Ord.
3837 - 12/1/03; Amd. Ord. 5126  9/19/16)



      14.   New Driveway Aprons Abutting Existing Bike Trails,
Sidewalks or Curbs. New driveway aprons abutting existing bike trails,
sidewalks or curbs shall be constructed  to meet the grade of such sidewalks
or curbs.  If necessary, the sidewalk shall be relocated to accommodate the
maximum driveway apron slope.  The location and grade for driveway aprons,
when no adjacent sidewalks or curb and gutter exists, shall match the
adjacent parkway.  The minimum slope shall be two (2) percent.  (Ord. 2570
- 5/2/94; Amd. Ord. 5126  9/19/16)



      15.   Driveway Side Setback Requirements for All Properties.
Driveways shall be located at least one (1) foot from the nearest side
property line and shall not obstruct storm water flow. Shared driveways or
driveways providing vehicular cross-access between adjacent parcels that are
approved by the Village and/or established by agreement between the subject
property owners shall be exempt from this one (1) foot side setbacks
requirement. Driveways in a side yards associated with side loading garages
shall comply with setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   C.   Driveway, Driveway Apron, and Parking Construction.



      1.   Concrete.  Concrete driveways shall be constructed in
compliance with the provisions of this Section, so far as they are applicable
and shall not be less than five (5) inches thick, plus a two (2) inch bedding
for residential use and eight (8) inches thick, plus a three (3) inch bedding
for multi-family, commercial and industrial property use.  Expansion joints
shall be used between the back of the curb and the driveway and between the
sidewalk and the driveway.  (Ord. 2570  - 5/2/94)



      2.   Asphalt.



         a.   Residential driveways shall be constructed in two
(2) courses and shall not be less than eight (8) inches in thickness after
compaction.  The crushed stone base course shall be six (6) inches in
thickness and compacted until all voids are filled with finely crushed stone
or sand.  The asphalt surfaced course shall be two (2) inches in thickness
after compaction and shall be constructed of bituminous plant-mix Type B-4 or
B-5 conforming to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction as prepared by the Division of Highways, Department of Public
Works, State of Illinois, most recent edition.  (Ord. 2570  - 5/2/94)



         b.   All other driveways, aprons and parking lots shall
be constructed in two (2) courses and shall not be less than eleven (11)
inches in thickness after compaction.  All concrete driveways must be
reinforced with a six (6) inch by six (6) inch welded wired mesh or fiber
mesh concrete additive.



(Ord. 2570  - 5/2/94)



      3.   Paver Bricks.  Paver bricks must be set on a minimum of
one (1) inch of sand over a minimum of four (4) inches of gravel, with a
rigid edge restraint, and a minimum slope of 1/4 inch per foot, subject to
approval by the Engineering Department.  (Ord.  3130 - 5/18/98)



   D.   Sidewalk, Driveway, and Parking Lot Materials. (Ord. 2570  -
5/2/94)



   All materials shall comply with the following standards of quality:



 



1.   Portland Cement:
 
ASTM C150 Type I, Normal


 
 
ASTM C150 Type II, High-Early-Strength


2.   Fine Aggregate:
 
ASTM C33, clean sand graded between #100 and #4 sieve limits.


3.   Coarse Aggregate:
 
ASTM C33, uncoated crushed stone or washed gravel.


 
 
Slag shall not be permitted.


4.   Water:
 
Potable and fit to drink


5.   Water-Reducing Admixture:
 
ASTM C494 Type A (normal) or Type D (retarder).


6.   Air Entraining Agent:
 
ASTM C260


7.   Premolded Filler Strips:
 
ASTM D994


8.   Curing Compound:
 
ASTM C309, Type 2 (white, pigmented)


9.   Reinforcement:
 
ASTM A615, Grade 40.




 



   E.   Concrete Quality.



      1.   Ready-mixed concrete that complies with ASTM C94 shall be
used for sidewalks, driveways, and driveway aprons.  The concrete shall be
supplied by a ready-mixed source which is inspected yearly by the Illinois
Department of Transportation.



      2.   Concrete mix shall be designed using the following data:



         a.   Minimum compressive strength of four thousand
(4000) psi at twenty-eight (28) days.



         b.   Minimum of six (6) sacks of cement per cubic yard.



         c.   Maximum size aggregate of one (1) inch.



         d.   Air entrainment of six (6) percent +1%.



         e.   Maximum slump of four (4) inches.



         f.   Maximum water content including moisture in the
aggregate of six (6) gallons per sack of cement.



         g.   All concrete shall contain a water-reducing
admixture with no reduction in cement content permitted.



   F.   Subgrade Preparation.  Where a fill condition exists, all
topsoil and unsuitable material shall be removed.  Subgrade shall be rolled
or tamped before granular fill is placed.  Fill shall be placed in six (6)
inch layers to the proper subgrade elevation.  Side slopes of fill material
shall not exceed one (1) foot vertical to three (3) feet horizontal.  Where
a cut condition exists, all top soil and unsuitable material shall be
removed.  Subgrade shall be removed to the proper elevation to allow
sufficient width to accommodate the forms.



   G.   Granular Base.  A granular base of two (2) inch minimum
thickness shall be placed on the prepared subgrade.  The base shall extend
the full width of the sidewalk or driveway apron.  The granular base shall
consist of CA6 aggregate conforming to the SSR & BC.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



   H.   Forms.  Side forms shall be of lumber of not less than two (2)
inches nominal thickness or steel of equal rigidity.  The minimum depth of
the side forms shall be equal to the sidewalk thickness.  No two (2) inch by
four (4) inch lumber forms shall be permitted.  Forms shall be held securely
in place by stakes or braces with the top edge true to line and grade.  The
forms for the sidewalk shall be set so that the slab will have a fall of one
(1) inch vertical to four (4) feet horizontal from the edge nearest the
property line toward the edge farthest from the property line, except as may
be otherwise directed by the Department of Code Enforcement.



   I.   Expansion Joints.  Expansion joints of the thickness specified
below shall consist of a premolded filler strip with the top strip placed
one-fourth (1/4) inch below the surface of the sidewalk or driveway apron.



      1.   One-Half Inch Thick Expansion Joints.   Expansion joints
one-half (1/2) inches thick shall be placed between sidewalks and all
structures which extend through sidewalks, such as light standards, traffic
light standards, and traffic poles.  One-half (1/2) inch thick expansion
joints shall also be provided at the junction of the driveway apron and the
sidewalk and at the junction of the driveway apron and the curb.



      2.   Three-Fourth Inch Thick Expansion Joints.   Expansion
joints three-fourth (3/4) inches thick shall be placed at maximum intervals
of fifty (50) feet in sidewalks and where specified by the Department of
Engineering.  Where sidewalks are constructed adjacent to pavement or curbs
that have expansion joints, the expansion joints in the sidewalk shall be
placed opposite the existing expansion joints as nearly as practicable. 
Expansion joints shall also be placed where the sidewalk abuts existing
sidewalks, between driveway pavement and sidewalk, and between sidewalk and
curbs where the sidewalk abuts a curb.



   J.   Placing and Finishing Concrete.



      1.   The Department of Code Enforcement shall be notified when
the subgrade has been finished.  A minimum of three (3) hours notice shall
be given prior to placing concrete.  No concrete shall be placed until the
subgrade has been inspected and approved by the Building Department.



      2.   Materials should not be placed on ice or frozen subgrade.



      3.   The subgrade shall be moistened just before the concrete
is placed.  The concrete shall be placed in successive batches for the
entire width of the slab, struck off from one-half (1/2) to three-fourth
(3/4) inch higher than the finished slab, tamped until all voids are removed
and free mortar appears on the surface, thoroughly spaded along the edges,
struck off to the true grade, and finished to a true and even surface with
floats and trowels.  The final troweling shall be done with a steel trowel,
leaving a smooth, even surface.  After the water sheen has disappeared, the
surface shall be given final finish by brushing with a fine-hair broom.  The
broom shall be drawn across the sidewalk or driveway apron at right-angles to
the edges of the slab, with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping, producing
a uniform, slightly roughened surface with parallel marks.



      4.   Control Joints.



         a.   Sidewalks.  Control joints shall be constructed at
right angles to the center line of the sidewalk and shall extend one-fourth
(1/4) the depth of the sidewalk.  They shall not be less than one-eighth
(1/8) inch nor more than one-fourth (1/4) inch in width, and shall be edged
with an edging tool having a one-fourth (1/4) inch radius.  All slabs shall
be five (5) feet long on any one side, unless otherwise ordered by the
Village Engineer.



         b.   Driveway Aprons.  Control joints shall be
constructed so as to divide the driveway apron into sections which are
approximately square, with no side longer than fifteen (15) feet.  The
control joints shall be not less than one-eight (1/8) inch nor more than
one-fourth (1/4) inch in width, and shall be edged with an edging tool having
a one-fourth (1/4) inch radius.  The minimum depth shall be one and
one-fourth (1 1/4) inch.



   K.   Protection from Low Temperatures.



   After the first seasonal frost, concrete shall be protected from
freezing in accordance with the "Recommended Practice for Cold-Weather
Concreting" (ACI 306).  The developer shall be responsible for all concrete
damaged by low temperatures, and any damaged concrete shall be removed and
replaced by the developer at the developer's expense.



   L.   Curing.



   Sidewalks and driveway aprons shall be cured by one of the following
methods:



      1.   Burlap shall be placed on the finished surface, saturated
with water and covered with an impermeable covering.



      2.   Polyethylene sheeting shall be placed as soon as the
concrete has sufficiently hardened to prevent marring of the surface.  The
surface of the concrete shall be wet immediately before the sheeting is
placed.  The edges of the sheeting shall be weighted securely with a
continuous windrow of earth or any other means satis-factory to the Building
Department to provide an air tight cover.



      3.   Specified curing compound shall be applied with brush,
roller, or spray at the rate of one (1) gallon for every two hundred fifty
(250) square feet of surface.  Any of the above curing methods must remain
in place for not less than six (6) days.



   M.   Backfill.  After the concrete has been cured, forms shall be
removed and the space near the edges of the sidewalk or driveway apron shall
be backfilled to the required elevation with material approved by the
Building Department.  The material shall then be compacted until firm and
the surface evenly graded.



   N.   Disposal of Surplus Material.   Surplus or waste material
resulting from the sidewalk or driveway apron construction shall be disposed
of by the developer.



   O.   Control of Materials.   The developer shall,  when requested
by the Village and at his expense, have a commercial testing laboratory
prepare and test samples of delivered concrete.  One (1) set of tests shall
be taken for the first twenty-five (25) cubic yards, or fraction thereof, and
one (1) set of tests shall be taken for each additional fifty (50) cubic
yards.  A set of tests shall consist of four (4) standard cylinders (two (2)
shall be broken at seven (7) days and two (2) shall be broken at twenty-eight
(28) days), one (1) slump test and one (1) air content test.  The laboratory
shall perform tests in accordance with recognized ASTM standards and shall
submit written reports of such tests to the Village Engineer for review.



SECTION 6-407. STREET LIGHTING.



   A.   Street Lighting Standards.  All developments shall meet the
following minimum standards for providing public street lighting:  (Ord.
2570  5/2/94)



      1.   All developments shall submit public improvement and
development plans that incorporate a proposed street lighting system to the
Director of Development Services or designee. The street lighting plan shall
show the location and direction of the pole and mast arm, and the proposed
routing of the electric cable and duct.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



      2.   An LED luminaire shall be placed at all intersecting
public streets, which intersect with major county or state highways and/or
major streets. Street lights shall be singularly controlled with photo
control cells attached to, and shall be an integral part of, the luminaire.
The control cell shall be similar to that manufactured by Precision, catalog
no. P26-275, or current Precision equivalent.



      3.   An LED luminaire shall be placed at all cross or “T”
intersections and at the end of streets and cul-de-sacs. An LED type
luminaire shall be placed at mid block of all blocks, at a distance not to
exceed 500 feet between installations. An LED type luminaire shall also be
placed at all major curves in street alignment.



      4.   Mounting height shall be thirty (30) feet for all poles,
except by approval from the Development Services Department.



      5.   All electric cable shall be placed underground in a unit
duct. Each light shall have a single feed from the light standard to the
point of connection to Commonwealth Edison electric lines. The single feed
shall run through an above grade secondary electrical pedestal disconnect
(API 10x14 or approved equal). The feed disconnect should have a buss inline
link with crimp terminals and Cooper-Bussman rubber boots (IA0512 or equal)
in the disconnect pedestal. The feed line from Commonwealth Edison pedestal
to the secondary disconnect pedestal shall be piped with rigid PVC conduit
(schedule 40) with two (2) 90 degree elbows.  (Ord. 3837  12/1/03)



      6.   For developments where there is limited access to
individual Commonwealth Edison pedestals, the use of a centrally located
lighting controller cabinet will be allowed. The controller shall be powered
by one single point electric service at 120/240V, 1Ø, 3 wire underground
service. The lighting controls shall be installed within a ground mounted
NEMA 3R, green-painted aluminum IDOT Type 3 locking cabinet. The individual
light standards shall be connected to the lighting controller via alternating
branch circuits. The control itself shall consist of a mechancially-held
contractor which is automatically controlled via a controller-mounted
photocell  with a manual “Hand-Off-Auto” switch and individual branch
circuits. Various controls shall be as shown in the standard details at the
end of this section.



      7.   After completion of the street lighting system, all
developments shall submit to the Village Engineer or designee, a set of “As
Built” drawings showing the routing of electric cable, mounting height,
size length, luminaire size wattage and actual locations of each light
standard, disconnect pedestal, and point of connection to Commonwealth Edison
electric lines. The Village Engineer or designee shall inspect the system for
conformance to the standards set out in this document. The Village Engineer
or designee may accept the system after all the deficiencies are corrected.



   B.   Light Standards and Bracket.



      1.   The complete standard shall be the type manufactured by
the HAPCO Company or Valmont Industries, Inc., as shown the standard details,
no exceptions. The pole size, bracket size, and applicable catalog/part
numbers are to be clearly shown on the development plans and applicable
catalog cut sheets are required. The mounting heights shall be thirty (30)
feet for all developments.



      2.   Each light standard shall be a one-piece, seamless, round
tapered tube of alloy 6063, hollow shaft, with attached bracket arm and all
accessories described herein. The pole shall have a 0.188 inch wall
thickness. The pole shall be fully heat-treated along its entire length
post-welding of the base flange, to produce the required T6 temper.



      3.   The metal pole foundations shall be in accordance with
Sections 836 and 1070 of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition.



      4.   Welding shall be done by the inert gas shielded metal arc
method with consumable electrode. Aluminum alloy 4043 electrode shall be used.



      5.   The base flange for the attachment of the shaft to the
foundation shall be a one-piece cast socket of aluminum alloy 356. The flange
shall be joined to the shaft by means of complete circumferential welds,
externally at the top of the flange and internally at the bottom of the shaft
tube. The bolt holes shall be capable of containing 1" inch anchor bolts with
a specific bolt circle diameter of 11-1/2 inches. The base shall have an
opening of such size as will permit easy entry of all conduit.



      6.   An ornamental cap of aluminum alloy shall be  provided
with each shaft. The cap shall be fastened to the shaft by means of a
stainless steel screw.



      7.   The pole shaft shall include a 4 inch by 6 inch
reinforced handhole centered 18 inches above the bottom of the shaft.
Handholes are to be located 90 degrees clockwise from the plane of the
bracket arm as viewed from the top. The opening for the handhole shall be
oval in shape and measure 4 inch by 6 inch, with the major dimension along
the vertical axis. The hole in the shaft wall shall be reinforced with a
frame of aluminum alloy 356-T6, which shall project slightly beyond the wall
interior and be completely joined to the interior and exterior of the shaft
with a fillet of which the minimum size shall be 5/16 inch. The opening shall
be protected by a snug-fitting cover attached with two stainless steel hex
head screws. The external contour of the reinforcing frame and cover shall be
curved to conform to the roundness of the shaft.  The cover shall have a
surface finish similar to the shaft.



      8.   Each pole shall contain an internal lug with a 3/8 inch
diameter hole for the purpose of attaching a grounding connector.



      9.   The bracket arm shall be the truss type of design with an
upper and lower member joined near the  luminaire end of the arm and braced
with a  vertical strut. The upper member shall be the continuous or wiring
member and shall be a tapered tube that is ovalized at the pole shaft end,
with the major dimension of the oval in the horizontal plane. Tube nominal
wall thickness shall be 1/8 inch. The lower member shall be  standard
circular pipe. Both upper and lower members shall be attached to the pole
shaft  with 1/4 inch thick wrought, curved plates. Plates shall be welded to
the members. The upper attachment shall be made with four 1/2 inch aluminum
bolts, nuts and lock washers. The lower attachment shall be made with two 3/8
inch stainless steel bolts. Blind nuts shall be factory installed in the pole
shaft. Wiring at the upper attachment shall be through a 1-1/4 inch diameter
hole with appropriate grommet. The material of the main bracket members and
their attachment plates shall be alloy 6063-T6. The bracket arm shall
incorporate a 2 inch pipe size slip-fitter tenon at least 6 inches long.



      10.   The bracket arm shall be of such length as will provide
for the attaching of a light fixture twelve (12) feet from the shaft at all
pole locations, on all equipment and materials.



      11.   A set of four threaded 1 inch-8 NC steel anchor bolts,
minimum 40 inches in length, with a 12 inch minimum length of hot-dipped
galvanizing at the threaded end, shall be provided for anchoring the base to
the concrete foundation. The bolts shall include a 4 inch right- angle hook
at the unthreaded end and 6 inches of thread on the threaded end. A
galvanized nut, lock washer and flat washer shall be supplied with each
anchor bolt. Four anchor bolt covers of aluminum alloy 43 and stainless steel
screws for their attachment, shall be provided.



      12.   All nuts, bolts and washers used in the assembly of the
pole shall be 300 series  stainless steel, except for anchorage hardware as
indicated in the Light Standard Detail, and excepting the foundation anchor
bolt hardware.



      13.   The pole shaft shall be provided with a satin finish
accomplished by mechanical rotary grinding. The bracket arms shall be
provided with a satin etched finish. All materials shall be clean, free from
dents and gouges. No surface preparation or painting of any type shall be
performed on the assembly components at the time of installation.



      14.   Raceway openings shall be free from burrs and rough
edges that may injure the installer and the wiring. Openings and shall be
fitted with a rubber grommet.



      15.   In areas where breakaway devices are required, these
devices shall be by means of breakaway couplings and aluminum shrouds or
transformer bases as shown in the Standard Details.



   C.   Luminaire, LED Type, Mast Arm-Mounted - Residential Public
Roadway



   Requirements for Typical Residential Public Roadways



   Performance Criteria



 

LUMINAIRE REQUIREMENTS
 





Maintenance
 
Tool-less, Entry Gasketed and Sealed and UL Listed for Wet Locations


Light Source & Drovers
 
RoHS and DLC Compliant


Operating Temperatures
 
-20°C to +40°C


Internal Connections & Components
 
Preassembled and Prewired Using Modular Electric Connections


Minimum Life Expectancy
 
50,000 Hours


Voltage Fluctuations
 
+ or -10%


Housing Finish Color
 
Gray, ASTM Rating of Six per D1654 after 1000 Hours


Tenon Nominal Pipe Size (Inches)
 
2"


Maximum Luminaire Weight (lb)
 
75 lb.


Nominal Luminaire EPA (ft2)
 
40 ft2


Nominal Input Voltage (V)
 
120V or 240V


ANSI Vibration Test Level
 
Level 1 (Normal)


Identification
 
External Labeling per ANSI C136.15 & 22


Optics
 
Type 3, Flat Glass


Mounting Method
 
Swivel-Tenon/Mast Arm


Driver
 
Control Signal Interface


Nominal BUG Ratings
 
B3-U0-G3


Make/Model of LED Light Source(s)
 
Cree, Philips, Lumiled, Nichia


Make/Model of LED Driver(s)
 
Advance, Philips or Equal


Dim-ability
 
[ T] Dimmarble7 pin photo cell receptacle
 
[  ]  Not dimmable


Electrical Immunity System Failure
 
No Possible Disconnect


Thermal Management
 
No Moving Parts


Warranty Period (yr)
 
10 Year


Buy America Compliance
 
NEMA listed company (provide copy of compliance document)


Design Lights Consortium Compliance
 
Yes (Provided documentation verifying product listing or DLC’s website)




 



 

PARAMETERS
 
 


Lamp Lumen Depreciation
 
0.70




Initial Input Power (W)
 
170W


Maintained Input Power (W)
 
170W


Initial LED Drive Current (mA)
 
530 min.


Maintained LED Drive Current (mA)
 
530 min.


CCT (K)
 
4000


S/P ratio
 
0.9




 



   D.   Luminaire, LED Type, Mast Arm-Mounted - Commercial Public
Roadway



   LED Lighting Requirements for Commercial and Collector Public Roadways



   Performance Criteria



 

LUMINAIRE REQUIREMENTS
 





Maintenance
 
Tool-less, Entry Gasketed, Sealed and UL Listed for Wet Locations


Light Source & Drivers
 
RoHS and DLC Compliant


Operating Temperatures
 
-20°C to +40°C


Internal Connections & Components
 
Preassembled and Prewired Using Modular Electrical Connections


Voltage Fluctuations
 
+ or – 10%


Housing Finish Color
 
Gray, ASTM Rating of Six per D1654 after 1000 Hours


Tenon Nominal Pipe Size (Inches)
 
2”


Maximum Luminaire Weight (lb)
 
75 lb.


Nominal Luminaire EPA (ft2)
 
40 ft2


Nominal Input Voltage (V)
 
120V or 240V


ANSI Vibration Test Level
 
Level 1 (Normal)


Identification
 
External Labeling per ANSI C136.15 & 22


Optics
 
Type 3, Flat Glass


Mounting Method
 
Swivel-tenon/Mast Arm


Driver
 
Control Signal Interface


Nominal BUG Ratings
 
B3-U0-G3


Make/Model of LED Light Source(s)
 
Cree, Philips, Lumiled, Nichia


Make/Model of LED Driver(s)
 
Advance, Philips or Equal


Dim-ability
 
[ T] Dimmable 7 pin photo cell receptacle
 
[  ] Not dimmable


Electrical Immunity System Failure
 
No Possible Disconnect


Thermal Management
 
No Moving Parts


Warranty Period (yr)
 
10 Year


Buy America Compliance
 
NEMA listed company (provide copy of compliance document)


Design Lights Consortium Compliance
 
Yes (Provide documentation verifying product listing on DLC’s website)

 


PARAMETERS
 



Lamp Lumen Depreciation
 
0.63


Initial Input Power (W)
 
200W max.


Maintained Input Power (W)
 
200W max.


Initial LED Drive Current (mA)
 
530


Maintained LED Drive Current (mA)
 
530


CCT (K)
 
4000


S/P ratio
 
0.9




 



   E.   Foundation. 



      1.   Pole Foundation.  Pole foundations shall be constructed
with a reinforced concrete foundation with dimensions required by the type of
soil as shown on the soil tests and borings. Standard Details indicate
minimums for concrete foundation construction.



         a.   Foundations shall include a cage made of #3 and #5
reinforcing bars.  The cage shall be 16 inches in diameter.  There shall be
six #5 bars, five feet in length, welded to six #3 bars which shall be spaced
12 inches O.C. and shall be formed into a 16 inch diameter circle.



         b.   Foundations shall also contain a 5/8 diameter by 10
foot length grounding rod which shall be attached to the internal grounding
lug located within the pole by clamps suitable gauge electrical grounding
wire.



         c.   In areas where conventional concrete foundations
cannot be utilized because of soil conditions or utility conflicts, the use
of metal helical screw-in type foundations may be utilized with written
approval from the Village Engineer or designee. The Standard Details identify
the minimums required.



      2.   Materials. The concrete shall be Class SI complying with
Section 503 of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road & Bridge
Construction, latest edition. The reinforcement bars shall comply with
Section 508 of the Standard Specifications. The raceway shall be a 2 inch
diameter straight conduit of rigid plastic.



      3.   Construction Method.



         a.   The foundation excavation shall be made by
augering. The foundation shall be cast-in-place and allowed to cure for at
least fourteen (14) days prior to erecting the light pole standard.



         b.   Metal pole foundations shall be in accordance with
Section 836 of the IDOT Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
latest edition.



   F.   Electric Cable 600 Volt, Plastic Insulated Materials.



      The electric cable shall comply with the ASTM Standards (latest
edition), Designation Number, and shall comply with the Insulated Power Cable
Engineers Association Standards cited by the paragraph or table number in
I.P.C.E.A. Pub. S-61-402 (latest edition).



      1.   Conductors. The conductors shall be in accordance with
Sections 817 and 1066 of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition, and shall be a minimum of No. 10 AWG size using
XLP or EPR in the light standard.  When not within the light standard, the
wire shall be a minimum of No. 6 AWG using XLP or EPR. Conductors of No. 8
AWG size, XLP or EPR - USE and smaller shall be stranded annealed copper
wire, ASTM B-3 compliant. Conductors of No. 6 AWG size and larger shall be
stranded annealed copper wire, ASTM B-8 compliant. Conductors shall be of
different colors to designate hot and neutral wires. Preferred colors are
black, red and white.  (Ord. 3837  12/1/03)



      2.   Fuses.  The wiring in the light standard shall have a 10
amp in-line fuse, FNM-10, and shall use an inline breakaway fuse holder with
crimp terminals and rubber boots. The neutral shall have a Bussman identified
solid neutral fuse holder and crimp terminals with rubber boots.



      3.   Unit Duct. The electric cable shall be in accordance with
Sections 816 and 1066 of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition. The unit duct shall be one piece without
splices. The unit duct may be formed by extruding it over the insulated
conductors. The unit duct shall have a smooth inner bore which does not
adhere to conductor insulation.



      4.   Construction Methods. The electric cable shall be
continuous (no splicing) between the service connection and disconnect
pedestal, between the lighting controller and light standard, and between the
disconnect pedestal and light standard, and shall be contained within the
plastic unit duct. The duct shall extend one foot into the light standard and
the cable shall be long enough for the splices to be withdrawn 18 inches from
the pole handhole. All electric cable and cable unit duct shall be buried at
a minimum depth of 30 inches below finished grade.



      5.   Splicing Of 600 Volt Cable and Wire (In Light Standard).
This specification covers splicing of insulated electric cable and wire.
Compliance with the ASTM Standards is required, as cited by the ASTM
Designation Number.



      6.   Taped Splices. Taped Splices are only allowed with prior
approval from the Village Engineer, or his designee. A taped splice shall
mean a splice of pigtail construction made with a spring connector, rubber
tape, and plastic/vinyl tape according to the following descriptions and
construction methods:



         a.   Connector. The spring connectors shall be made of
spring steel and zinc plated, or similar corrosion-resistant coating. The
connectors shall employ the expandable spring principle and shall insure
positive mechanical and electrical connection under all temperature and load
conditions.



         b.   Rubber Tape. The rubber tape shall be of 0.75 inch
width and 0.030 inch thickness, ASTM D119 compliant.



         c.   Vinyl-Plastic Tape. The vinyl tape shall be similar
to that manufactured by 3M Corporation as SCOTCH Super 33+ Vinyl Plastic
Electrical Tape. The vinyl tape shall be 0.75 inch width and 0.0070 inch
thickness with an adhesive coating on one surface. The tape shall exhibit
properties per ASTM D1000 and tape flammability resistance shall be per ASTM
D568.



         d.   Alternate Taped Splice. A taped splice shall also
mean a splice of pigtail construction made with a split-bolt connector
wrapped in vinyl tape, followed by rubber tape, then finally with vinyl tape
using the following criteria:



            1.   There shall be no exposed or bare electrical
wire within the light standard, with the exception of the grounding cable.
All exposed cable wire within a splice shall be fully taped.



            2.   Sufficient torque shall be exerted on the
bolting assembly to ensure positive electrical connection under all
temperature and load conditions.



            3.   No insulating paint of any type shall be
allowed.



   G.   Vibratory Plowing. The cable duct shall be directly buried by a
vibratory plowing method to a minimum depth of 30 inches. Cable unit duct
shall not be buried in excess of 48 inches.



      1.   Directional Boring: All directional boring must be in
accordance with IDOT Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction,
Sections 810 and 1088.



   H.   Granular Trench Backfill. At locations indicated by the Village
Engineer or designee, a trench shall be constructed to accommodate the cable
duct or unit. The trench shall be backfilled with granular material in
accordance with Section 810 of the IDOT Standard Specification for Road and
Bridge Construction, latest edition. The contractor or developer shall
furnish the trench backfill material and shall appropriately dispose of all
surplus backfill material.



   I.   Construction Methods. The trench shall be excavated to a depth
no less than 30 inches and no greater than 48 inches, in a manner that
prevents cave-in. Excavated material shall be withdrawn and placed a
sufficient distance away to prevent excavated material from reentering the
trench. The trench width shall be at least six inches. Where the cable duct
enters the foundation or a rigid steel conduit, the bottom of the trench
shall be shaped so as to provide a smooth directional run of the cable duct.



      a.   The cable duct shall be placed in the bottom of the
trench only after all existing loose granular material has been removed, and
the trench area has been bedded with granular backfill material, as directed
by the Village Engineer or designee.



      b.   The trench shall be backfilled by placing granular
material in uniform layers no greater than six inches in depth (loose
un-compacted measure). The granular material in each deposited layer shall be
thoroughly in such a manner as to avoid damage to the cable duct and/or
wiring.



      c.   No granular material greater than two inches maximum
dimension shall be allowed in any layer of the backfill placement.



      d.   No sod, frozen material, or any foreign material which,
by decay or otherwise, would cause settlement, shall be placed as backfill
material. Undesirable "naturally occurring" materials such as, but not
limited to, topsoil, clay lumps, broken concrete, shall not exceed five
percent (5%) by weight in any one sample of backfill material.



      e.   Any material excavated from the trench may be used as
backfill provided it does not conflict with the above, and the material is
approved by the Village Engineer or designee. However, if the material in
question has been excavated from the roadway area, replacement material must
be granular trench backfill regardless of what material has been excavated
from the trench.



   J.   Acceptance of Street Lighting System.



      1.   Once the street lighting system has been initially
installed according to the specifications set forth in this Section, the
Village Engineer or designee shall, upon the request of the developer,
inspect the system and prepare a list of items for repair (punch list)
(commonly referred to as a "punch list"). The punch list shall be provided to
the developer or their designee. When the appropriate repairs have been made,
the Village shall accept the lighting system for luminaire maintenance only.
The developer remains responsible for the lighting system and shall therefore
be responsible for any damage due to construction, including cable hits and
pole knock-downs. The Village shall accept the lighting system when the
development is formally accepted in letter form, as written by the Director
of Development Services or designee.



      2.   During the punch list creation, the Village shall
recognize that one splice on each cable is necessary between the light
standard and the connection to the Commonwealth Edison electrical system.
This splice is allowed as a result of cable cutting associated with the
construction of the electrical system. If the cable has been cut for other
reasons (e.g. accidental cable hit) and thereby requires more than one splice
per cable run, the cable and duct shall be replaced in its entirety from the
Commonwealth Edison disconnect pedestal to the light standard, or from the
Commonwealth Edison disconnect pedestal, or transformer, to the lighting
controller.



(Amd. Ord. 5061 – 1/18/16)



















 







 



























































































 



SECTION 6-408. SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   A.   General.



      1.   All development, whether public or private, shall include
provisions for the construction of sanitary sewers and appurtenances designed
in accordance with this Section.  Developers shall use either the public
sewer system or an alternative sewer system, certified by the agency or
municipality with jurisdictional authority, provided that the development is
proximate to a transmission line that has adequate capacity to handle such
proposed development.



      2.   All sanitary sewer improvements shall be installed in
accordance with the material installation and testing requirements of the
"Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,"
Sixth Edition July 2009, unless otherwise modified in this Section. Sanitary
sewer improvements shall conform to all applicable requirements of the
current Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago
(“MWRDGC”) Watershed Management Ordinance (“WMO”).



   B.   Service Areas.  All sewers shall be designed to accommodate an
ultimate service area as defined by the Village Board of Trustees.



   C.   System Extension.  The size and location of proposed
extensions to the existing sanitary sewer system shall be as approved by the
Village Engineer.



   D.   Basic Design Standards.



      1.   Design Flows.



         a.   Design flows for single and multiple residential
development shall be based upon full development of the service area with the
population served, estimated as follows:



 

Type of Dwelling Unit
 
Number of Persons


Studio
 
1


1 Bedroom
 
2


2 Bedroom
 
3


3 Bedroom
 
4


4 Bedroom
 
5



 



   The maximum daily per capita design flow shall be calculated using the
formula:



            The maximum daily per capita design flow shall be
calculated using the formula:



               Q=500(P) 1/5



            Where Q* = maximum design flow, in gallons per capita
per day (“gpcpd”)



            P  = population served, in thousands



            *Not to exceed 400 gpcpd or be less than 250 gpcpd



            For undeveloped residential areas where the details
of future developments are not known, design population (P) per acre may be
estimated by the Village Engineer.



         b.   Design flows for non-residential developments shall
be based on full development of service area with the maximum daily per
capita design flow calculated as follows:



 

Type of Establishment
 
Unit
 
Average Flow in Gals/day/unit




Shopping Center
(without food service or laundries)
 
Employee
 
0.10 gal/sq. ft.


Store
 
Employee
(1 shift)
 
25


Office
 
Person
(1 shift)
 
25


Industrial
 
 
 
 


- with showers
 
Person
 
35


- without showers
 
Person
 
25


Restaurant
 
Meal Served
 
7


Theater
 
Per Seat
 
5


Hotel
 
Per Guest
 
100




 



*    Quantities are exclusive of process water requirements which must be
estimated and added.



         For non-residential developments where the details of the
development are not established, domestic design flows may be estimated by
the Village Engineer.  Such flow estimate shall not relieve the owner or
developer of the responsibility to provide adequate sanitary sewer capacity
in order to meet any and all future requirements within the development.



      2.   Sewer Design Hydraulics.



         a.   Sanitary gravity sewer mains shall be designed to
provide design flow capacity, without surcharging, using typical Manning's
formula:



                  Q = (A) 1.486 (R)2/3 (S)1/2



                       n



            Where Q= design flow in units of cubic feet per
second (“cfs”)



               A= area in units of square feet



               R= hydraulic radius in units of feet



               S= slope in units of feet per foot
(dimensionless)



               n= roughness coefficient, independent on
conduit material



         b.   Roughness coefficient utilized shall be as follows:



            1.   Concrete pipe - 0.013



            2.   Ductile iron - 0.014



            3.   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) - 0.009



         c.   Design mean velocity, flowing full, shall not be
less than two (2) feet per second or greater than fifteen (15) feet per
second.



         d.   Design flow shall include total allowable
infiltration at any point based on one hundred (100) gallons per inch of
diameter of sewer per mile per twenty-four (24) day at any time for any
section of the system.



         e.   Minimum and maximum design slopes are found in Part
F.3 and are per the MWRDGC WMO.



      3.   Minimum Sewer Size.



         a.   Minimum sanitary sewer main size shall be eight (8)
inch diameter.



         b.   Minimum building sanitary service sewer size shall
be six (6) inch diameter.



      4.   Alignment.  Sewers shall be laid straight in both
horizontal and vertical planes between manholes, unless otherwise approved by
the Village Engineer.



      5.   Sewer Size Changes.  Sanitary sewers of different
diameters shall join only at manholes.  The invert elevations shall be
adjusted to maintain a uniform energy gradient by matching the 0.8 depth
points of different diameters.



      6.   Sanitary Sewer Manholes.



         a.   Manholes shall be provided at the following
locations:



            1.   Termination of existing and future lines



            2.   Changes in direction, horizontal or vertical



            3.   Changes in shape or pipe size



            4.   Junctions with other sewers



            5.   Maximum manhole spacing shall be 400 feet.



         b.   Where possible, sanitary sewer facilities shall be
designed to avoid the use of a drop manhole. A drop manhole shall be provided
for manholes with any pipe having a difference in invert elevation more than
seventy-two (72) inches above the invert of the sewers leaving such manholes.
Small drops may be used in the event of utility conflicts, where approved by
the Village Engineer. The invert of the outlet pipe from a drop pipe must
match the springline elevation of the precast manhole bench. All drop
manholes must be precast with monolithic drop pipe assemblies.



         c.   Where flows and other conditions dictate, special
manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and constructed.



         d.   All manholes shall have a precast base.



      7.   Sewer Depth.  Sanitary sewers shall be constructed at a
minimum depth of eight (8) feet and shall provide an outfall for all sanitary
sewage within the existing and future ultimate service area, unless approved
by the Village Engineer. The eight foot depth is intended to eliminate the
service line separation deficiencies which commonly occur between sanitary
sewer placed at six feet deep and water mains at five feet deep.



      8.   Lift Stations.



         a.   Whenever possible, sanitary sewerage facilities
shall be appropriately designed per this Code section so as to avoid the
necessity of providing lift stations.



         b.   Lift station and force main designs shall be
submitted for review and approval to the Village Engineer, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago.



         c.   Lift stations shall be of the single wet well type
utilizing submersible pumps, and shall be comparable to other recently
constructed lift stations within the service area of the Village.



         d.   A stand-by internal combustion power source shall
be provided for lift stations. The power source shall be natural gas-fueled
for output rating less than 100 kW and shall be diesel-fueled for 100 kW and
above.



            As an alternate, the Village Engineer may allow a
dual connection to the power system as a method of providing stand-by power
in cases where such an alternate would provide an equal degree of
reliability, and also would provide an economy to the Village over the
service life of the alternate stand-by power system.



            All stand-by power sources must be installed within a
weatherproof building structure suitable to accommodate the power source,
controls, alarm system and all other required appurtenances.  The structure
must be large enough to allow for servicing of all equipment and must meet
all Village building codes.



         e.   Force mains shall be designed and constructed of
epoxy-lined ductile iron pipe or PVC pressure pipe ASTM 2241-SDR 21. A tracer
wire shall accompany all force main piping installations for the purpose of
future locating with an electronic locating device. A pipeline marker shall
be installed above the force main every 400 feet and at horizontal bends in
the pipe. The tracer wire shall terminate in an enclosure (typically a
pipeline marker) with sufficient wire slack for connecting to an electronic
locating device.



         f.   A compatible telemetered alarm system shall be
installed and connected to the Village's existing computerized reporting and
alarm panel.



         g.   The force main wet well shall be epoxy-lined after
installation of the well structure itself and associated piping.



      9.   Sewer Pipe Class.  Sewer pipe class shall be determined
by using ASTM rigid and flexible pipe design strength formulas.



      10.   Sewer Pipe Bedding.



         a.   Sewer pipe bedding shall, as a minimum, conform to
the requirements established in Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Construction in Illinois, July 2009, and/or latest revision.



         b.   Sewer pipe concrete cradle, arch, or full
encasement shall be constructed whenever dictated by trench or embankment
conditions as directed by the Village Engineer.



   E.   Material Specifications.  All sanitary sewer system elements
shall conform to the following specifications:



      1.   Sewer and Service Connection Pipe.



         a.   Reinforced concrete pipe - circular reinforcement,
minimum Class 3, ASTM C76, with epoxy lining, 18" diameter and larger.



         b.   Ductile iron pipe - ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C151),
minimum thickness, Class 52 per ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C150), calcium aluminate
cement-lined.



         c.   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) - ASTM D-3034, SDR 26 less
than 20 foot depth at final grade for sizes 6" through 12" inside diameter
and AWWA C905, DR 25 for sizes 14" through 36" inside diameter.



         d.   Polyvinyl Chloride Molecularly Oriented Pressure
Pipe (PVCO) - ASTM F1483, AWWA C909 Class 150 for sizes 6" through 12" I.D.
at 20 feet or greater depth.



         e.   High Density Polyethylene Pipe (HDPE) for force
main only - AWWA C906.



      2.   Sewer and Service Connection Pipe Joints.



         a.   Reinforced concrete pipe - ASTM C443.



         b.   Ductile iron pipe - ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111).



         c.   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) - ASTM D-3212.



         d.   Polyvinyl Chloride Molecularly Oriented Pressure
Pipe (PVCO) - Gaskets meeting ASTM F477, Joints meeting ASTM D-3139.



      3.   Sewer and Service Connection Pipe Fittings.



         a.   Ductile iron - ANSI A21.10 (AWWA C110).



         b.   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) - ASTM D-3034.



         c.   Polyvinyl Chloride Molecularly Oriented Pressure
Pipe (PVCO) requires ductile iron fittings meeting the specifications above.



         d.   



 

Materials
 
Joints


1.   Reinforced Concrete Sewer Pipe
(A.S.T.M. C-76)
 
A.S.T.M. C-361


2.   Ductile Iron Pipe ANSI A 21.51
(AWWA 151-75)
 
ANSI 21.11
(AWWA C111)


3.   6" diameter Sanitary Sewer Pipe
ABS SDR 23.5 (services only)
 
ASTM D-2751


4.   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
(ASTM D-3034) (SDR 26)
 
ASTM D-3212



 



   Nothing herein shall constitute or imply an endorsement by the Village
of any one material over another or an opinion by the Village regarding
equality or superiority of the performance qualities of any of the above
materials.



      4.   Casing Pipes (Exhibit PC-01).  Bituminous coated steel
pipe - ASTM A120, 0.375" minimum thickness. All casing pipes shall utilize
appropriate stainless steel spacers, per manufacturer’s specifications, to
support the sewer pipe as directed by the Village Engineer.



      5.   Manholes (Sanitary Manhole Standard Details SS-01, SS-02,
SS-03).



         a.   Precast Reinforced Concrete. ASTM C478 and ASTM
C443 conforming to the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, Sixth Edition July 2009 and/or latest revision.



         b.   Sizes:



            1.   For sewer eighteen (18) inch diameter or
less, manhole shall have a forty-eight (48) inch inside diameter.



            2.   For sewer twenty-one (21) inch to thirty-six
(36) inch diameter, manhole shall have a sixty (60) inch inside diameter.



            3.   For sewer greater than thirty-six (36) inch
diameter, manhole shall be a minimum of seventy-two (72) inches inside
diameter and have an offset riser cone section of forty-eight (48) inch
inside diameter.



         c.   Adjustment.



            1.   Any frame adjustment shall use at least one
rubber adjustment riser (Infra-Riser brand or approved equal) to establish
the final seating surface of the structure frame. Any structure located
within the paved roadway shall require the use of at least of one (1) rubber
riser, and, if necessary, said riser shall be of the tapered wedge-type in
order to match the proposed cross-slope of the pavement surface.



            2.   No more than two (2) rubber adjustment
risers, with six (6) inches total maximum adjusted height, shall be allowed
per structure.



            3.   A frame adjustment less than three (3) inches
in height shall consist of only rubber riser(s). The minimum thickness of a
rubber riser shall be one (1) inch.



            4.   A frame adjustment greater than three (3)
inches in height shall use a minimum three (3) inch precast concrete riser
for the lower riser, and the final riser shall be rubber.



         d.   Sealing. All mating surfaces of concrete adjustment
riser(s), structure sections, and frames shall be sealed with a mastic
sealant. No concrete mortar or epoxy mortar shall be allowed as a sealant for
adjustment risers, structure sections or frames. If multiple adjustment
risers are required, a continuous application of sealant shall be applied
between each unit. Rubber adjustment risers must be sealed with an approved
sealant such as XSeal brand hydrophobic non-shrinking polyurethane sealant,
or approved equal.



         e.   Pipe and Frame Seals.  All pipe connection
openings shall be precast with resilient rubber water tight pipe to manhole
sleeves or rubber boot seals. 



         f.   Connections. All sewer connections to existing
manholes shall be "core-drilled" and rubber boot seals installed.



         g.   Bottom Sections.  All manhole bottom sections
shall be monolithically precast including bases and invert flowlines.



         h.   Drop Manholes. Drop manhole assemblies shall be
monolithically precast with manhole barrel section. Refer to Drop Manhole
Standard Details. SS-02, SS-03.



      6.   Castings.



         a.   Manhole Frame & Cover. Manhole frame and cover - 7"
East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. #1022Z1 with 1020A HD GS lid embossed with
“SANITARY SEWER” and “VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK,” as shown on Sanitary
Manhole Frame and Cover - Standard Detail No. SS-04.



         b.   Pick Hole. All lids shall be cast with a concealed
pick hole.



         c.   Water Tightness. Where necessary to prevent entry
of overland flow, a water tight frame and self-sealing lid shall be used, 7"
East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. #1022Z1 PT4 (4 bolt lock down) frame and 1020A
HD GS lid embossed with “SANITARY SEWER” and “VILLAGE OF ORLAND
PARK,” Sanitary Manhole Frame and Cover - Standard Detail No. SS-04 or as
required by the Village Engineer.  (Ord. 2570 – 5/2/94)



   F.   Design Flows.



      1.   Average Daily Flow for Sanitary Sewer. Average daily flow
for sanitary sewer shall be 100 GPCPD.  Maximum design flow for sanitary
sewer lines shall be determined by one of the following equations indicated
below; provided, however, that the maximum design flow for sewer laterals
need not exceed 400 GPCPD and the maximum design flow for sewer mains and
trunks shall not be less than 250 GPCPD.



   Equation No. 1:   Q   =   500
                  P 1/5



   Equation No. 2 :   Q   =   100(1+14)
                    (4+P)



   Where:      Q = Maximum design flow in GPCPD



         P = Population in thousands



      2.   Minimum Size.  No public sewer conveying raw sewage
shall be less than 8 inches in diameter.



      3.   Design Slopes.  Minimum and maximum slopes are tabulated
below.  The slopes are those that produce minimum and maximum velocities of
2.0 ft/sec. and 15.0 ft/sec. respectively, based on Kutter's formula, with n
= 0.013 and the pipe flowing full, unless approved by the Village Engineer.



 

Sewer Size
(Inches)
 
Minimum Slope (Percent)
 
Maximum Slope (Percent)




8
 
0.40
 
22.0


10
 
0.28
 
15.0


12
 
0.22
 
11.0


14
 
0.17
 
9.0


15
 
0.15
 
8.3


16
 
0.14
 
7.8


18
 
0.12
 
6.5


21
 
0.10
 
5.1


24
 
0.08
 
4.2




 



   G.   Protection of Water Mains.   Water mains shall be protected in
accordance with the applicable Illinois Pollution Control Board Regulations
and the Illinois Environmental Protec-tion Agency, Division of Public Water
Supplies, Technical Policy Statements.  Wherever the sanitary sewer main,
building service sewer, or any storm drain crosses a water main, a minimum
eighteen (18) inches vertical separation shall be provided between the top of
the lower pipe and the bottom of the upper pipe.  If an eighteen (18) inch
vertical separation cannot be maintained, the sanitary or storm sewer shall
be constructed of watermain quality pipe, for a minimum distance of ten (10)
feet on each side of the water main.  If storm or sanitary sewer crosses
above a watermain and an 18" clearance cannot be maintained, both sewer and
water pipes must be of the same pipe material as the watermain.



   H.   Sewers in Relation to Streams.



      1.   Location of Sewers on Streams.



         a.   Cover Depth.  The top of all sewers entering or
crossing streams shall be at a sufficient depth below the natural bottom of
the stream bed to protect the sewer line.  In general, the following cover
requirements shall be met:



            1.   One (1) foot of cover is required where the
sewer is located in rock.



            2.   Three (3) feet of cover is required in other
material.  In major streams, more than three feet of cover may be required.



            3.   In paved stream channels, the top of the
sewer line should be placed one (1) foot below the bottom of the channel
pavement.  Concrete encasement may be required.



   Note:      Less cover will be approved only if the proposed sewer
crossing will not interfere with the future improvements to the channel
stream.



         b.   Horizontal Location.  Sewers located along streams
shall be located outside of the stream bed and sufficiently separated from
the stream bank to provide for future remediation and to prevent siltation
pollution during construction.



         c.   Structures.  The sewer outfalls, headwalls,
manholes, gate boxes, or other structures shall be located so they do not
interfere with the free discharge of flood flows of the stream. Watertight
covers per Section 6-408.E.6.c shall be required for manholes set at
elevations below flood hazard elevations.



         d.   Alignment.  Sewers crossing streams should be
designed to cross the stream as nearly perpendicular to the stream flow as
possible and shall be designed without change in grade.  Sewer systems shall
be designed to minimize the number of stream crossings.



      2.   Construction Requirements.



         a.   Materials and Backfill.  Sewers entering or
crossing streams shall be constructed of calcium aluminate cement lined
ductile iron pipe with mechanical joints; otherwise they shall be constructed
so they will remain watertight and free from changes in alignment and
grade.  The backfill used in the trench shall be coarse aggregate, gravel,
or other materials which will not cause siltation, pipe damage during
placement, or chemical corrosion in place.



         b.   Siltation and Erosion.  Construction methods that
will minimize siltation and erosion shall be employed as stated in Land
Development Code article 6-411 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control.  The
design engineer shall include in the project specifications the methods to be
employed in the construction of sewers in or near streams to provide adequate
control of siltation and erosion.



      3.   Aerial Crossings.



         a.   Structural Support.  Support for all joints shall
be provided in pipes utilized in aerial crossings.  The supports shall be
designed to prevent frost heave, overturning and settlement.



         b.   Freeze and Expansion Protection.   Protection
against freezing shall be provided.  This may be accomplished through the
use of insulation, and increased slope expansion jointing shall be provided
between the aerial and buried sections of the sewer line.



         c.   Flood Clearance.  For aerial stream crossings the
impact of flood waters and debris shall be considered.  The bottom of the
pipe should be placed no lower than the elevation of the 100 year (1% annual
chance of occurrence) flood.



      4.   Inverted Siphons.  Inverted siphons shall have not less
than two (2) barrels with a minimum pipe size of six (6) inches and shall be
provided with the necessary appurtenances for convenient flushing and
maintenance.  The inlet and outlet structures shall have adequate clearances
for cleaning, sufficient head shall be provided and pipe sizes shall be
selected to ensure velocities of at least three (3) ft/sec. for average
flows.  The inlet and outlet structures shall be designed so that normal
flow is diverted to one (1) barrel such that either barrel may be taken out
of service for cleaning.



   I.   Handling of Pipe.  Sanitary sewer pipe shall be handled in a
manner that will prevent damage prior to installation.  Damaged or defective
material on the job site shall be rejected and replaced to the satisfaction
of the Village Engineer.  Methods of construction conducive to the damage of
sewer pipe shall be corrected when called to the attention of the
contractor.  All pipe and fittings shall be examined by the contractor above
grade before placement in the trench.



   J.   Laying of Pipe.



      1.   Sanitary Sewer Pipe.  Sanitary sewer pipe shall be laid
true to line and grade as set forth in the Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, Sixth Edition (July 2009), and/or
latest revision.  Dirt or other foreign material shall be prevented from
entering the pipe or pipe joint during handling or laying operations and any
pipe or fitting that has been installed with dirt or foreign material in it
shall be removed, cleaned, and relaid.  At times when pipe laying is not in
progress, the open end of the installed pipe shall be closed with a water
tight plug or by other means approved by the Village Engineer to ensure
absolute cleanliness and avoidance of extraneous flows inside the pipe.



      2.   Laying of Pipe on Curves.  The curvature of sanitary
sewers is not allowed unless, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, special
circumstances dictate otherwise.  Pipe required to be laid on curved
alignment shall be joined in straight alignment and then deflected, joint by
joint.  Special care shall be taken in blocking the pipe, and in no case
shall the degree of deflection exceed the manufacturer's recommendations for
the respective pipe size, material and barrel length.



      3.   Sanitary Sewer Services.  (Sanitary Service Riser SS-05
and SS-05-20):



         Sanitary sewer services shall be a minimum of six (6)
inches in diameter and connected to the sewer main with a manufactured wye at
a minimum angle of thirty (30) degrees and a maximum angle of forty-five (45)
degrees.  Sanitary sewer services shall be extended to the property line or
building at a minimum gradient of one (1) percent.  Sanitary sewer service
connections to sewer mains twelve (12) feet or more in depth shall be
constructed with a six (6) inch tee and riser and backfilled with select
granular material or encased in concrete at the option of the Village
Engineer.  On a temporary basis, sanitary services may be terminated with a
manufactured plug in which case the location shall be staked and an accurate
record kept of the stub distance from the nearest downstream manhole along
the sewer main.  Sanitary sewer service connections to existing sewer mains
shall be made with a dedicated tapping machine and the saddle shall be
tightly secured to the existing sanitary sewer.



      4.   Depth of Pipe Cover. All pipe shall be laid to a minimum
depth of eight (8) feet measured from the proposed ground surface to the top
of the pipe barrel unless specifically allowed otherwise under special
circumstances by the Village Engineer.



      5.   Pipe Bedding. (Trench Section Sanitary Sewer Detail No.
SS-06). Crushed gravel or crushed stone - ASTM C33. The only gradation
allowed shall be 100% retained on a 3/8" sieve and 100% passing 3/4" sieve.
Granular pipe bedding material or granular cradle shall be required on all
sanitary sewers installed in the Village. Granular pipe bedding shall be a
minimum of four (4) inches in earth excavation and a minimum of six (6)
inches in rock excavation. The trench shall be backfilled with granular
material to six (6) inches over the top of the pipe. The granular material
shall conform in gradation to Type B, of the Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, Sixth Edition (July 2009)
and/or latest revision.



      6.   Selection of Granular Backfill. All trenches for sanitary
sewers falling under and within two feet of a proposed or existing paved
surface shall be backfilled with select granular material conforming to only
gradation Types A or B as listed in the Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, Sixth Edition (July 2009) and/or latest
revision. Selected granular backfill shall be placed in uniform layers not
exceeding six (6) inches (loose measure) and compacted with mechanical
equipment to 90% of maximum density in accordance with AASHTO-99.



   K.   Installation Requirements.



      1.   No connection of any section of new sanitary sewer to an
existing Village sanitary sewer is allowed until the Village approves the new
sewer(s) for service.



      2.   Sewer system design and construction shall in all
respects be in accordance with the regulations of the MWRDGC and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.  No construction shall commence until
evidence of the approved permits from these agencies is filed with the
Village Engineer.



      3.   The installation of sanitary sewer and appurtenances
shall conform to the requirements of this Section and the following:



         a.   Reinforced concrete pipe - Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, Sixth Edition (July 2009)
and/or latest revision.



         b.   Ductile iron pipe and fittings - AWWA C600



         c.   PVC pipe and fittings - ASTM D-2321



      4.   The installation of sewer service connections shall
conform to the requirements of this Section .



      5.   Where the installation of a grease separator is required,
the basin shall be exterior to the building where possible. However, should
the establishment prefer to have an internal grease basin, it will be allowed
if ample basin capacity can be provided. Basin capacity shall be dictated by
applicable plumbing code(s).



      6.   The contractor shall keep a record of the location of all
sewer services by measurement to the nearest downstream manhole.  Such
records shall be delivered to the Village Engineer at the completion of the
work.



   L.   Inspection and Test.



      1.   Cleaning.  All sewers and appurtenances shall be high
pressure cleaned prior to inspection and testing required by this Section.



      2.   Visual Inspection.



         a.   All sewer and appurtenances shall be visually
inspected by representatives of the developer during and following
construction.



         b.   Sewers designed to be straight between manholes
will be tested for straightness by flashing a light from manhole to manhole,
lamping or by other suitable means.



      3.   T.V. Inspections.



         a.   Upon completion of construction and prior to
initiation of the maintenance guarantee period, a T.V. inspection shall be
performed.  Video and a written report of all television inspections shall
be provided to the Village prior to the initial acceptance provided for by
this Section.  The form of the report and video format shall be approved by
the Village Engineer.



         b.   Fees and costs connected with T.V. inspections
shall be paid for by the developer or owner.



         c.   All dips, cracks, leaks, improperly sealed joints,
and departures from approved grades and alignment shall be repaired by
removing and replacing the involved sections of pipe and manholes.



         d.   All defects and corrective work required as the
result of T.V. inspection shall be performed by the developer without
delay.  Upon completion thereof, the sewer shall be retested and such
further inspection made as may appear warranted.



      4.   Infiltration Testing.



         a.   It is the intent of this Section to secure a sewer
system with a minimum amount of infiltration.  The maximum allowable
infiltration shall not exceed one hundred (100) gallons per inch of diameter
of sewer per mile per twenty-four (24) hour day at any time for any section
of the system.  The joints shall be tight and any joint with visible leakage
or leakage in excess of that specified above, shall be repaired at the
developer's expense.



         b.   The repair must be of a permanent nature and of a
quality equal to new construction in conformance with the applicable
specifications.



         c.   Immediately after backfilling, the entire length of
the sewer trench, including stubs, shall be inundated to normal ground water
level or eighteen (18) inches above the top of sewer pipe, whichever is
higher.  At that time, infiltration tests shall be made to determine
compliance with the allowable infiltration criteria.  To measure the amount
of infiltration, the contractor shall furnish, install, and maintain a
V-notch shape crested weir in a metal frame tightly secured at the lower end
of each sewer test section as directed by the Village Engineer.  The Village
Engineer shall check the infil-tration by measuring the flow over such
weirs.  When infiltration is demon-strated to be within the allowable
limits, the contractors shall remove such weirs.



      5.   Exfiltration Testing.  If during the construction of the
sewer system, the Village Engineer determines that it is impractical to
obtain a proper infiltration test, then a test for watertightness shall be
made by bulkheading the manhole at the lower end of the section under test
and filling the sewer with water to eighteen (18) inches above the top of the
sewer in the manhole at the upper end of the section.  Leakage will then be
calculated as the measured amount of water added to maintain the above
described level at a maximum allowable exfiltration rate of one hundred (100)
gallons per inch of diameter of sewer per mile per twenty-four (24) hour day
at any time for any section of the system.



      6.   Air Testing.  All Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) and Polyvinyl
Chloride Molecularly Oriented Pressure Pipe (PVCO) will require low pressure
air testing meeting ASTM F1417. The Village Engineer may require air testing
for other pipe materials in accordance with ASTM C828.



      7.   Deflection Testing.



         a.   All Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) and Polyvinyl Chloride
Molecularly Oriented Pressure Pipe (PVCO) require deflection testing. The 5%
deflection test for pipe sizes six (6) to fifteen (15) inches in diameter is
to be run using a nine-arm mandrel having a diameter equal to 95% of the base
diameter of the pipe as established in ASTM D-3034. For pipe sizes eighteen
(18) to twenty-seven (27) inches in diameter, the nine-arm mandrel size shall
be 95% of the inside diameter and wall thickness dimensions shown in Table 1
of ASTM F-679, latest issue. The test shall be performed without mechanically
pulling devices.



         b.   The individual lines to be tested shall be so
tested no sooner than 30 days after they have been installed.



         c.   Wherever possible and practical, the testing shall
initiate at the downstream lines and proceed towards the upstream lines.



         d.   No pipe shall exceed a deflection of 5%. Where
deflection is found to be in excess of 5% of the original pipe diameter, the
contractor shall excavate to the point of excess deflection and carefully
compact around the point where excess deflection was found. The line shall
then be retested for deflection. If the deflected pipe fails to return to the
original size (inside diameter) after the second test, the line shall be
replaced accordingly to the standards set forth in this Section.



   M.   Exhibits.  Standard Detail Exhibits labeled SS-01, SS-02,
SS-03, SS-04, SS-05, SS-05-20, SS-06 and PC-01 are typical specifications of
Village sanitary sewer standards that shall be applied to any improvements
required by these regulations.



   N.   Acceptance of Sanitary Sewer System.  (Ord. 2570 – 5/2/94)



      1.   Once the sanitary sewer system has been completed
according to the specifications set forth in this Section, the Development
Services Department shall, upon the request of the developer, inspect the
system and prepare a list of items for repair (punch list).  The list shall
be sent to the developer and when repairs have been made, the Village shall
accept the system for operational use only.  During the time after the
acceptance by the Village for maintenance, the developer shall be responsible
for any deficiencies identified within the system, including but not limited
to sewer blockages, adjustment to manhole frames and leaking joints.  Upon
reaching approximately eighty (80) percent development of building
construction, the Development Services Department will reinspect the sanitary
sewer system for any existing deficiencies and prepare a list of items for
repair.  The list shall be given or sent to the developer and when the
repairs have been made to the satisfaction of the Village, the system shall
be formally accepted by the Village in letter form sent to the developer.



      2.   All construction shall meet the requirements and
acceptance procedures of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago prior to the acceptance by the Village. (Amd. Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



Standard Detail Exhibits (pdf)



SECTION 6-409. STORM SEWERS AND STORM WATER DETENTION.



(Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99)



   A.   General. 



      1.   All development, whether public or private, shall include
provisions for the construction of storm sewers and appurtenances designed in
accordance with this Section.  Developers shall use either the public sewer
system or an alternative sewer system, certified by an agency or municipality
with jurisdictional authority, provided that the development is proximate to
a transmission line that has adequate capacity to handle such proposed
development.



      2.   All development designated by the Director of Engineering
shall include provisions for storm water holding facilities designed in
accordance with this Section.  The storm water holding facilities should
incorporate multiple uses where practicable.



   The detention (dry pond), retention (wet pond), or depressional storage
areas that are to be used as part of the drainage system for a property shall
be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program.  Any
eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the
applicant before project completion in order to maintain the design volume of
the facilities.  (Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03)



      3.   Storm sewer systems shall be installed in accordance with
Section 600 of the "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction," and "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois," latest edition, unless otherwise modified in this
Section.



      4.   Stormwater system designs should be in conformance with
Illinois EPA stormwater permitting requirements.  In particular, a state
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit for
Construction Site Activities is required for land disturbances of five or
more acres.  Permit requirements for a "stormwater pollution prevention
plan" specifically reference the need for stormwater detention, vegetated
swales and natural depressions, infiltration measures, and velocity
dissipation devices to control runoff pollutants and to maintain pre
development hydro logic conditions.



      5.   All dry ponds should be required to have a minimum of a
6" under drain.  (3837 - 12/1/03)



      6.   In wet ponds natural landscaping is required to be
planted at not less than 5 feet wide at the normal water line for a 4:1
slope.  (3837 - 12/1/03)



   B.   Service Areas.  All storm sewers, streams or channels shall be
designed to accommodate all areas which naturally flow to the area of the
development and also any additional areas which are planned to contribute to
the drainage area as identified by the Director of Engineering.  The
drainage areas as designated shall be designed to not adversely impact the
capacity of the downstream system.



   C.   System Extension.  The location of proposed extensions to the
existing storm sewer system shall be approved by the Director of Engineering.



   D.   Submittal Requirements



      1.   Drainage Plan.  Each applicant shall submit the
following information as required by the Director of Engineering, depending
on development size.  Properties smaller than 10 acres shall submit the
Basic Drainage Plan.  Properties larger than 10 acres shall comply with the
submittal requirements of both the Basic Drainage Plan and the Advanced
Drainage Plan. The applicant shall have a registered professional engineer
certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, and
construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the drainage
plan.  The following information shall be submitted for both existing and
proposed property conditions.



      2.   Topographic Map:   A topographic survey of the property
at one foot contours under existing and proposed conditions, and areas
upstream and downstream, necessary to determine off site im pacts of the
proposed drainage plan.  The map shall be keyed to a consistent datum
specified by the Director of Engineering.



      3.   Basic Drainage Plan:   Mapping and descriptions, where
relevant, of existing and proposed drainage system features of the property
and immediate vicinity including:



         a.   The banks and centerline of streams and channels;



         b.   shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins;



         c.   the limits of wetland areas;



         d.   any designated natural areas;



         e.   any proposed environmental mitigation features;



         f.   farm drains and tiles;



         g.   sub watershed boundaries within the property;



         h.   watershed soils classifications;



         i.   the property's location within the larger watershed;



         j.   location, size and slope of stormwater conduits and
drainage swales;



         k.   depressional storage areas;



         l.   delineation of upstream and downstream drainage
features and watersheds which might be affected by the development;



         m.   detention and/or retention facilities;  (Ord. 3837
- 12/1/03)



         n.   roads and streets and associated stormwater inlets;



         o.   base flood elevation, and regulatory floodway where
identified for the property; and



         p.   basis of design for the final drainage network
components.



      4.   Advanced Drainage Plan: The same information as required
under the Basic Drainage Plan is required for properties larger than 10 acres
along with the following additional information for the minor drainage
system's design runoff event and the 100 year runoff event of critical
duration:



         a.   Elevations and maps of 100 year flooding;



         b.   cross section data for open channel flow paths and
designated overland flow paths;



         c.   direction of storm flows;



         d.   flow rates and velocities at representative points
in the drainage system; and



         e.   a statement by the design engineer of the drainage
system's provisions for  handling events greater than the 100 year's runoff.



   E.   Basic Design Standards. The following criteria should be used
in evaluating and designing the drainage system.  The underlying objective
is to provide capacity to pass the 10 year peak flow in the minor drainage
system and an overland flow path for flows in excess of the  design
capacity.  Whenever practicable, all areas of the property must be provided
an overland flow path that will pass the 100 year flow at a stage at least 1
foot below the lowest  grade adjacent to the foundation in the vicinity of
the flow path.  Overland flow paths designed  to handle flows in excess of
the minor drainage system capacity shall be provided drainage  easements. 
Street ponding and flow depths shall not exceed curb heights by more than one
inch, except as allowed by the Director of Engineering.



      1.   Drainage Area.  The drainage area, in acres, used for
design shall be the entire watershed service area tributary to the point in
the drainage system under consideration.  It shall include any tributary
service area that may be outside the development. 



      2.   Rainfall Intensity.  The rainfall data source for
computations of hydraulic and hydrologic analysis shall be based upon
Frequency Distributions and Hydroclimatic Characteristics of Heavy Rainstorms
in Illinois (Bulletin 70  State of Illinois (Northeast Section)), known
commonly as Bulletin 70. The average rainfall intensity used for design shall
be selected from a Rainfall Intensity  Duration curve, as follows:



         a.   Underground storm sewer water conduits and swales
shall be determined from the ten (10) year storm event curve.



         b.   Surface streams and open channels shall be
determined from the one hundred (100) year storm event curve.



         c.   The elapsed duration time used in selecting a
specific point on the rainfall intensity curve shall be equal to the time of
concentration, defined as inlet time, plus the time of flow between the most
distant inlet and the point in the system under consideration.



      3.   Storm Sewer, Stream Improvement and Open Channel
Hydraulics.



         a.   Storm sewers, stream improvements and open channels
shall be designed to provide design flow capacity using Manning's formula:



            Q = (A)(1.486)  (R 2/3 )(S 1/2 )
                     n



         b.   Roughness coefficients (n) shall be as follows:



            1.   Concrete pipe  0.013



            2.   Plastic pipe (PVC)(HDPE)  0.010



            3.   Open channels concrete or asphalt lining 
0.013



            4.   Open channels sodded  0.020



            5.   Improved stream  0.025



            6.   Natural stream  0.050



         c.   Design mean velocity shall not exceed the following:



            1.   Storm sewers  ten (10) feet per second.



            2.   Open channels, concrete or asphalt lining 
ten (10) feet per second.



            3.   Open channels, sodded  five (5) feet per
second.



            4.   Storm sewer, including manholes, shall be
constructed so that infiltration shall not exceed thirteen hundred (1300)
gallons per inch diameter of sewer per mile per twenty four (24) hour day at
any time for any section of the system.



      4.   Natural Stream Channels.  Natural stream channels that
are designated by the Board of Trustees for the Village of Orland Park shall
be retained in lieu of either constructed open channels or enclosed storm
sewer pipes.  Natural stream channels shall be regulated by provisions in
Section 6-411 and Section 6-412 of these regulations.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 –
7/16/18)



      5.   Manmade Open Channels.



         a.   Constructed open channels that are not designated
as natural stream channels, and that will be draining an area eighty (80)
acres or larger, may be provided on an optional basis in lieu of an enclosed
storm sewer pipe.



         b.   All constructed open channels that are not
designated as natural stream channels located within a development or located
on public property or easements adjacent to the development and other open
channels within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the development, shall be
improved as follows:



            1.   Maximum slopes shall be six (6) horizontal to
one (1) vertical.



            2.   An eight (8) foot wide bituminous concrete
(IDOT  Class I) pathway, suitable for use by maintenance vehicles, with a
minimum thickness of six (6) inches, shall be constructed a minimum of two
(2) feet above the normal water level.  The far edge of the pathway shall be
a minimum of one (1) foot within the easement running along the open
channel.  The near edge of the pathway shall not be more than ten (10) feet
from the edge of the normal water line.



            3.   A six (6) inch underdrain shall be
constructed with a minimum cover of six (6) inches along the flowline of all
open channels.



            4.   An easement for drainage, access and
municipal utilities, shall be provided along the open channel with a width
adequate to include the area covered by an one hundred (100) year storm.



      6.   Swales.  All swales shall be sodded and limited to a
maximum water depth of twelve (12) inches. The maximum water depth shall be a
minimum of one foot (1') below the lowest opening of an adjacent foundation
along the flow path.  Maximum side slopes of swales shall not be steeper
than six (6) horizontal to one (1) vertical.



      7.   Alignment.  Sewer shall be laid straight in both
horizontal and vertical planes between manholes, unless otherwise approved by
the Director of Engineering.



      8.   Pipe Design Flows.  Unless otherwise approved by the
Director of Engineering, storm sewer pipes and open channels shall be
designed to carry storm water runoff flows determined by the Rational Method
using the formula: 



            Q = C i A



         Where  Q =  runoff flow in units of cubic feet per second.



            C =  runoff coefficient, characteristic of tributary
drainage area in dimensionless units.



            A =  tributary drainage area in units of acres.



            i =  average rainfall intensity in units of inches
per hour.



         a.   The runoff coefficient, C, is the ratio of runoff
to rainfall and shall be assumed as follows:



            1.   All impervious areas (paved or hard surfaced
areas of all types and buildings, inclusive of, but not limited to, patios,
garage walks, stoned landscaped areas and pools), C shall equal 0.95.



            2.   All pervious areas (all areas not classified
as impervious), C shall equal 0.45.



            3.   All bodies of water (wetlands, lakes,
streams, and depressional storage areas), C shall equal 1.0.



         b.   The runoff coefficient used in design shall be the
weighted average for the  proposed tributary watershed.



         c.   Within a development, the runoff coefficient shall
be computed assuming ultimate develop ment.  Where ultimate development
plans are not available at the time of the design of the storm sewer system,
a runoff coefficient shall be selected by the Director of Engineering, based
on the zoning classification, knowledge of the specific development and the
previous experience of the Village with similar developments. The area within
the watershed, but outside the development, shall be computed for existing
conditions, the runoff coefficient shall be approved by the Director of
Engineering.



      9.   Minimum Sewer Size.



         a.   Storm sewer serving inlets shall not be less than
ten (10) inch diameter.



         b.   Storm sewer serving sump pumps and roof drains
shall not be less than eight  (8) inch diameter.



         c.   Storm sewer service lines shall not be less than
four (4) inch diameter.



      10.   Sewer Size Changes.  Storm sewer of different diameters
shall join only at structures.  The invert elevations shall be adjusted to
maintain a uniform energy gradient by matching the 0.8 depth points of the
different diameter.



      11.   Storm Water Inlets.



         a.   Surface drainage inlets shall be provided so that
surface water is not carried across any street intersections or parking lot
drives.  Surface runoff shall not extend a distance of more than four
hundred (400) feet along the surface of the ground and shall not build up a
flow of more than two (2) cubic feet per  second (with no more than 1.0' of
head) in a ten (10) year storm before being intercepted by drainage inlets. 
Inlets shall discharge into storm sewers which shall not discharge into side
lot or rear lot drainage ditches.  Inlets shall be provided at all low
points.



         b.   Rear yard inlets having a minimum depth of two (2)
feet shall be provided where necessary.



      12.   Storm Sewer Manholes.



         a.   Manholes shall be located as follows:



            1.   At the termination of all sewers which do not
terminate at an inlet.



            2.   Changes in direction, horizontal or vertical.



            3.   Changes in shape or pipe size.



            4.   Junctions with other storm sewers.



            5.   Access spacing shall be:



 

Sewer Pipe Size
(in inches)
 
Maximum Interval
(in feet)


6 - 24
 
350


27 - 36
 
400


42 - 54
 
500


60 or larger
 
1000



 



         b.   Where flows and other conditions dictate, special
manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and constructed.



      13.   Sewer Depth.  Storm sewers shall be constructed
sufficiently deep so as to prevent freezing and provide an outfall for all
storm water within the ultimate service area, both existing and future.  The
minimum cover shall be three (3) feet.



      14.   Sewer Pipe Class.  Sewer pipe class shall be determined
based upon the specifications of Section 603 of the "Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction," latest edition.



      15.   Sewer Pipe Bedding.



         a.   Sewer pipe bedding shall, as a minimum, conform to
the requirements shown on Exhibit No. SS 07.



         b.   Sewer pipe concrete cradle, arch, or fill
encasement shall be constructed whenever dictated by trench or embankment
conditions.



      16.   Building Drainage.



         a.   The point of discharge of sump pumps shall be
connected to storm sewer system for each building served, as shown on the
Engineering Plan, unless approved otherwise.  Storm sewer service lines from
that point shall be provided to the storm sewer system.



         b.   Lots shall be graded in such a manner as to cause
positive drainage away from the building to lot line swales or ditches, which
shall merge as quickly as possible and then discharge into a storm sewer. 
The route of flow of storm water away from each building into swales, ditches
and storm sewers to where it leaves the site shall be shown on the
Engineering Plan.



         c.   No lot shall be allowed to divert, modify or change
grade elevation from an approved engineering drawing without approval from
the Director of Engineering.



      17.   Vacant Lot Drainage.  Positive drainage shall be
established for each lot whether or not it is the owner's intention to
construct a building on that lot. 



      18.   Storm Water Detention Facilities.



         a.   Detention Basin (dry pond) Outlet Design: 
Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall
be evaluated when designing the outlet.  (Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03)



         b.   The volume of detention facilities shall be
determined as follows: the  maximum volume of storm water generated by the
100 year frequency storm, less the volume of storm water released through the
outlet pipe at the calculated peak of the 100 year frequency storm.  The
design maximum storage to be provided in a detention basin shall be based on
the runoff from the 100  year, 24 hour event and reservoir routing or
equal.  Detention storage shall be computed using hydrograph methods as
described in this section.  The Director of Engineering may designate an
alternative design computation for detention storage.



         c.   The outlet pipe(s) shall be designed to allow a
maximum discharge of no more than 0.15 cubic feet per second per gross acre
of development for a 24 hour 100 year storm event and shall include design to
allow a maximum discharge of no more than 0.04 cubic feet per second per
gross acre of development for a 24 hour 2 year storm event.  Where a single
pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall
have a minimum diameter of 4 inches.  If this minimum size permits release
rates greater than those specified in this section, and regional detention is
not a practical alternative, the Director of Engineering may require an
alternative outlet design which shall utilize self cleaning flow restrictors.
If the receiving storm  system is determined to be unable to accept the
above calculated discharge rate, a lesser discharge rate may be required.



         d.   In order to prevent soil erosion and weed problems,
"dry" detention basins must be landscaped including the establishment of a
groundcover over all unpaved areas through sodding of native natural growth
plant material or material as designated by the Director of Development
Services.  Such groundcover shall not be of a plant type which can be
carried by water plow to aggressively invade other downstream lands or
properties, and crown vetch shall be prohibited.  Native natural plant
growth may comprise a variety of techniques that employ in concert according
to the needs of the site.  Some of these include biologs, aquatic plants,
wattles, natural native grasses, tri lok, and vegetated geogrids.  Detention
Basins shall be designed so that the portion of their bottom area which is
intended to be dry shall have standing water no longer than seventy two (72)
hours for all runoff events less than the 100 year frequency storm.



            If detention facilities are proposed, they shall also
be reviewed by the Director of Recreation and Parks for usability as active
recreational areas during dry weather conditions.  Additional underdraining
may be required.  Pipe runs and spacing shall be designed to ensure good
drainage.  Detention facilities shall be designed so that the cross slope is
at least two (2) percent.  The bottom of the facility shall be provided with
an underdrain (minimum six (6) inch diameter perforated drain tile) covered
on all sides with a minimum of six (6) inches of crushed stone conforming to
ASTM C33, Size No. 67.  The underdrain shall be installed to drain the basin
below grade during periods of low flow and shall connect to a storm sewer
outfall pipe.  Detention facilities shall be designed with side slopes not
steeper than four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical (4:1). The inflow storm
piping system shall be constructed in such a manner so as to allow for "low"
flows to by pass the basin.  (Ord. 2959 – 11/18/96;  Amd. Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



         e.   Permanent retention ponds ("wet basins") shall be
designed in accordance with Exhibit No. STS 13. Native natural plantings are
recommended for  shorelines and banks.  Prior to the construction of the
basin, soil testing must be done to determine the need for a clay or
synthetic liner and to determine the minimum side slopes required to prevent
soil  erosion.  In order to prevent shore erosion and muskrat digging or
denning, a fiber mat or other  acceptable material shall conform to any
applicable State specifications.  The slopes that are inundated by the storm
water levels shall be covered  with this fiber.  Native natural plant
growth is recommended and may comprise a variety of techniques according to
the needs of the site.  Some of these include biologs, aquatic plants,
wattles, natural native grasses, tri lok, and vegetated geogrids.  Ponds
shall have a minimum of four (4) foot horizontal to one (1) foot vertical
side slopes (4:1). All slopes that are 4:1 should be sodded.  Slopes greater
than 4:1 and bottoms of ponds may be hydro-seeded.  Sediment basins are
required in dry ponds.  Access for maintenance purposes should be at least
15 feet wide at the top of the pond property starting at any point above the
high water level.  At the toe of the slope, a twelve (12) foot wide safety
ledge sloped toward the shore at four (4) percent  shall be provided.  See
Exhibit STS 13.  Beyond the safety ledge, the pond bottom shall slope at two
(2) horizontal to one (1) vertical (2:1) down to the pond bottom elevation.
The minimum pond bottom elevation shall be fifteen (15) feet below normal
water level for a minimum of 25% of the surface area.  Points of inflow to
the pond shall be accessible to construction equipment for dredging as
necessary.  If retention facilities are designated for recreational
purposes, appropriate consideration shall be reflected in the design for
maintenance of fish life, boating, and safety.  Wet basin ponds  may be
required to have aeration equipment installed to ensure adequate water
quality.  (Ord.2959  11/18/96; Amd. Ord. 3837 - 12/1/03)



         f.   Detention basins within the floodplain is strongly
discouraged.  However, the stormwater detention requirements of this
ordinance may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood fringe
areas on the project site provided the following provisions are met.



            1.   Detention in Flood Fringe Areas:  The
placement of a detention basin in a flood fringe area shall require
compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume below the base flood elevation
occupied by the detention basin including any berms.  The release from the
detention storage pro vided shall still be controlled consistent with the
requirements of this section.  The applicant shall demonstrate its operation
for all streamflow and floodplain backwater conditions. Excavations for
compensatory storage along watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the
area occupied by detention.  All floodplain storage lost below the ten year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the ten year flood elevation.  All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten year flood elevation.  All compensatory
storage excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.



            2.   On stream Detention:  On stream detention
basins and detention basins located within the regulatory floodways are
discouraged but allowable if they provide regional public benefits and if
they meet the other provisions of this ordinance with respect to water
quality and control of the two year and 100 year, 24 hour events from the
development.    If on stream detention is used for watersheds larger than
one square mile, a Conditional Letter of Map Amendment approved by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency is required prior to any construction and
a Letter of Map Amendment from the Federal Emergency Management Agency is
required prior to any building construction.  The applicant will submit
modeling to demonstrate that the design will not increase stage for any
properties upstream or downstream of the property.  Also, impoundment of the
stream as part of on stream detention:



               a.   shall not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning,



               b.   shall not cause or contribute to the
degradation of water quality or stream aquatic habitat,



               c.   shall include a design calling for
gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a pre
sedimentation basin,



               d.   shall not involve any stream
channelization or the filling of wetlands,



               e.   shall require the implementation of an
effective nonpoint  source management program throughout the upstream
watershed which shall include at a minimum: runoff reduction BMPs; 2  year
detention/sedimentation basins for all development; and a program to control
nonpoint sources at the source for prior developments constructed without
appropriate stormwater BMPs.



         g.   Methods for Generating Runoff Hydrographs  Runoff
hydrographs shall be developed incorporating the following assumptions of
rainfall amounts and antecedent moisture.



            1.   Rainfall:  Unless a continuous simulation
approach to drainage system hydrology is used, all design rainfall events
shall be based on the Illinois State Water Survey's Bulletin 70 or 71.  The
first quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and
analysis of conveyance systems with critical durations less than or equal to
12 hours.  The third quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for
the design and analysis of detention basins and conveyance system with
critical durations greater than 12 and less than or equal to 24 hours.  The
fourth quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of
systems with durations greater than 24 hours.  The first, third, and fourth
quartile distributions described by Huff are presented in Table 37 of
Bulletin 70.  The SCS Type II distribution may be used as an alternate to
the Huff distributions.



            2.   Antecedent Moisture:  Computations of runoff
hydrographs which do not rely on a continuous accounting of antecedent
moisture conditions shall assume a normal antecedent moisture condition (2),
unless otherwise directed by the Director of Engineering.



         h.   Inlet and Outlet Orientation:  To the extent
feasible, the distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be
maximized.  If possible, they should be at opposite ends of the basin.



         i.   Wetland and Dry Detention Basin Design:  In
addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, wetland and dry basins
shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be
aesthetically pleasing and as much as feasible to be available for multiple
uses.



            Wetland and dry basins shall be designed so that the
portion of their bottom area which is intended to be dry shall have standing
water no longer than seventy two hours for all runoff events less than the
100 year event.  Underdrains directed to the outlet may be used to
accomplish this requirement.  Grading plans shall clearly distinguish the
wet/wetland portion of the basin bottom from the dry portion.



         j.   Velocity Dissipation:  Velocity dissipation
measures shall be incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at
inlets and outlets and to minimize the resuspension of pollutants.



         k.   Stilling/Sedimentation Basins:  A
stilling/sedimentation basin should be constructed at each major inlet to a
wetland or dry basin.  The volume of the basins should be at least 500 ft3
per acre of impervious surface in the drainage area.  Side slopes of the
basins shall be no steeper than 4 horizontal to 1 vertical and basin depths
should be at least 3 feet to minimize resuspension of accumulated sediment.



         l.   Overflow Structures:  All stormwater detention
basins shall be provided with an overflow structure capable of safely passing
excess flows at a stage at least 1 foot below the lowest founda tion grade in
the vicinity of the detention basin.  The design flow rate of the overflow
structure shall be equivalent to the 100 year inflow rate, or as designated
by the Director of Engineering.



         m.   Stormwater runoff from areas tributary to the
property shall be considered in the design of the property's drainage
system.  Whenever practicable, flows  from upstream areas that are not to
be detained should be routed around the basin being provided for the site
being developed.



            1.   Upstream Areas Not Meeting Ordinance
Requirements  When there are areas not meeting the storage and release rates
of this ordinance, tributary to the applicant's property, regionalized
detention on the applicant's property shall be explored by the applicant. 
The following steps shall be followed.



               a.   The applicant shall compute the storage
volume needed for his property using the release rates of this section.



               b.   Areas tributary to the applicant's
property, not meeting the storage and release rate requirements of this
ordinance, shall be identified.



               c.   Using the areas determined in 2) above
plus the applicant's property area, total storage needed for the combined
properties shall be computed.



                  Allowable release rates shall be computed
using the combined property areas.  If tributary areas are not developed, a
reasonable fully developed land cover, based on local zoning, shall be
assumed for the purposes of computing storage.



            2.   Upstream Areas Meeting Ordinance
Requirements  When there are areas which meet the storage and release rate
requirements of this ordinance, tributary to the applicant's property, the
upstream flows shall be bypassed around the applicant's detention basin, or
be routed through the applicant's detention basin if this is the only
practicable alternative.



         n.   All storm water inflow pipes must be constructed to
inverts that are at or above the normal water level in "wet basins".



         o.   Within the minimum twenty-five foot (25') setback
from an artificial detention/retention basin, a maintenance vehicle access
area shall be provided at least eight (8) feet wide not exceeding a two
percent (2%) cross slope.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         p.   Streets or habitable structures that are built with
adjoining detention facilities shall meet those vertical clearance
requirements provided in the flood plain regulations of the Village and other
applicable laws.



         q.   Detention facilities designed and built in
accordance with wetland mitigation plans approved by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers shall be maintained to meet those criteria.  Interpretive signage
may be required by the Village. Wetlands must also meet the criteria provided
in Section 6-413 of these regulations.



            Existing wetlands and depressional storage areas
shall not be modified for the purposes of storm water detention unless it is
demonstrated that the existing wetland is low in quality and/or the proposed
modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to perform
beneficial functions. 



            1.   Existing storage and release rate
characteristics of wetlands and other depressional storage areas shall be
maintained and the volume of detention storage provided to meet the
requirements of this section shall be in addition to this existing storage.



            2.   The existing wetland shall be protected
during construction by appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures.



            3.   All runoff from the development shall be
routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to
capture the two year 24 hour event before discharging into the wetland.



   F.   Material Specifications.  All storm sewer system elements
shall conform to the following specifications:



      1.   Sewer Pipe.



         a.   Sump pump service connection and storm sewer
extension (4" and 6") – ABS sewer pipe or PVC sewer pipe ASTM D2751, SDR35,
or ASTM D3034, SDR35, or flexible plastic drain pipe.



         b.   Concrete sewer pipe (10" diameter and smaller),
minimum Class 3, ASTM  C14.



         c.   Reinforced concrete pipe (12" diameter and larger),
circular reinforcement, minimum Class 3, wall B, ASTM C76.



         d.   Reinforced concrete arch culvert pipe – double
line reinforcement, minimum Class 3, ASTM C506.



         e.   Reinforced concrete elliptical culvert pipe
–minimum class HE-III or VE-III, ASTM C507.



         f.   PVC underdrain pipe (4", 6", and 8") – ASTM
D2729, SDR35.



      2.   Sewer Pipe Joints.



         a.   ABS pipe – ASTM C443.



         b.   PVC pipe – ASTM D3212, push on type, except
underdrain pipe which shall have solvent welded joints.



         c.   Reinforced concrete pipe – ASTM C443.  ("O" ring)



         d.   Reinforced arch or elliptical pipe – ASTM C877.



      3.   Casing Pipes for Augered Sleeves.  Steel pipe – ASTM
A120, 3/8" minimum thickness.



      4.   Manholes and Catch Basins. (Exhibit Nos. STS-01 and
STS-02).



         a.   Precast reinforced concrete – ASTM C478 and ASTM
C443.



         b.   Size:  For sewer 18" diameter or less, manhole
shall have a 48" inside diameter.



            For sewer 21" to 36" diameter, manhole shall have a
60" inside diameter.



            For sewer greater than 36" diameter, manhole shall
have an offset riser pipe of 48" inside diameter.



         c.   Adjustment:  No more than two (2) precast concrete
adjusting rings with six (6) inch maximum height adjustment shall be allowed.



         d.   Pipe and frame seals:  All pipe connection
openings shall be precast with resilient rubber water tight pipe to manhole
sleeves or seals.  External flexible water tight sleeves shall also extend
from the manhole cone to the manhole frame.



         e.   Bottom sections:  All bottom sections shall be
monolithically precast including bases and invert flowlines.



      5.   Inlets. (Exhibit No. STS 05).



         a.   Precast  reinforced concrete  ASTM C478 and ASTM
C443.



         b.   Size:  Inlets shall have 24" inside diameter and a
maximum depth of four (4) feet.



         c.   Adjustment:  No more than two (2) precast concrete
adjusting rings with six (6) inch maximum height adjustment shall be allowed.



         d.   Only one (1) pipe connection is allowed and it
shall be precast with resilient rubber water tight pipe to manhole sleeves or
seals. 



         e.   Bottom sections:  All bottom sections shall be
monolithically precast including bases and invert flowlines.



      6.   Castings.



         a.   Manhole frame and cover  East Jordan Iron Works,
Inc. #1022Z3, 1020A HD.



         b.   Manhole steps  East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. #8518.



         c.   Six (6) inch curb and catch basin inlet East Jordan
Iron Works, Inc. #1051Z3 and 1020M1 grate.



         d.   Three (3) inch inlet and catch basin inlet  East
Jordan Iron Works, Inc. #7525Z Frame and 7525M grate.



         e.   Yard inlet  East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. #6527
grate.



      7.   Crushed Granular Bedding. (Exhibit No. STS 11). Crushed
gravel or crushed stone course aggregate  ASTM C33, Size No. 67.



      8.   Headwalls and Precast End Sections (Exhibit Nos. STS 08,
STS 09).  All pipes shall terminate at reinforced concrete headwalls or
precast end sections.



   G.   Inspection and Testing.



      General site grading shall not begin until the Project Engineer
has certified in writing to the Village that any necessary detention
facilities are in place and operational.  The Director of Engineering or his
representative will also conduct periodic inspections of the work in progress
to be certain that the drainage system is being built as designed.  If any
violations of the provisions or requirements of this ordinance are noted
during such inspections, the Director of Engineering  shall notify the
property owner in writing of the items needing correction.  The property
owner shall have ten (10) calendar days to make such corrections unless given
a specific extension of time in writing by the Director of Engineering. 
Failure to complete such corrections within the specified time period shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance



      1.   Cleaning.  All sewers and appurtenances shall be cleaned
prior to inspection and testing required by this Section.



      2.   Visual Inspection.



         a.   All sewer and appurtenances shall be visually
inspected by representatives of the developer during and following
construction.



         b.   Contractor must perform a high pressure jetting of
sewer system in order to determine if any repairs must be made prior to
lamping or testing.



         c.   Sewers designed to be straight between manholes
will be tested for  straightness by flashing a light from manhole to
manhole, lamping or by other suitable means.



      3.   T.V. Inspections.



         a.   Upon completion of construction and prior to
initiation of the maintenance  guarantee period, and upon recommendation of
the Director of Engineering, a T.V. inspection shall be performed on the
sections or portions of the sewer.  Video tapes and a written report of all
television inspections shall be provided to the Village prior to the initial
acceptance provided for by this Section.  The form of the report and type
and format of the video tape shall be approved by the Director of
Engineering.  T.V. Inspections and reports shall be completed for all storm
systems and sanitary systems installed in the Village of Orland Park.  (Ord.
3837 - 12/1/03)



         b.   Fees and costs connected with T.V. inspections
shall be paid for by the developer or owner.



         c.   All dips, cracks, leaks, improperly sealed joints,
and departures from approved grades and alignment shall be repaired by
removing and replacing the involved sections of pipe.



         d.   All defects and corrective work required as the
result of T.V. inspection shall be performed by the developer without
delay.  Upon completion thereof, the  sewer shall be re tested and such
further inspection made as may appear  warranted.



   H,   Acceptance of Storm Sewers and Storm Water Detention.



      1.   Once the storm sewer system has been completed according
to the specifications set forth in this Section, the Director of Engineering
shall, upon the request of the developer, inspect the system and prepare a
list of items for repair (punch list).  The list shall be given or sent to
the developer and when repairs have been made, the Director of Engineering
shall accept the system for operational use only.  During the time after the
acceptance by the Village for maintenance, the developer shall be responsible
for any delinquencies incurred within the system, including but not limited
to siltation within the pipe, manholes and inlets, adjustment to manhole
frames and leaking joints.  Upon reaching approximately eighty (80) percent
development of building construction, the Director of Engineering will
reinspect the storm sewer system for any delinquencies which may have
occurred and prepare a list of items for repair.  The list shall be given or
sent to the developer and when the repairs have been made to the satisfaction
of the Director of Engineering, the Director shall accept the system for the
Village.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



      2.   All construction shall meet the requirements and
acceptance by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago
prior to the acceptance by the Director of Engineering.  (Ord. 2570  5/2/94)



      3.   Maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities located on
private property shall be the responsibility of the owner of that property. 
Before a  permit is obtained from the Village,  the applicant shall execute
a maintenance agreement with the guaranteeing that the applicant and all
future owners of the property will maintain its stormwater drainage system. 
The maintenance agreement shall also specifically authorize representatives
of the Village to enter onto the property for the purpose of inspections and
maintenance of the drainage system. Such agreement shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of Cook and Will Counties in Illinois.  The maintenance
agreement shall include a schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of
the property's stormwater drainage system and shall provide for access to the
system for inspection by authorized personnel of the Village.  The
maintenance agreement shall also stipulate that if the Village notify the
property owner in writing of maintenance problems which require correction,
the property owner shall make such corrections within 30 (thirty) calendar
days of such notification. If the corrections are not made within this time
period the Village may have the necessary work completed and assess the cost
to the property owner.



      The Village has the option of requiring a bond to be filed by the
property owner for maintenance of the stormwater drainage system.



   I.   Penalties



          Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or
requirements of this section of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00).  Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.



SECTION 6-410. WATER SUPPLY.



(Entire Section Amended – Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   A.   General.



      1.   All development shall include provisions for the
construction of water distribution facilities complete with valves, fire
hydrants, and other appurtenances designed in accordance with this Section. 
As a minimum, the water distribution system shall provide a service
connection(s) at the approximate mid-point of the front property line of each
individual lot or parcel within the development.  Where more than one
building is located or planned on one lot or parcel of property, or when
water main construction is required on the property for fire protection, the
proposed construction shall also include all water main construction and
appurtenances within the lot or parcel except service lines.



      2.   Specification references made herein for manufactured
materials such as pipe, hydrants, valves and fittings refer to designation of
the American Water Works Association (AWWA) or of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI).  Water distribution systems shall be constructed
in accordance with the "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois," latest edition, unless otherwise modified in this
Section.



   B.   Basic Design Standards.



      1.   System Extension.



         a.   Extension to the water distribution system shall
form a complete network extension or a part of a complete network extension
that includes all primary mains, secondary mains, and gridiron mains,
complementing the existing distribution system network.



         b.   Primary mains are those mains that form the
arterial portion of the system. Primary mains under construction within a
development are further defined as mains that are sixteen (16) inches or
larger.  Primary mains within or adjacent to a development shall be sized
and located in accordance with the Comprehensive Water System Study of the
Village, latest edition. Secondary mains shall be sized, looped, and spaced
as required for fire flows and shall have a minimum diameter of eight (8)
inches.



         c.   Gridiron mains shall form a grid to supply water to
the local fire hydrants and service lines.  Gridiron mains shall have a
minimum diameter of eight (8) inches.  Dead end water mains shall not be
allowed.



         d.   The proposed system extensions shall be arranged so
that the service interruptions caused by a break in any main will be limited
to twenty (20) residential units or one thousand (1000) feet in all
non-residential areas.  The maximum number of valves for a shutdown shall be
three (3); four (4) may be allowed in unique cases with the approval of the
Village.



         e.    Developer shall be required to extend water
distribution system as determined by Village Engineer.



      2.   Maximum Day Consumption.  For purposes of water main
design, maximum day consumption for water main design shall be based on the
following table:



 


Type of Establishment

 

Unit

 

Maximum Day Consumption Gal/day/unit*





 
 
 
 
 


Retail
 
(> 100,000 sq. ft.)
 
105


Retail
 
(< 100,000 sq. ft.)
 
  65


Office
 
Person (1 shift)
 
  50


Industrial
 
Person (1 shift)
 
  75


Restaurant
 
Meal Served
 
  15


Theater
 
per Seat
 
  10


Hotel
 
per Guest
 
210




 



*   Quantities are exclusive of process water requirements which must be
estimated and added.



For other than residential developments, when the details of the development
are not known, maximum day consumption and fire flow may be estimated by the
Village Engineer.  Such estimate shall not relieve the owner or developer of
the responsibility of providing adequate main capacity for any and all future
needs within the development.



      3.   Head Losses.  Head losses in relation to velocity in
water mains shall be computed using the Hazen-Williams formula:



         V = .318 (C)(R)0.63(S)0.54



      Where   V = Velocity, in units of feet per second



         C = 100



         R = Hydraulic radius, in units of feet



         S = Hydraulic gradient, in units of feet per foot



      4.   Main Capacity.  Primary mains, secondary mains, and
gridiron mains shall be sized to provide sufficient capacity to deliver the
required fire flow plus the consumption at the maximum daily rate to all
areas served by the proposed construction.



      5.   Required Fire Flow and Pressure.  A separate fire flow
report shall be prepared that indicates that at selected locations, and at
any other locations that may be selected by the Village Engineer, the fire
flows required, in excess of maximum daily consumptive demands, will be
supplied using a "C" factor of 100, ignoring fittings, and with a minimum
residual hydrant pressure of twenty (20) psi.  Required fire flow shall be
computed as detailed in the "Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow,"
latest edition, published by the Insurance Service Office.  Watermains shall
be sized and set at grades to provide ISO fire protection flow rates.  The
developer shall bear the cost of the flow studies.  Flow tests are to be
performed to verify compliance w/ the guide.



         Single-Family Residential     1500      GPM @ 25
PSI



         Multi-Family Residential     2500      GPM @ 25
PSI



         Commercial - Industrial     3500      GPM @ 25 PSI



      6.   Fire Hydrant Spacing.



         a.   Fire hydrants shall be installed so that the near
corner of all construction on the site that could burn will not be further
than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a fire hydrant, and the maximum
distance between fire hydrants shall be 350 ft.  Fire hydrants shall be
provided so as to provide the required fire flows to structures as described
in the "Fire Suppression Rating Schedule," latest edition, published by the
Insurance Service Office.  Six (6) inch main extensions serving hydrants
shall not be more than ten (10) feet long.  Where water transmission lines
or offsite water lines are installed in existing right-of-ways or in existing
easements, hydrants must be installed at six hundred (600) foot intervals.



         b.   Fire hydrants shall be placed on private property
when the Fire Chief determines that fire hydrants are at too great a distance
to provide proper protection for multi-family, commercial or industrial
properties.  Easements shall be provided for all hydrants on private
property.



         c.   Fire hydrants shall be placed within one hundred
(100) feet of all sprinkler and or standpipe siamese connections provided on
buildings unless otherwise directed by the Fire District because of existing
or proposed circumstances.



      7.   Valve Spacing.  A sufficient number of valves shall be
provided so that a break or other failure will not affect more than twenty
(20) residential units or one thousand (1000) feet of main in nonresidential
areas.  All valves 3" and larger must be installed in valve vaults.



   C.   Material Specifications and Details.  All water distribution
system elements shall conform to the following specifications:



      1.   Ductile Iron Pipe.



         a.   Pipe class thickness - ANSI A21.50 (AWWA C150),
minimum thickness, Class 52



         b.   Pipe - ANSI A21-51 (AWWA C151)



         c.   Pipe lining - ANSI A21.4 (AWWA C104)



         d.   Fittings - ANSI 21.10 (AWWA C110)



         e.   Joints - mechanical and push-on, ANSI A21.11 (AWWA
C111)



         f.   Polyvinyl wrapping of all watermain is required.



         g.   All tees, elbows, bends and reducers, shall utilize
Megalugs© for joint restraints.  Megalugs (joint restraints) shall be
required to be installed in addition to concrete thrust blocks.



      2.   Valves.



         a.   Twelve (12) inch and smaller - iron body East
Jordan Flowmaster RW (resilient wedge), non-rising stem gate valves, counter
clockwise to open, AWWA C515



         b.   Fourteen (14) inch and larger - iron body, rubber
seat, butterfly valve, Class 150B, counter clockwise to open, AWWA C504



         c.   Joint end - mechanical, AWWA C111



      3.   Fire Hydrants.  (Exhibit No. WM-06.)



         a.   East Jordan Iron Works, Inc. Watermaster 5BR250
with brass liner, painted Safety yellow.  AWWA C502.



         b.   Valve size, 5 1/4-inch, counter clockwise to open.



         c.   Nozzles, 2 at 2 1/2-inch, 1 at 4 1/2-inch, with
threads conforming to National Standard Specifications.



         d.   Frangible section (breakaway type) with the break
line flange located one (1) inch above finished grade.



         e.   Hydrant to be installed with MJ swivel Tee with
swivel MJ Gland.  Auxiliary to be attached to fire hydrant and utilize six
(6) anodized cap sacrificial nuts.



         f.   Hydrant Marker - Roden style.



      4.   Hydrant Valve Box (Exhibit No. WM-06).



         a.   East Jordan 8550 Series



         b.   Lid embossed "WATER"



         c.   Must include Valve Box Stabilizer - Alberico
Plastic or Adapter II Rubber.



      5.   Air Release Valves.  Apco, type 200A, 2-inch or
Valvematic.



      6.   Corporation Stops.  (Exhibit No. WM-08).  Mueller
H15000, 1-inch minimum, AWWA C800



      7.   Service Pipe.



         a.   Copper tube, 2-inch and smaller, ASTM B88, Type K
(base minimum on number of fixtures)



         b.   Ductile Iron, larger than 2-inch, conform to
Section C(1) above.



      8.   Curb Stop.



         a.   Copper service, Mueller H-15154 as denoted in
Exhibit No. WM-08.



      9.   Curb Box.



         a.   Copper service, Mueller H-10302 or H-10304 as
denoted in Exhibit No. WM-08.



         b.   Ductile iron service, 4-inch and larger, conform to
Section C(12) below.



      10.   Concrete Thrust Restraints.



         a.   Horizontal reactions - thrust restraints at all
tees, plugged ends, hydrants, and bends between 11 1/4 degrees and 90 degrees
shall conform to Exhibit No. WM-10.



         b.   Vertical reactions - the engineer shall submit
individual designs for each location and comply with AWWA C600, Section 3.8.



         c.   Material - precast or poured Class X concrete.



         d.   Where undisturbed earth is not available or not
likely to be available to back up pressure type concrete thrust blocks, the
engineer shall specify tie rods with or without anchor type concrete thrust
blocks and submit design data for such specifications.  Care shall be taken
when pouring concrete so that the mix will not interfere with access to
joints or with hydrant drainage. All tees, elbows, bends and reducers, shall
utilize Megalugs© for joint restraints.  Megalugs (joint restraints) shall
be required to be installed in addition to concrete thrust blocks.



      11.   Casing Pipes.  Steel Pipe - 0.375" minimum thickness,
bituminous coated, casing spacers are stainless steel, casing is to be sealed
at both ends with a masonry cap and made water-tight.



      12.   Valve Vaults.  (Exhibit Nos. WM-01 and WM-02).



         a.   Precast reinforced concrete - ASTM C478 and ASTM
C443.



         b.   Size:  For -, 8", - and smaller diameter valves,
valve vaults shall have a 60"" inside diameter; for pressure connections and
valves -10" and larger in diameter, valve vaults shall have a minimum 72""
inside diameter or as required by the village engineer.



         c.   Adjustment:  No more than two (2) precast concrete
adjusting rings with six (6) inch maximum height adjustment shall be allowed.
Rubber adjusting rings shall be used for structures in pavement.



      13.   Castings.



         a.   Manhole frame and cover - EJ (East Jordan Iron
Works, Inc.) 1022Z1 and 1020A HD embossed WATER and VILLAGE OF ORLAND PARK
with a lid design as denoted on Exhibit No. WM-03.



         b.   Manhole steps, EJ (East Jordan Iron Works, Inc.).
#8518. 406.



      14.   Crushed Granular Bedding.  (Exhibit No. WM-11). Crushed
gravel or crushed stone course aggregate -ASTM C33, Size No. 67.



      15.   Carrier Pipe.



         a   PVC pipe - AWWA C900, minimum thickness equal to
SDR26, push-on type joints.



         b.   Other pipes - conforming to water main standards of
this Section.



   D.   Installation Requirements.



      1.   Environmental Protection Agency Permit.  Water system
design and construction shall in all respects be in accordance with the
regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency, State of Illinois.  No
construction shall commence until a copy of a permit from this agency is
filed with the Village.



      2.   Installation.  The installation of water mains and
appurtenances, including services, shall conform to the requirements of this
Section and shall conform to AWWA C600.



   E.   Water Service Line.



      1.   Installation and Location.  A water service line is a
water pipe connected at the water main by a brass corporation stop or a
ductile iron fitting.  Such pipe is extended horizontally at right angles
with the water main to the front line of a lot or single building which it is
to serve.  The service pipe shall be provided with a brass curb stop or gate
valve at the mid-point between the curb and the sidewalk unless otherwise
specified by the Village Engineer.  A cast iron curb box shall be installed
over curb stops.  A valve vault shall be provided for gate valves - three
(3) inches and larger.  All water service lines shall be located at the
approximate center of each lot at a minimum depth of five (5) feet.  A water
service curb box that falls within a hard service area shall be relocated.



      2.   Meters.



         a.   All meters shall be installed in a habitable area
and shall be accessible for inspection and serviceable by the Village.



         b.   All meters shall be per Village standard as
determined by the Director of Development Services.  Meter size shall be
determined by the Director of Development Services.  All meters less than
1.5" shall be installed by the Village.  All meters greater than 1-1/2"
shall be installed by a plumbing contractor at his expense.  All meter
installation shall comply with Village's codes and inspections. Residential
meters shall have an AWWA approved ball valve at both ends.  Both ball
valves shall have female threads to accept male ends of meter couplings. 
Spread design shall be so only the meter and meter couplings will be between
the two (2) valves.  (Ord. 2680 – 3/18/96)



         c.   All 1" meter settings shall have an AWWA approved
ball valve at both sides.  Both valves shall have female threads to accept
male ends of meter couplings.  Spread design shall allow only the meter and
meter couplings to be between the two (2) valves.



         d.   All 1 1/2" meter settings shall have an AWWA
approved ball valve at both sides.  Both valves shall have male threads to
accept female meter unions.  Spread design shall allow only the meter and
meter coupling unions to be between the two (2) valves.



         e.   All 2" and larger meter settings shall receive
flanged type meters per Village standard.  A high quality brass ball valve
shall be located immediately adjacent to companion flanges.  (Ord. 2860 –
3/18/96)



         f.   All meter settings of 3 inch size and larger will
be equipped with a by-pass system that shall be metered.  (Ord. 2860 –
3/18/96)



         g.   All meter settings require a remote reading device
that is external to the meter location.  Conduit or thinwall is required
when necessary to facilitate installation and maintenance of the reading
device.  Conduit shall be placed so the reading device will be mounted near
the gas meter, 18" to 36" above foundation.  (Ord. 2860 – 3/18/96)



         h.   At all water meter settings, an electrical jumper
wire shall be installed so the meter may be removed without breaking
continuity, or interfering with the maintenance of the metering equipment. 
The wire size shall be equal to, or greater than the neutral conductor of the
largest service supplied to the building by the electric service provider. 
Ground wires should be located to service side of meter wherever possible.



         i.   All special meter applications, including sprinkler
systems, - back flow preventers, and fire systems, shall require special
review and authorization by the Director of Development Services and Director
of Public Works.  (Ord. 2860 - 3/18/96)



      3.   Back Flow Prevention.  Back flow prevention devices
should be required in conformance with other applicable Village regulations.



      4.   Water Service Connection Requirements.



         a.   Residential and Commercial.



            1.   Each individual residential unit, except as
noted below in 4.a.2, shall have a separate metered water service to each
unit.  The service line shall be individually tapped into the water main and
extended into the unit without passing through the property of another unit.
Location and placement of wiring conduit shall be determined by the Village
Plumbing Inspector and installed by the contractor.



            2.   Multi-floor residential buildings can be
served by one (1) adequately sized water service line into a meter room. 
Inside the meter room, the service shall be manifolded to accept one (1)
meter per unit served and one (1) meter for any common purpose water use. 
The manifold shall be constructed similarly to a single meter setting with
padlock type valving device as approved by the Village Plumbing Inspector. A
single meter for the entire building may be allowed in unique cases with the
approval of the Director of Development Services and Director of Public Works.



            3.   Commercial, Industrial and Office type
buildings shall be served by one (1) adequately sized water service line into
a meter room. If the units are individually owned (not leased or rented),
inside the meter room, the service shall be manifolded to accept one (1)
meter per unit served and one (1) meter for any common water purpose. The
manifold should be constructed similarly to a single meter setting with
padlock type valving device as approved by the Village Plumbing Inspector. If
the building is singularly owned (units leased or rented) only one (1)
adequately sized meter will be allowed.



            4.   The meter room shall be accessible from a
public area and constructed solely for water meter housing.  A separate
conduit shall be installed by the electrical contractor from each meter to a
common point area on the building exterior.  Location and placement of the
wiring shall be determined by the Village Plumbing Inspector.



   F.   Fire Service Line.  All fire sprinklers shall be connected to
the water system through a single water service line constructed in
accordance with the requirements in this Section and separated inside the
building prior to meter.



   G.   Water Main Protection.  All water main, storm sewer and
sanitary sewer construction shall meet the requirements of this Section.



      1.   Horizontal Separation.



         a.   A water main shall be laid at least ten (10) feet
horizontally from any existing or proposed storm or sanitary sewer line.



         b.   Should local conditions prevail which would prevent
a lateral separation of ten (10) feet, a water main may be laid closer than
ten (10) feet to a storm or sanitary sewer provided the main is laid in a
separate trench or on an undisturbed earth shelf located to one side of the
sewer and at such an elevation that the bottom of the water main is a least
eighteen (18) inches above the top of the sewer.  In such cases, water main
shall be laid with as much horizontal clearance for sewer as possible.



         c.   If it is impossible to obtain proper horizontal and
vertical separation as stipulated in Subsections (a) or (b) above, both the
water main and the length of sewer between adjacent manholes shall be
constructed of push-on or mechanical-joint ductile iron pipe, or pre-stressed
concrete pipe and shall be pressure-tested to assure water tightness before
backfilling.



      2.   Vertical Separation.



         a.   Whenever a water main must cross house sewers,
storm drains, or sanitary sewer, the water main shall be laid at such an
elevation that the bottom of the water main is eighteen (18) inches above the
top of the drain or sewer.  This vertical separation shall be maintained for
that portion of the water main located within ten (10) feet, horizontally, of
any sewer or drain crossed.  Said ten (10) feet is to be measured at the
normal distance from the water main to the drain or sewer.



         b.   Where conditions exist that the minimum vertical
separation set forth in a subsection above cannot be maintained, or it is
necessary for the water main to pass under a sewer or drain, one of the
following two measures must be taken:



            1.   The water main shall be installed within a
PVC carrier pipe and the carrier pipe shall extend on each side of the
crossing until the normal distance from the water main to the sewer or drain
line is at least ten (10) feet.



            2.   The involved sewer or drain shall be
constructed from manhole to manhole with "O" ring pipe conforming to ASTM 361
or other pipe material which would conform to water main standards.



   H.   Construction Requirements.



      1.   Excavation.



         a.   The trench shall be excavated so that the water
main shall have a minimum of five (5) feet six (6) inches of cover.  The
trench for the pipe shall be excavated at least twelve (12) inches wider than
the external diameter of the pipe but not wider than the widths denoted on
Exhibit No. WM-11.



         b.   Bell holes of sufficient depth shall be provided
across the bottom of the trench to accommodate the bell of the pipe, to
provide sufficient room for joint making and to insure uniform bearing for
the pipe.



         c.   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for
the bottom of the trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy or other
unsuitable soil, such unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of
the trench or tunnel and replaced with well compacted unwashed gravel or an
equal substitute, or crushed stone if such compacted material proves
unsatisfactory.  Where rock in either ledge or boulder formation is
encountered, it shall be removed below grade and replaced with a
well-compacted cushion of unwashed gravel having a thickness under the pipe
of not less than eight (8) inches.



      2.   Sheeting and Bracing.



         a.   Sheeting and bracing shall be used in the
excavation area as may be necessary for the safety of the work and the
public, for the protection of the workmen and to prevent damage to adjacent
properties.



         b.   Sheeting shall not be removed until the backfill
has been placed and thoroughly compacted.



      3.   Laying Water Main.



         a.   The contractor shall keep the trench free from
water while the water main is being placed and until the pipe joint has been
sealed to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.



         b.   Adequate provision shall be made for the safety,
storage and protection of all water pipe prior to actual installation in the
trench.  Care shall be taken to prevent damage to the pipe castings and
coating, both inside and out.  Provisions shall be made to keep the inside
of the pipe clean throughout its storage period and to keep mud and/or other
debris from being deposited therein.  All pipes shall be thoroughly cleaned
on the inside before placement of the pipe.  Proper equipment shall be used
for the safe handling, conveying and laying of the pipe.  All pipes shall be
carefully lowered into the trench, piece by piece, by means of a derrick,
ropes, or other suitable tools or equipment, in such manner as to prevent
damage to water main materials and protective coatings and linings.  Under
no circumstances shall water main materials be dropped or dumped into the
trench.



         c.   In making joints, all portions of the joining
materials and the socket and spigot ends of the joining pipe shall be wiped
clean of all foreign materials.  The actual assembly of the jointing shall
be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and/or as
directed by the Village Engineer.  During construction, until jointing
operations are complete, the open ends of all pipes shall be at all times
protected and sealed with temporary watertight plugs.



         d.   Polyvinyl encasement shall be installed around
ductile iron pipe with a minimum overlap of 12" at each joint and sealed with
approved polyvinyl compatible adhesive tape.



      4.   Pipe Cutting.



         a.   The cutting of pipe for inserting valves, fittings
or closure pieces shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner without
damage to cement lining and so as to leave a smooth end at right angles to
the axis of the pipe.



         b.   When machine cutting is not available for cutting
pipe twenty (20) inches in diameter or larger, the electric-arc cutting
method shall be permitted, using a carbon or steel rod.  Only qualified and
experienced workmen shall be allowed to perform this work.



         c.   The flame cutting of pipe by means of an
oxyacetylene torch shall not be allowed.



      5.   Trench.



         a.   The trench bottom shall be flat and shall provide
full bearing of the length of the pipe.



         b.   Thrust blocks shall be used to prevent movement at
all bends, tees, caps, valves and hydrants.



         c.   Backfilling of the trench shall be accomplished by
careful replacement of the excavated material after the pipe and the bedding
material have been installed.  Any pipe installed within two (2) feet of a
pavement edge or curb and gutter shall be backfilled to the top of the trench
with granular material in compliance with Illinois Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.



      6.   Fire Hydrant.



         a.   Fire hydrants shall be placed as specified on
engineering plans.  All hydrants shall stand plumb, their pumper nozzle
pointing normal to the road.  They shall conform to the established grade,
with the breakaway flange being between 1 to 5 inches above finished grade.
All nozzles shall be at sufficient height above finished grade to provide
free rotation of a standard hydrant wrench free and clear of any obstructions.



         b.   A drainage pit two (2) feet in diameter and two (2)
feet deep shall be excavated below each hydrant and filled completely with a
minimum of one cubic yard of 1" river rock under and around the bowl of the
hydrant and to a level six (6) inches above the waste opening.  No hydrant
drainage pit shall be connected to a sewer.



         c.   Hydrant leads are not allowed for extending the
setback unless approved by the Director of Development Services and the
Director of Public Works.



         d.   Barrel extensions shall be provided as needed in
order to provide sufficient height above finished grade to provide free
rotation of a standard hydrant wrench free and clear of any obstructions and
to provide a minimum 18" height above finished grade to the break-a-way
flange.  An extension shall not exceed a maximum of 3 feet.



         e.   Front of hydrant shall be no closer than three (3)
feet to back of curb.



      7.   Water Main Installation.  During water main
installation, to make a closure between two pipe ends, or between pipe end
fittings, or between pipe end and valve, short lengths shall be used with
proper connections or couplings.  Repair sleeves shall not be used to make
closures during new construction.



      8.   Dewatering.  Where water is encountered in the trench,
it shall be removed during pipe-laying and jointing operations.  Trench
water shall not be allowed to enter the pipe at any time.



      9.   Connections to Existing Mains.  All connections to the
Village water distribution system shall be made under full water service
pressure unless otherwise approved by the Director of Development Services
and the Director of Public Works at locations approved by the Director of
Public Works.



   I.   Pressure Test.



      1.   As part of the construction, the water mains shall be
pressure tested in accordance with this Section.



      2.   All newly laid pipes shall be subjected to a hydrostatic
pressure of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch.  Duration of
each pressure test shall be for a period of not less than two (2) hours. 
Each valved section of pipe shall be filled with water and the specified test
pressure shall be applied by means of a pump connected to the pipe.  Before
applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the
pipe.  All leaks shall be repaired until tight.  Any cracked or defective
pipes, fittings, valves, or hydrants discovered in consequence of this
pressure test shall be removed and replaced and the test repeated until
satisfactory results are obtained.



      3.   All testing shall be done before the installation of
service lines.  Suitable means shall be provided for determining the
quantity of water lost by leakage under the specified test pressure. 
Allowable leakage shall not be greater than that computed as follows:



            L = (N) (D) (P)



                      7400



   L =   Allowable leakage in gallons per hour



   N =   number of joints in length of pipeline tested



   D =   Nominal diameter of the pipe in inches



   P =   Average test pressure during leakage test in pounds per square
inch gauge.



Leakage is defined as the quantity of water required to be supplied to the
newly laid pipe necessary to maintain the specified leakage test pressure.



   J.   Preliminary Flushing.  Prior to chlorination, the main shall
be flushed as thoroughly as possible with the water pressure and outlets
available.  Flushing shall be done after the pressure test is made. 
Because such flushing removes only the lighter solids, it cannot be relied
upon to remove heavy material allowed to get into the main during pipe
placement.  If no hydrant is installed at the end of the main, a tap should
be provided large enough to affect a velocity in the main of at least two and
one-half (2 1/2) feet per second.



   K.   Disinfection.



      1.   The preferred point of application of the chlorinating
agent shall be at the beginning of the pipeline extension or any valved
section of it and through a corporation stop in the top of the newly laid
pipe.  The injector for delivering the chlorine-gas into the pipe should be
supplied from a tap on the pressure side of the gate valve controlling the
flow into the pipeline extension.



      2.   Water from the existing distribution system or other
source of supply shall be controlled so as to flow slowly into the newly laid
pipeline during the application of chlorine-gas.  The rate of chlorine
mixture flow shall be in such proportion to the rate of water entering the
pipe that the chlorine dose applied to the water entering the newly laid pipe
shall be at least fifty (50) ppm, or enough to meet the requirements during
the retention period.  This may require as much as one hundred (100) ppm of
chlorine in the water left in the line after chlorination.



      3.   Valves shall be manipulated so that the strong chlorine
solution in the line being treated shall not flow back into the line
supplying the water.



      4.   Treated water shall be retained in the pipe long enough
to destroy all spore-forming bacteria.  This retention period shall be at
least twenty-four (24) hours.  After the chlorine-treated water has been
retained for the required time, the chlorine residual at the pipe extremities
and at other representative points should be at least 25 ppm.



      5.   In the process of chlorinating newly laid pipe, all
valves or other appurtenances shall be operated while the pipeline is filled
with the chlorinating agent.



      6.   All water mains shall be disinfected and tested according
to the requirements of the "Standards for Disinfecting Water Mains," AWWA
C601, and as required by this Section.  All disinfection, as required by
this Section, shall be performed by an independent firm exhibiting experience
in the methods and techniques of this operation, and shall be approved by the
Village Engineer.



   L.   Final Flushing and Testing.



      1.   Following chlorination, all treated water shall be
thoroughly flushed from the newly laid pipeline at its extremities until the
replacement water, throughout its length shall, upon test, be approved as
safe water by the Village Engineer.  This quality of water delivered by the
new main should continue for a period of at least two (2) full days as
demonstrated by laboratory examination of samples taken from a tap located
and installed in such a way as to prevent outside contamination.  Samples
should never be taken from an unsterilized hose or from a fire hydrant
because such samples seldom meet current bacteriological standards.



      2.   After disinfecting and flushing, a minimum of two (2)
water samples shall be collected by the contractor on two successive days,
with notice given, so that the collection may be witnessed by the Village
Engineer.  Bacteriological sampling and analysis of the samples shall be
performed by a laboratory approved by the Illinois Department of Public
Health and the Village Engineer.  Should the initial treatment result in an
unsatisfactory bacterial test, the procedure shall be repeated until
satisfactory results are obtained.  The contractor or developer shall pay
for the sampling and analysis.  Results of the analysis shall be transmitted
by the laboratory directly to the Village Engineer.  Test results shall
indicate the date the sample was collected, the date the analysis was made,
the exact locations at which samples were taken, the firm submitting the
sample, and the project at which the samples were collected.  Sufficient
samples shall be collected in order to insure that the system is
bacteriologically safe.



      3.   Village of Orland Park to operate valve.



   M.   Exhibits.  Exhibits below are typical specifications of water
main standards that shall be applied to any improvements required by these
regulations.







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 



   N.   Acceptance of Water Supply.



      1.   Once the water supply system has been completed according
to the specifications set forth in this Section, the Director of Public Works
shall, upon the request of the developer, inspect the system and prepare a
list of items for repair (punch list).  The list shall be given or sent to
the developer and when repairs have been made, the Director of Public Works
shall accept the system for operational use only.  During the time after the
acceptance by the Village for maintenance, the developer shall be responsible
for any delinquencies incurred within the system, including but not limited
to water main leaks, adjustment to manhole frames and bent curb boxes.  Upon
reaching approximately eighty (80) percent development of building
construction, the Director of Public Works will re-inspect the water supply
system for any delinquencies which may have occurred and prepare a list of
items for repair.  The list shall be given or sent to the developer and when
the repairs have been made to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works, the Director shall accept the system for the Village.  (Ord. 2570 –
5/2/94)



      2.   All construction shall meet the requirements and
acceptance by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency prior to the
acceptance by the Director of Public Works.  (Ord. 2570 – 5/2/94)



(Entire Section 6-410 Amended by Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



SECTION 6-411.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of this Section is to conserve the land,
water, air and other natural resources within the Village by establishing
requirements for the control of erosion and sedimentation.  (Amd. Ord. 5312
– 7/16/18)



   B.   Objectives. The following guidelines shall apply for the
planning, implementing, monitoring and maintenance of all development
activity within the Village which disturbs stabilized soil allowing erosion
and sedimentation to occur:



      1.   Development shall be related to the topography and soils
of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion.  Areas of steep
slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever
possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.



      2.   Natural watercourses, existing trees, and conservation
areas shall be retained and protected from erosion and sedimentation so that
natural features and functions are maintained. Areas immediately adjacent to
natural watercourses and which are planned to be left undisturbed shall be
left undisturbed for a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the natural water
course, as measured from the bank of the perennial stream, the centerline of
an intermittent stream, or the ordinary high water mark of a lake or pond, or
twenty-five (25) feet for an artificial detention/retention basin, as
measured from the high water line level, whenever possible, and shall be
governed by the regulations in Section 6-412.



      3.   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for
the shortest practical time during development.  Sediment control measures
shall be installed prior to the commencement of any land disturbance.



      4.   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or
permanent measures within seven (7) calendar days following the end of
disturbance activities.



      5.   Perimeter protection, sediment basins, debris basins,
desilting basins, or silt traps or filters shall be installed, and shall be
maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing
development and from undeveloped land.



      6.   Provision shall be made to stabilize stormwater
management systems that are functioning throughout construction. Temporary or
permanent stabilization measures shall be installed at time of construction.



      7.   Proper storm sewer inlet and outlet protection shall be
in place and maintained throughout construction until permanent stabilization
of the development has been completed.



      8.   Provisions shall be made for the temporary or permanent
stabilization of soil stockpiles within seven (7) days of placement. 
Perimeter controls shall be placed around the base of the stockpile
immediately.  Stockpiles shall be graded to a safe slope within six (6)
months of deposit. Weeds and other vegetation above eight inches (8") tall
shall be cut back as needed.  (Ord. 2570 – 5/2/94)



      9.   Provision shall be made for the control of the deposit of
sediment and debris from the development site onto streets, alleys and
sidewalks at the end of each work day, or if a hazardous condition
develops.  (Ord. 2570 - 5/2/94)



      10.   All construction ingress and egress points shall have a
stabilized construction entrance installed and maintained until permanent
stabilization of the development has been completed.



      11.   Sediment filtering devices shall be used for all
dewatering activities.



      12.   All waste including building materials and construction
debris shall be placed in the appropriate receptacles.



      13.   Onsite pollutants such as building materials, building
products, landscape materials, sanitary waste, fueling, and cleaning and
maintenance areas shall be appropriately managed to minimize and discharge.



      14.   Site development shall be in accordance with other
Village ordinances and State law, and it shall not decrease the normal
capacity of a flood plain by adding fill unless compensatory capacity is
provided elsewhere.



      15.   Erosion prevention measures in site development shall be
implemented in phases on a time schedule so as to more effectively control
potential conditions associated with the seasons (i.e., run off from the
melting of snow).



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   C.   Soil Erosion Control Plan and Permit Requirements.



      1.   Plan Requirements.  A Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Plan shall be submitted with the Final Engineering Plans to be
reviewed and approved by the Development Services Department.  For single
lots in established subdivisions a Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan shall be submitted for review and approval with the Building Permit Set
and approved by the Development Services Department.  The plan set shall
include all of the guidelines outlined in Section 6-411.B. that pertain to
the specific site conditions.



      2.   Letter of Credit Requirements.  When a Letter of Credit
is required for the development, the erosion control measures approved in the
Final Engineering plans shall be included in the Letter of Credit total. 
The amount of money earmarked for the erosion control measure will be held
until final stabilization of the project is complete or until an authorized
agent of the Development Services Department has approved a reduction or
release.



      3.   Permit Requirements.  Implementation of the approved
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan is required prior to the issuance
of any Foundation Permits.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no
person shall commence or perform any grading, stripping, excavating, or
filling of land without having first installed the erosion and sedimentation
control measures outlined in the approved Final Engineering Plan set or
Building Permit set. 



      4.   Exceptions.  A soil erosion control plan and permit
shall not be required for any of the following:



         a.   Agricultural use of land, including farming, the
implementation of conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan
approved by  the Soil and Water Conservation District and community garden
plans.



         b.   Construction of conservation measures including,
but not limited to, sod waterways, terraces, grade stabilization structures,
berms and swales.



(Amd. Ord. 5167–2/20/17)



      5.   Application for Permit.  When development activity is
planned and there are no soil erosion control plans, application for a soil
erosion control plan permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his
authorized agent to the Development Services Department on a form furnished
for that purpose.  Each application shall include certification that any
land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth
shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit. 
Each application shall include a certification by an Illinois registered
professional engineer that the contour lines, current and proposed, and other
technical contents of the plans are valid.  When development is proposed as
a part of a building permit for a part of the site, the applications may be
combined, provided, that the information required under this Section is
submitted with the engineering drawings required for the building permit.



      Each application shall be accompanied by the following:



         a.   the name and address of the developer and owner;



         b.   The name, address and telephone number of any
design consulting firm or engineer;



         c.   Identification of person(s) or entity which will
have legal responsibility for maintenance or erosion control structures and
measures after development is completed;



         d.   A vicinity sketch showing site acreage, site
boundary lines, utilities and buildings presently located on the site, drains
and roads on and within 1/2 mile of the site, intermittent and perennial
streams and water bodies downstream within 1/2 mile of the site, and a legend
and scale;



         e.   Proposed use of the site, including present
development and planned utilization; areas of excavation, grading, and
filling; proposed contours, finished grades, and street profiles; provisions
for storm drainage, including the control of accelerated runoff, with a
drainage area map and computations; existing trees and wooded areas; kinds
and locations of utilities; and areas and acreage proposed to be paved,
covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed;



         f.   An erosion and sedimentation program showing or
describing all the erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to
meet the objectives of this Section throughout all phases of construction and
necessary to meet the objectives at the completion of development of the
site.  The program may include erosion structures, temporary and permanent
vegetation and other conservation measures; and



         g.   The proposed phasing of development of the site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final
grading and landscaping.  Phasing should identify the expected date on which
clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and
the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary sediment control
measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas,
and establishment of permanent vegetative cover.



      The Village Engineer may waive specific requirements for the
content of submission upon written finding that the information submitted is
sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives and
principles of this Section and the standards contained in the Handbook
incorporated by Subsection (E)(1).



      6.   Time Schedules.  In the event a site developer is unable
to meet the phasing time schedules as contained in either the approved site
development plans or the site development permit, the site developer shall
submit, prior to missing the time schedule, an addendum to any plans or
permit application stating in the addendum that scheduling will not be met
and what, if any, additional measures will be taken.



(Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   D.   Fees.  Fees for site development permits, when required by
this Section, shall be determined by the Village in accordance with Section
1-104 of these regulations.



   E.   Operation Standards and Requirements.



      1.   Handbook Adopted by Reference.  The procedures and
standards set out in the Illinois Urban Manual, as amended, and the Illinois
Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, as
amended, shall be applicable to all developments.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 –
7/16/18)



      2.   Inspections.  Plans for grading work shall be maintained
at the site during grading.  In order to obtain the necessary grading
inspections, the permittee shall notify the Development Services Department
at least two (2) full working days before the following inspection is to be
made:  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



         a.   Rough Grading:  When all rough grading has been
completed; and



         b.   Final Inspection:  When all work, including
installation of all drainage and other structures and required planting, has
been completed.



      3.   Responsibility.  The permittee shall not be relieved of
responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law,
and the Village or its officers or agents shall not be made liable for such
damage, by (1) the issuance of a permit under this section, (2) compliance
with the provisions of that permit or with conditions attached to it by the
Village, (3) failure of Village officials to observe or recognize hazardous
or unsightly conditions, (4) failure of Village officials to recommend denial
of or to deny a permit, or (5) exemptions from the permit requirements of
this section.



      4.   Special Precautions.



         a.   If at any stage of the grading of any development
site the Village Engineer determines by inspection that the nature of the
site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to
imperil any property, public way,  watercourse or drainage structure, the
Village Engineer may require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done,
that such reasonable special precautions be taken as is considered advisable
to avoid the likelihood of such peril.  "Special precautions" may include,
but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of
additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing, or
installa-tion of plant materials for erosion control.  Said special
precautions shall, as much as possible, reflect the standards contained in
the Handbook.



         b.   On large operations or where unusual site
conditions prevail, the Village Engineer or his designee may specify the
timing of grading or may require that the operations be conducted in specific
stages so as to insure completion of protective measures or devices prior to
the advent of seasonal rains.  Said specifications or requirements shall, as
much as possible, reflect the standards contained in the Handbook.



      5.   Coordination with Local Stream and Water Body
Protection.  Except as allowed by the standards outlined in Section 6-412,
no grading or removal of top soil shall be allowed in the minimum setback
area defined on the Village's Natural Stream Channel and Water Body Map
(Exhibit 2).



      6.   Major Amendments of the Site Development or Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plans.  Major amendments of the site development or
erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the Development
Services Department and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the
same manner as the original plans.  Field modifications of a minor nature
may be authorized by the Development Services Department by written
authorization to the permittee.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   F.   Expiration of Permit.  Each permit shall expire and become
null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced
within six (6) months, or work is not completed by a date which shall be
specified in the permit; except that the Director of Development Services
may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual
difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within the
specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written
application is made before the expiration date of the permit.  (Amd. Ord.
5167–2/20/17; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



   G.   Effect on Other Permits.  The granting of a permit under the
provisions of this Section shall in no way affect the owner's responsibility
to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance, or
regulation of any state agency or subdivision thereof, or to meet other
Village ordinances and regulations.



SECTION 6-412.   LOCAL STREAM AND WATERBODY PROTECTION.



   A.   Purpose.  The purpose of this Section is to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the present and future residents of the
Village and downstream drainage areas by providing for the protection,
preservation, proper maintenance, and use of public and private watercourses,
lakes and ponds.  It is specifically not the intent of this Section to
duplicate or in any way conflict with any regulations adopted by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers. 



   B.   Objectives.  This Section is specifically adopted to achieve
the following objectives:



      1.   to prevent flood damage by preserving storm and flood
water storage capacity;



      2.   to maintain the normal hydrologic balance of streams,
ponds, lakes, and groundwater by storing and filtering wet season runoff in
floodplains and wetlands and releasing it slowly to the stream to maintain
dry season stream flow;



      3.   to manage stormwater runoff and maintain natural runoff
conveyance systems, and minimize the need for storm sewer construction and
drainageway modification;



      4.   to improve water quality both by filtering and storing
sediments and attached pollutants, nutrients, and organic compounds before
they drain into streams, lakes or ponds and by maintaining the natural
pollutant assimilating capabilities of streams, lakes, ponds and floodplains;



      5.   to protect shorelines from soil erosion;



      6.   to protect fish spawning, breeding, nursery and feeding
grounds;



      7.   to protect wildlife habitat;



      8.   to preserve areas of special recreational, scenic, or
scientific interest, including natural areas and habitat of endangered
species;



      9.   to maintain and enhance the aesthetic qualities of
developing areas; and



      10.   to encourage the continued economic growth of the 
Village which depends in part, on an adequate quality of water, a pleasing
natural environment, and recreational opportunities in proximity to the
Village.



   C.   Boundary.  The procedures, standards and requirements
contained in this Section shall apply to all lots within water bodies and
streams, and to all lots identified wholly or in part on the stream and
waterbody map adopted by the Board of Trustees, as amended from time to time.



   D.   Development Activity in, and Minimum Setback from Streams,
Lakes and Ponds.



      1.   No development (except as provided in subsection 2) may
occur within the minimum setback area identified on the Village's Natural
Stream Channel and Water Body Map, as adopted by the Board of Trustees and as
amended from time to time, and in no case shall be less than fifty (50) feet
from a natural watercourse or waterbody, as measured from the top of bank of
the perennial stream, the centerline of an intermittent stream, or the
ordinary high water mark of a lake or pond, or twenty-five (25) feet for an
artificial detention/retention basin, as measured from the high water
level.  (Ord. 2746 – 6/5/95 & Ord. 3070–10/20/97; Amd. Ord. 5221 –
9/18/17; Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      2.   The following activities are permitted within the minimum
setback area only if, as a practical matter, they cannot be located outside
the setback area.  Such modification shall be approved only after
preparation of a report prepared by a qualified professional and approved by
the Director of Development Services.  The report shall note that the
modification will not adversely affect water quality; destroy, damage, or
disrupt a significant habitat area; adversely affect drainage and/or
stormwater retention capabilities; lead to unstable earth conditions; create
erosion hazards or be materially detrimental to any other property in the
area of the subject property or to the Village as a whole, including the loss
of open space or scenic vistas:  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



         a.   minor improvements, such as walkways, benches,
footbridges, observation decks and docks;



         b.   the maintenance, repair, replacement and
reconstruction of existing highways and bridges, electrical transmission and
telecommunication lines, poles, and towers; and



         c.   the establishment and development of public and
private parks and recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic,
natural and scientific areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife habitat
improvement projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and
public boat launching ramps.



      3.   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the
construction of park shelters or similar structures shall be permitted.  The
construction and maintenance of roads necessary for these permitted uses
shall be allowed only on a very limited basis and where no alternate location
outside of the setback area is available.



      4.   Land surface modification within the minimum setback
shall be permitted for the purpose of constructing stormwater drainage swales
between the developed area of a lot (including a storm-water detention
facility on the lot) and a stream, lake or pond.



      5.   An applicant for a special use permit must stabilize any
areas left exposed after land surface modification with vegetation normally
associated with the affected stream, lake or pond.  The planting of native
riparian vegetation is recommended as the preferred stabilization measure. 
Other techniques shall be used only when and where vegetation fails to
control erosion.  One alternative is rip-rap, using natural rock materials
where practicable, installed on eroding bank areas in a manner that provides
interstitial space for vegetative growth and habitat for macroinvertebrates
and other stream organisms. (Exhibit No. STS-13)  Lining of the stream
channel bottom shall not be permitted.



      6.   Access to property located near a stream, lake or pond or
related environmentally sensitive area, shall be minimized when such access
would adversely affect such area.



      7.   Silt or sediment basins shall not be installed within a
perennial stream channel or a waterbody.  However, such basins may be
installed within an intermittent stream channel.



   E   Local Stream and Waterbody Protection Plan.



      1.   A local stream and waterbody protection plan shall be
prepared for any proposed development within all or part of a stream or water
body corridor, as identified on the Village's Natural Stream Channel and
Water Body Map, and shall indicate:



         a.   dimension and area of parcel;



         b.   location of any existing and proposed structures;



         c.   location of existing or proposed on-site sewage
systems or private water supply systems;



         d.   location of any perennial stream and its banks, the
centerline of any intermittent stream, and any lake or pond as delineated by
its ordinary height water mark;



         e.   location of setback lines;



         f.   location of 100 year floodplain limits;



         g.   location of existing or future access roads;



         h.   specifications and dimensions of areas proposed for
wetland alterations;



         i.   an assessment of the potential impact of the
proposed development activity on the stream, lake or pond including, but not
limited to, loss of flood storage potential, loss of habitat, changes in
species diversity and quantity, impacts on water quality, increases in human
intrusion and impacts on associated streams, lakes or ponds or downstream
sensitive areas; and



         j.   such other information as reasonably requested by
the Director of Development Services.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      2.   The developer shall present evidence that demonstrates
that the proposed development shall not endanger health and safety, including
danger from gas, electricity, fuel, shortcircuiting, grounding, igniting or
electrocuting, and the obstruction or diversion of flood flow.  The
developer shall also show that the proposed development will not
substantially reduce natural floodwater storage capacity, destroy valuable
habitat for wildlife, adversely affect ground water resources, or increase
stormwater runoff velocity so that water levels on other land are
substantially raised or the danger from flooding increased.



   F.   Geologic and Soil Characteristics Report.   The site proposed
for development shall be investigated to determine the soil and geologic
characteristics.  A report, prepared by a registered professional engineer
experienced in the practice of geological and soils mechanics, shall be
submitted with each application for development within an environmentally
sensitive area.  This report shall include a description of soil type,
stability of surface and subsurface conditions.  Any area which the
investigation indicates to be subject to geologic or soil hazards shall not
be subjected to development unless the engineer can demonstrate conclusively
that these hazards to the area can be overcome.



   G.   Hydrologic Controls.  A hydrologic control plan that, in part,
describes the hydraulic characteristics of nearby watercourses, prepared by a
registered professional engineer experienced in civil engineering, shall be
submitted with each application for development. Unless otherwise provided in
this Section, the following restrictions, requirements and standards shall
apply to all development:



      1.   natural open channel drainageways shall be preserved; and



      2.   runoff from areas of concentrated impervious cover (e.g.,
roofs, driveways, streets, patios, etc.) shall be collected and transported
to a natural drainageway with sufficient capacity to accept the discharge
without undue erosion or detrimental impact.  Vegetated drainage swales are
preferred over conveyances constructed of concrete or other manufactured
materials.



   H.   Site Grading and Excavation.



      1.   A grading and excavation plan, prepared by a registered
professional engineer trained and experienced in civil engineering shall be
submitted with each application for development and shall include the
following unless a site development plan that includes grading and excavation
components has been or submitted in accordance with Section 5-106 of these
regulations:



         a.   property contours at one (1) foot intervals;



         b.   details of the existing terrain, trees and
woodlands, and drainage pattern;



         c.   dimensions, elevation and contours of grading,
excavation and fill;



         d.   a description of methods to be employed in
disposing of soil and other material that is removed from allowable grading
and excavation sites, including the location of the disposal site if on the
property;



         e.   a schedule showing when each stage of the project
will be completed, including the total area of soil surface to be disturbed
during each stage, and estimated starting and completion dates.  The
schedule shall be prepared so as to limit to the shortest possible period the
time soil is exposed and unprotected.  In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days
prior to initiation of the improvements; and



         f.   a detailed description of the revegetation and
stabilization methods to be employed, to be prepared in conjunction with the
landscape plan provided in Subsection (I) (3), below.



      2.   Unless otherwise provided in this Section the following
restrictions, requirements and standards shall apply to all construction:



         a.   every effort shall be made to develop the site in
such a manner so as to minimize the alteration of the natural topography;



         b.   no grading, filling, cleaning, clearing, terracing
or excavation of any kind shall be initiated until final engineering plans
are approved and the application is approved by the Village Engineer; and



         c.   the depositing of any excavation, grading or
clearing material within a stream, lake or pond shall be prohibited.



      3.   In addition to locating all site improvements on the
subject property to minimize adverse impacts on the stream, lake or pond, the
applicant shall install a berm, curb, or other physical barrier during
construction, and following completion of the project, where necessary, to
prevent direct runoff and erosion from any modified land surface into the
stream, lake or pond.  All parking and vehicle circulation areas should be
located as far as possible from any stream, lake or pond.



      4.   The Village may limit construction activity in or near a
stream, lake or pond to specific months and to a maximum number of continuous
days or hours in order to minimize adverse impacts.  The Director of
Development Services may also require that equipment be operated from only
one side of a stream, lake, or pond in order to minimize bank disruption. 
Other construction techniques, conditions, and restrictions may be required
in order to minimize adverse impacts on streams, lakes or ponds and on any
related areas not subject to development.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   I.   Vegetation and Revegetation.



      1.   To minimize erosion, stabilize the streambank, protect
water quality, keep nutrients out of the water, maintain water temperature at
natural levels, preserve fish and wildlife habitat, screen man-made
structures, and preserve aesthetic values of the natural stream, lake or
pond, a natural vegetation strip shall be maintained along the edge of the
natural watercourse or waterbody.  Within required setbacks from a natural
watercourse or waterbody, a natural vegetation strip shall extend landward
twenty-five (25) feet, as measured from the top of bank of the perennial
stream, the centerline of an intermittent stream, the ordinary high water
mark of a lake or pond.  Refer to the Stormwater Management Area Landscape
in Section 6-305 for vegetation requirements adjacent to artificial
detention/retention basins.  (Amd. Ord. 5312 – 7/16/18)



      2.   Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may
be selectively pruned or removed for harvest of merchantable timber, to
achieve a filtered view of the stream, lake or pond from the principal
structure and for reasonable private access to the stream, lake or pond. 
Said pruning and removal activities shall insure that a live root system
stays intact to provide for streambank stabilization and erosion control.



      3.   A landscape plan, prepared by a professional landscape
architect, shall be submitted with each application for development and shall
contain the following:



         a.   a plan describing the existing vegetal cover of the
property and showing those areas where the vegetation will be removed as part
of the proposed construction; and



         b.   a plan describing the proposed revegetation of
disturbed areas specifying the materials to be used.



      4.   The landscape plan will be evaluated according to:



         a.   the character and size of the proposed development
and potential for adverse impact on the stream, lake or pond;



         b.   the width of the stream;



         c.   the topography of the area;



         d.   the type and stability of the soils;



         e.   the type and density of the existing vegetation; and



         f.   the existence of diseased trees or trees in danger
of falling.



   J.   Watercourse Relocation and Minor Modifications.



      1.   Watercourse relocation or modification is generally not
permitted because these activities are not usually consistent with the
purposes of this Section.  Under unusual circumstances, relocation and minor
modification may be permitted as a special use where:



         a.   off-site hydrological conditions are causing
erosion, flooding and related problems; or



         b.   on-site soil and geological conditions are
resulting in unstable conditions that pose hazards to life, health, and
existing development; and



         c.   a mitigation plan is prepared and approved by the
Village Board of Trustees which results in a watercourse habitat equal to or
better than the original condition.



      2.   Channelization shall not be permitted, except for an area
within the right-of-way and within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way of any
roadway that crosses a watercourse.



      3.   Modification of watercourses as a convenience for site
design purposes shall not be permitted. Stream modification, when permitted,
shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions:



         a.   water quality, habitat, and storm water retention
must be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat
area may be destroyed;



         b.   the amount of flow and velocity of a stream shall
not be increased or decreased as the stream enters or leaves a subject
property unless this reflects an improvement over previous conditions in
terms of reduced flooding, reduced erosion, or enhanced low-flow conditions;
and



         c.   prior to diverting water into a new channel, a
qualified professional approved by the Village Engineer inspects the stream
modification and issues a written report to the Village Engineer that the
modified stream complies with the requirements of this Section.



      4.   Stream relocation shall be permitted in accordance with a
stream relocation plan which provides for:



         a.   the creation of a natural meander pattern, pools,
ripples, and substrate;



         b.   the formation of gentle side slopes (at least 3
feet horizontally for 1 foot vertically), including installation of erosion
control features;



         c.   the utilization of natural materials wherever
possible;



         d.   the planting of vegetation normally associated with
streams, including primarily native riparian vegetation;



         e.   the creation of spawning and nesting areas wherever
appropriate;



         f.   the re-establishment of the fish population
wherever appropriate;



         g.   the restoration of water flow characteristics
compatible with fish habitat areas, wherever appropriate;



         h.   the filling and revegetation of prior channel;



         i.   the proposed phasing plan specifying time of year
for all project phases; and



         j.   plans for sediment control.



      5.   Stream channel armoring in the form of bulkheads, rip-rap
or other materials or devices shall not be permitted except in accordance
with the following:



         a.   significant erosion cannot be prevented in any
other way and the use of vegetation will not sufficiently stabilize the
shoreline or bank;



         b.   the bulkhead, rip-rap or other device will minimize
the transmittal of wave energy or currents to other properties; and



         c.   the change in the horizontal or vertical
configuration of the land is kept to a minimum.



      6.   Culverts shall not be permitted in streams except in
accordance with following:



         a.   where a culvert is necessary for creating access to
a property (convenience in order to facilitate general site design is not to
be considered);



         b.   the culvert allows passage of fish inhabiting the
stream, and accommodates the 100 year storm, except where a restricting
culvert is desirable as part of an overall stream and flood management plan;
and



         c.   the culvert shall be maintained to be free of
debris and sediment to allow free passage of water and, if applicable, fish.



   K.   Ownership and Control.   The Village shall require an
applicant to submit a proposed plan of ownership and control of the local
stream and water body area.  The Board of Trustees shall approve the
proposed plan prior to the Board of Trustees' approval of the development,
provided that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed ownership and
control will adequately protect the local stream and water body area in
accordance with the standards of these regulations.  Methods of ownership
and control may include, but are not limited to, homeowner association
covenants, Village management plans or private protection plans.



   L.   Stream Channel and Waterbody Development Permit.



      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, to ensure
that proposed development can be carried out which is compatible and
harmonious with the natural amenities of the stream channel area and with
surrounding land uses, no person shall commence development within the
minimum setback area without first having obtained a Stream Channel and
Waterbody Development Permit.  A request for a permit shall be submitted to
and approved by the Village Engineer.



      2.   No permit shall be issued unless the applicant submits
engineering data, surveys, site plans and other information as the Village
may reasonably require in order to determine the effects of such development
on the affected land and water areas.  The permit shall not be approved by
the Village Engineer unless:



         a.   the development will not detrimentally affect or
destroy natural features such as streams, lakes, ponds, and forested areas,
but will preserve and incorporate such features into the development's site
design;



         b.   the location of natural features and the site's
topography have been considered in the designing and citing of all physical
improvements;



         c.   adequate assurances have been received so that the
clearing of the site of top soil, trees, and other natural features before
the commencement of building operations will occur.  Only those areas
approved for the placement of physical improvements may be cleared;



         d.   the development will not substantially reduce the
natural retention storage capacity of any stream, lake or pond, thereby
increasing the magnitude and volume of flood at other locations;



         e.   the soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for
excavation and site preparation and the drainage is designed to prevent
erosion and environmentally deleterious surface runoff; and



         f.   the development will be free from offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate matter, odorous matter, fumes,
water pollution, and other objectionable influences.



      3.   No structure shall be constructed, altered, enlarged or
otherwise created or moved, nor shall there be any clearing or removal of
natural ground cover and/or trees in connection with site preparation for
construction, immediate or future, within the sensitive area for any purpose
unless a permit is granted subject to the provisions of this Section.



      4.   Dumping, filling, mining, excavating, dredging, or
transferring of any earth material within the area is prohibited unless a
special use permit is granted.  However, normal gardening, farming and
housekeeping activities shall not be affected.



      5.   No ponds or pools shall be created and no other
alterations or improvements shall be allowed in the sensitive area for
recreational uses, storm water management, agricultural uses, or as scenic
features, unless a special use permit is granted.



   M.   Permit Exceptions.  The permit provisions of this Section
shall not apply to:



      1.   emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. 
When emergency work is performed under this Section, the person performing it
shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the Village within
ten (10) days after commencement of the work and shall thereafter obtain a
special use permit and shall perform such work as may be determined by the
Village Engineer to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such
emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity of the
watercourse; and



      2.   work consisting of the operation, repair, or maintenance
of any lawful use of land existing on the date of adoption of these
regulations.



   N.   Effect on Other Permits. The granting of a permit under the
provisions of this Section shall in no way affect the owner's responsibility
to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance, or
regulation of any state agency or subdivision thereof, or to meet other
Village ordinances and regulations.



   O.   Expiration of Permit.  Each permit shall expire and become
null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced
within six (6) months, or work is not completed by a date which shall be
specified in the permit; except that the Director of Development Services
may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual
difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within the
specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written
application is made before the expiration date of the permit.  (Amd. Ord.
5167 – 2/20/17)



SECTION 6-413. WETLANDS PROTECTION.



   A.   General.  The nontidal wetlands of the Village of Orland Park
are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development
constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soil limitations.  In their
natural state, nontidal wetlands serve man and nature.  They provide habitat
areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation, water-quality maintenance and
pollution control, flood control, shoreline erosion control, natural resource
education, scientific study, open space, and recreation opportunities.



   A considerable number of these important natural resources have been
lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavation, building,
pollution, and other acts.  Piecemeal or cumulative losses may, over time,
destroy remaining wetlands.  Damaging or destroying nontidal wetlands
threatens public safety and the general welfare.



   It is therefore necessary for the Village to ensure maximum protection
for nontidal wetlands by discouraging development activities in nontidal
wetlands and those activities at adjacent upland sites that may adversely
affect nontidal wetlands and to encourage restoration of already degraded or
destroyed systems.  (Ord.2746 - 6/5/95)



   B.   Purpose.  It is the policy of the Village of Orland Park to
encourage or require planning to avoid or minimize damage to nontidal
wetlands wherever prudent or feasible; to require that activities not
dependent upon a nontidal wetland location be located at upland sites; to
allow nontidal wetland losses only when such losses are in the public
interest and after all practicable measures have been applied to reduce those
losses to the unavoidable minimum; to provide for compensation in the form of
nontidal wetland restoration or creation to offset further losses.



   Furthermore, any activities in a wetland must not threaten public
safety or cause nuisances by:



      1.   Blocking flood flows, destroying flood storage areas, or
destroying storm barriers, thereby raising flood heights or velocities on
other land and increasing flood damages;



      2.   Causing water pollution through any means, including
location of wastewater disposal systems in wet soils;  unauthorized
application of pesticides, herbicides, and  algacides; disposal of solid
wastes or stormwater runoff directly into a wetland site; or creation of
unstabilized fills;



      3.   Increasing erosion; or



      4.   Increasing runoff of sediment and stormwater.



   In addition, it is the policy of the Village not to permit activities
in or affecting nontidal wetlands that could destroy natural wetland
functions important to the general welfare by:



      1.   Decreasing breeding, spawning, nesting, wintering,
feeding, or other critical habitat for fish and wildlife, including rare,
threatened, and endangered plant and animal species and commercially and
recreationally important wildlife;



      2.   Interfering with the exchange of nutrients needed by fish
and other forms of wildlife;



      3.   Decreasing groundwater recharge capability;



      4.   Destroying sites needed for education and scientific
research as outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms, and training
areas;



      5.   Interfering with public rights in waters and recreation
opportunities for fishing, boating, hiking, birdwatching, photography,
camping, and other similar activities in nontidal wetlands; or



      6.   Destroying aesthetic and property values.



   C.   Applicability.



      1.   This section shall apply to all lands in or within 50
feet of a nontidal wetland located within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Orland Park.  Areas shown on the Village of Orland Parks Comprehensive
Plans? Environmental Areas Mapping Wetlands Map as wetlands are presumed to
be nontidal wetlands consistent with the definition thereof. This official
Wetlands Map shows the general location of nontidal wetlands and should be
consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near nontidal wetlands
before engaging in regulated activity.



      2.   The actual boundaries of non-tidal wetlands shall
ordinarily be determined by the applicant through the performance of a field
survey applying the nontidal wetland definition.  The Wetlands Map is to be
used as a guide to the general location of nontidal wetlands.  The applicant
is required under Section 6-413-D.1 of this ordinance to show a Wetland
District boundary on a scaled drawing submitted as part of the permit
application.  Evidence documenting the results of the boundary survey may be
required by the Village Engineer.



   D.   Permit Requirements.



      1.   No regulated activity in or within 50 feet of a nontidal
wetland may be conducted without a permit from the Village Engineer and full
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable
regulations.  All activities that are not permitted as of right or as
special permit uses shall be prohibited.



      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance or any
other law to the contrary, the Village Engineer may issue a temporary
nontidal wetlands permit through oral or written authorization, provided a
written permit application is received within five days, if he or she deems
that an unacceptable threat to life or severe loss of property will occur if
an emergency permit is not granted.  The emergency permit may be terminated
at any time with out process upon a determination by the Village Engineer
that the action was not or is no longer necessary to protect human health or
the environment. 



      3.   To guide restoration and creation actions should a
violation occur, the Village Engineer shall have the power to order the
violator to develop a plan as described in Section 6-413 G.2. of this
ordinance for the approval of the Village Engineer.  Field verification of
absence or existence of wetland areas, in the form of a wetland report
checklist, shall be provided for approval of the Village Engineer.  (Ord.
3837 - 12/1/03)



   E.   Uses by Right in a Nontidal Wetland.



      1.   The following uses shall be allowed as a right within a
nontidal wetland to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance or federal, state or local law and provided they do not require
structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein or
authorized by special permit:



         a.   Conservation or preservation of soil, water,
vegetation, fish, shellfish, and other wildlife;



         b.   Outdoor recreational activities, including fishing,
birdwatching, hiking, biking, boating, horseback riding, swimming, and
canoeing;



         c.   The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay,
ferns, moss, wild rice, berries, tree fruits, and seeds in a manner that is
not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the
harvesting does not require alteration of nontidal wetland by changing
existing nontidal wetland water conditions or sources, tilling of soil, or
planting of crops;



         d.   Forestry practices limited to the thinning and
harvesting of native timber in accordance with a forest management plan that
incorporates best management practices approved by the Cook County Forest
Preserve District pursuant to its current regulations.



         e.   The continued cultivation of agricultural crops,
provided no nontidal wetlands are subject to cultivation where no such use
existed five years prior to the effective date of application.



         f.   Education, scientific research, and nature trails;



      2.   Special Permit Uses in a nontidal Wetland.



         Regulated activities other than those specified in Section
6-413 E.1 may not be conducted except upon application to the Development
Services department and issuance of a special use permit.  (Amd. Ord. 5167
– 2/20/17)



   F.   Standards and Procedures for Special Use Permits.



      1.   Procedures.  Application for a special use permit to
conduct a regulated activity shall be made to the Development Services
Department on forms furnished by that office.  All special uses must be
established in nontidal wetlands as special uses in accordance with the
procedures and standards set forth in Section 5-105 (I) of this Code. 
Permits shall ordinarily be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issue and shall expire at the end of that time unless a longer period is
specified by the Director of Development Services upon issuance of the
permit.  The request for renewal of a permit shall follow the same form and
procedure as the original application except that the Director of Development
Services shall have the option of not holding a hearing if the original
intent of the permit is not altered or extended in any significant way. 
(Am. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      2.   Standards.  The Village Board, after according
consideration to the comments of the general public, other affected
municipalities and other counties, and federal and state agencies with
jurisdiction over the area in question, shall issue a nontidal wetland permit
only if it finds that  the regulated activity is in the public interest and
that the applicant has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that
the regulated activity:



         a.   Is water-dependent or requires access to the
nontidal wetland as a central element of its basic function, or is not
water-dependent but has no practicable alternative;



         b.   Will result in minimum feasible alteration or
impairment to the nontidal wetland?s functional characteristics and its
existing contour, vegetation, fish and wildlife resources, and hydrological
conditions;



         c.   Will not jeopardize the continued existence of
species that appear on federalor state endangered species lists;



         d.   Will not cause significant degradation of
groundwater or surface-water quality;



         e.   Complies with all applicable state, local, and
federal laws, including those related to sediment control, pollution control,
floodplain zoning, and on-site  wastewater disposal;



         f.   Will provide a nontidal wetland buffer area of not
less than 50 feet between the nontidal wetland and upland activities for
those portions of a regulated activity that need not be conducted in the
wetland; and



         g.   Complies with other standards contained in this
ordinance, including those pertaining to nontidal wetland creation and
restoration as required.



      3.   Practicable Alternative.



   For all permit applications, an alternative site for the proposed
activity shall be considered practicable if it is available and the proposed
activity can be carried out on that site after taking into consideration
costs, existing technology, infrastructure, and logistics, in light of
overall project purposes.



   G.   Nontidal Wetland Restoration and Creation.



      1.   Standards.  As a condition of a permit issued or as an
enforcement action under this ordinance, the Director of Development Services
may require that the applicant engage in the restoration or creation of other
nontidal wetlands in order to offset, in whole or in part, the losses
resulting from the action of an applicant or violator under these
regulations.  In making a determination of whether such a requirement will
be imposed, and, if so, the degree to which it would be required, the
Director of Development Services will consider the following:  (Amd. Ord.
5167 – 2/20/17)



         a.   Recommendations by the Army Corp of Engineers.



         b.   The long and short term effects of the action upon
the nontidal wetland and associated aquatic ecosystem, and the reversible or
irreversible nature of the impairment or loss;



         c.   The type and benefit of the wetland functions and
associated resources lost;



         d.   The type, size, and location of the wetland
altered, and the effect it may have upon the remaining system or watershed of
which the wetland is a part;



         e.   Observed or predicted trends with regard to the
gains or losses of this type of wetland in the watershed of which the wetland
is a part;



         f.   The cost and likely success of the possible
compensation measures in relation to the magnitude of the proposed project or
violation; and



         g.   The degree to which an applicant has demonstrated a
good-faith effort to incorporate measures to minimize and avoid wetland
impacts within the proposed project.



      An applicant or violator may prepare or be required by the
Director of Development Services to develop a nontidal wetlands restoration
or creation plan of review and approval of the Director of Development
Services.  The approval shall be based on the recommendation of a qualified
consultant which shall be at the cost of the applicant.  The creation or
restoration of wetlands shall not be an alternative to the standards set
forth in Section 6-413.G.1. but shall be used only to compensate for
unavoidable losses.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



      2.   Restoration and Creation Plan Requirements.



   The plan should state the location, by metes and bounds description, of
the site proposed for restoration or creation; ownership; size; type; and
complete ecological assessment (flora, fauna, hydrology, wetland functions,
etc.) of the wetland being restored or the area where a new wetland will be
created; and the natural suitability of the proposed site for establishing
the replacement wetland (i.e., water source and drainage patterns,
topographic position, wildlife habitat opportunities, value of the existing
area to be converted, etc.)  In addition, plane view and cross-sectional,
scaled drawings; topographic survey data, including slope percentage and
final grade elevations; and other technical information are required in
sufficient detail to explain, illustrate, and provide for:



         a.   Soil and substrate conditions; topographic
elevations; grading and excavation; erosion and sediment control needed for
wetland construction and long-term survival;



         b.   Planting plans specifying plant species types,
quantities, locations, size spacing, or density; source of plant materials,
propagules, or seeds; timing, season, water, and nutrient requirements for
planting; and, where appropriate, measures to protect plants from predation;



         c.   Water-quality parameters, water source, water
depths, water-control structures, and water-level maintenance practices
needed to achieve the necessary ambient water conditions and
hydrocycle/hydroperiod characteristics;



         d.   Mid-course corrections and a three-year monitoring
and replacement plan establishing responsibility for removal of exotic and
nuisance vegetation and permanent establishment of the wetland system and all
its component parts; and



         e.   A demonstration of fiscal, administrative, and
technical competence of sufficient standing to successfully execute the
overall project.



   H.   Suspension, Revocation.



      The Director of Development Services may suspend or revoke a
permit if he or she finds that the applicant has not complied with the
conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope
of the work set forth in the permit.  The Director of Development Services
shall cause notice of his or her denial, issuance, conditional issuance,
revocation, or suspension of a permit by written notice to the petitioner. 
(Ord. 2746 – 6/5/95; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



SECTION 6-414. CONSERVATION AREAS.



   A.   Intent.  It is the intent of the Village to promote open space
in order to preserve natural features and the Village's natural heritage, as
well as to provide for flood control, to provide residents with views of
natural areas, to provide residents the opportunity to interact with nature
in their own neighborhoods, to increase property values, to provide wildlife
habitat corridors, and to generally improve the quality of life.  The Board
of Trustees shall consider the use of conservation easements as an
alternative way of preserving open space in developments.



   B.   Requirements.



      1.   Conservation easements shall be required when critical
and sensitive environmental areas, as identified in the Comprehensive Plan,
are located in a proposed development and are not protected through public
land acquisition.



      2.   Developers shall be required to provide legal
descriptions of the conservation easement, to enter into a grant of
conservation easement, and to record the easement on a Plat of Subdivision
with the County.



      3.   Developers shall transfer the conservation easement only
to an agency of the State of Illinois, to a unit of local government or to a
not-for-profit corporation or trust whose primary purposes include the
conservation of land, natural areas, open space or water areas, or the
preservation of native plants or animals, or biotic communities.



      4.   The conservation easement grantee shall preserve and
maintain said property in its natural state and maintain all trails and
nature signs located within said property.



      5.   The grantee shall have the right to view the easement in
its scenic condition at ground level from adjacent roadways and property. 
  (Ord.2746 - 6/5/95)



SECTION 6-415. BIKEWAYS AND BIKEPATHS.



   A.   Intent.  It is the intent of the Village to provide bikeways,
bikepaths and other bicycle facilities in order to promote bicycling as a
means of both recreation and transportation.  The Board of Trustees shall
consider bicycle traffic when it approves all future improvements to the
existing street system, as well as the cost and desirability of building
facilities such as bicycle lanes, bicycle routes, shoulder improvements and
wide curb lanes.



   B.   Requirements.



      1.   Bikeways shall be required on one side of all arterial
and collector streets or at other alternate locations including reasonable
off-site connections that provide contiguity to the overall system.  The use
of additional pedestrian ways or bikepaths in any instance to provide safe
and convenient access to schools, parks or other similar destinations may be
recommended by the Plan Commission and required by the Board of Trustees.



      2.   Developers shall be required to install bicycle parking
and racks sufficient to serve all new commercial and industrial
developments.  Developers of other uses may be required to install bicycle
parking and racks, provided that the uses generate such need, and subject to
the approval of the Director of Development Services.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 –
2/20/17)



      3.   Although bike paths are generally not required in the
rural/suburban area (Exhibit 2), there may be circumstances in which
continuity for larger networks of bicycle paths, or nearby sidewalk or bike
path access to schools, parks, neighborhood commercial, or similar features
may necessitate installation of such facilities in certain areas. 
Sidewalks, bikepaths or streetlights on perimeter roads may be required if
health, safety and welfare reasons warrant such installation.



   C.   Construction Requirements.  The construction requirements and
other standards set out in the Guide For Development of New Bicycle
Facilities, 1981, or as hereinafter updated, published by the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), 444 North
Capital Street, N.W., Suite 225, Washington, D.C. 20001, that pertain to the
planning, operation and maintenance of roadways, bikeways and bikepaths shall
be applicable to all development located within the Village.  Copies of this
Guide shall be kept on file at the Department of Development Services and the
Building Department.  (Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




ARTICLE 7:
MICELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



SECTION 7-101. CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES



   A.   Time of Construction of Improvements.   All public and private
improvements required by these regulations shall be installed after approval
of a subdivision plat, a final resubdivision plan, or a final development
plan.  No construction shall commence prior to said approval.



   B.   Time of Construction of Buildings. No building permits shall be
issued for the construction of any building or structure unless a final plan
of a subdivision, final plan of resubdivision, or final development plan has
been approved and recorded and unless all public improvements are provided to
serve the subdivision in the manner and in accordance with the approved and
recorded plat; provided, however, that building permits may be issued if all
grading operations and drainage improvements are completed and the first
layer of bituminous concrete wearing course has been placed on the road or
roads to be improved, and provided that a road with the first layer of
bituminous concrete wearing course has been placed on a road leading to any
model or trailer or that other access to such model or trailer is provided by
an improved road.



   C.   Use of Existing Streets.   Only those streets designated by
the Plan Commission during the approval of the final plan or final
development plan may be used for access to the subdivision by all equipment
and trucks engaged in the construction of all improvements, utility services
and buildings.



   D.   Sequence of Construction.   All underground utilities, water
mains, sanitary sewers or storm sewers installed in streets, alleys, service
roads or highways shall be installed prior to the surfacing of such
streets.  Service connections to such underground utilities and sewers shall
be extended to the property line of each lot so as to prevent disturbing the
surface improvements in such public ways when service connections are later
made.  Where underground utilities are located in the parkway adjacent to
the paved roadway, service connections to properties across such roads shall
only be made by drilling under the pavement in such a way that the surfacing
is not disturbed or weakened.  All access streets shall be constructed
before building construction may begin.



   E.   Maintenance During Construction.  The subdivider shall clean
and maintain all public ways, sewers, ponds and drains free from snow, mud,
debris, trash or other extraneous material prior to acceptance of the street
by the Village  at all times during construction and as the Village Engineer
may otherwise deem necessary.  The Police Department shall have the
authority to issue tickets to the developer or his or her agents in the event
of any such violation.  The Village shall withhold any subsequent
development approvals for the development until the tickets have been paid
and the violation corrected.



   F.   Construction Noise.  The subdivider shall take every
precaution to assure that undue noise from construction operations is kept at
a minimum.  To assure that contractors are aware of this requirement, the
following construction noise standard shall be made a part of all contracts
entered into for construction of proposed improvements:



      1.   Any engine or engine-driven equipment used for hauling or
construction activities shall be equipped with an adequate muffler in
constant operation. The exhaust system shall not have a cutout, bypass or
similar device as part of the operational system.



      2.   All mufflers must be equal to or quieter than the
original muffler provided with the engine.  If an engine was originally
provided without a muffler, a muffler complying with the recommendations of
the engine manufacturer shall be installed.  Mufflers recommended by other
than the engineer manufacturer shall not be used.



      3.   Any engine or engine-driven equipment shall be properly
maintained to prevent excessive or unusual noise. The various components of
any engine or engine-driven equipment, including the exhaust system, shall be
properly maintained at all times to prevent excessive or unusual noise. 
Items as leaks, holes or improper operation shall be remedied by sealing,
patching or replacing as necessary to insure proper operation of the system.



      4.   Any machine or device or part thereof which is subject to
Federal or State of Illinois standards shall conform to those standards.



      5.   All construction operations shall be confined to
available daylight hours during the time period set by the Director of the
Building Department.  The subdivider may appeal the Director of the Building
Department's decision to the Board of Trustees.



      6.   Requests to modify or deviate from these requirements
shall be submitted in writing by the Contractor and must be approved in
writing by the Village Engineer.



   G.   Liability During Construction.  During the construction of the
improvements and until the Village Board of Trustees has accepted said
improvements in accordance with Section 5-112(I) of these regulations, the
Village shall not be responsible for any liability or property damage
insurance to cover any liability incurred during the course of construction.



   H.   Qualification of Contractors. The subdivider shall file with
the Village a list of all contractors and subcontractors who are to
participate in the construction of the improvements, their addresses,
telephone numbers, and names of persons in charge.



   I.   Contractor Insurance Requirements. During the life of the
construction contract, the contractor shall effect and maintain with
companies satisfactory to the Village Attorney public liability and property
damage insurance protecting the Village, the developer, their agents and the
contractor against loss from liability for damages, on account of injury or
death suffered by any person or persons by reason of the performance of the
work.  In addition, the policy shall provide for legal defense against any
and all claims on the policy.  In the event the



   Village cannot be covered by endorsement on the Contractor's policies,
separate policies covering the Village shall be provided.  Minimum limits of
insurance coverage shall be as follows:



      1.   Public liability including personal injury and accidental
death.



         Each occurrence   $1,000,000.00



      2.   Property damage liability:



         Each accident      $  500,000.00



         Aggregate      $1,000,000.00



SECTION 7-102.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY



   A.   Purpose and Scope.



      1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this Section is to establish
policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within
the Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
Village rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.



      2.   Intent.  In enacting this Section, the Village intends
to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in
particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility
facilities, including without limitation:



         a)   prevent interference with the use of streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



         b)   prevent the creation of visual and physical
obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;



         c)   prevent interference with the facilities and
operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located
in rights-of-way or public property;



         d)   protect against environmental damage, including but
not limited to damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



         e)   protect against increased stormwater run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



         f)   preserve the character of the neighborhoods in
which facilities are installed;



         g)   preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods;



         h)   prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



         i)   assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of
private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.



      3.   Facilities Subject to This Section.  This Section
applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Section may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



      4.   Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.  The
Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to
enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of
locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the Village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to
enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into such an
agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this Section.



      5.   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.



         a)   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers.
In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof, provided however that
the Village may impose on such provider such competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory requirements, terms and conditions set forth in this
Section as are (a) necessary to preserve, protect or to advance the public
safety and welfare or to manage rights-of-way, and (b) do not conflict with
the requirements, terms and conditions, set forth in such franchise, license
or similar agreement with the Village.



         b)   Telecommunications Providers.  In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this Section and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof, provided
however that the Village may impose on such provider such competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory requirements, terms and conditions set forth in
this Section as are (a) necessary to preserve, protect or to advance the
public safety and welfare or to manage rights-of-way, and (b) do not conflict
with the requirements, terms and conditions, set forth in such franchise,
license or similar agreement with the Village.



      6.   Conflicts with Other Sections and Chapters. This Section
supersedes all Sections and Chapters or parts of Sections and Chapters
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.



      7.   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws.  In the event
that applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this Section, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this Section to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
State laws or regulations.



      8.   Sound Engineering Judgment.  The Village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this Section and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this Section when the
Village so determines.  Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the
ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare.



   B.   Definitions. 



   As used in this Section and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this Section.  Any term not defined in this Section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code §530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO means American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI means American National Standards Institute.



   Applicant means a person applying for a permit under this Section.



   ASTM means American Society for Testing and Materials.



   Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated
material in a trench or pit.



   Bore or Boring means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for
the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   Cable operator means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).



   Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).



   Cable system means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).



   Carrier Pipe means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   Casing means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.



   Clear Zone means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge
of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.



   Coating means protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried
pipe for protection against external corrosion.



   Code means the Municipal Code of the Village of  Orland Park.



   Conductor means wire carrying electrical current.



   Conduit means a casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   Construction or Construct means the installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   Cover means the depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   Crossing Facility means a facility that crosses one or more
right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.



   Department of Public Works means the Village Department of Public Works.



   Director of Public Works means the Village Director of Public Works or
his or her designee.



   Disrupt the Right-of-Way means for the purposes of this Section, any
work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on
the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include,
without limitation, the following:  excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or
structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that
does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for
the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   Encasement means provision of a protective casing.



   Equipment means materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other
items used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   Excavation means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material,
or laying bare by digging.



   Extra Heavy Pipe means pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.



   Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials
(including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic
cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals,
poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto)
located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way
under this Section.  For purposes of this Section, the term facility shall
not include any facility owned or operated by the Village.



   Freestanding Facility  means a facility that is not a crossing
facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or
meter station.



   Frontage Road means roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.



   Hazardous Materials means any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the Village Department of Public Works to pose an unreasonable
and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.



   Highway Code means The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.,
as amended from time to time.



   Highway means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular
traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. Highway includes all
highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



   IDOT means Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ICC means Illinois Commerce Commission.



   Jacking means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   Jetting means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under
pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   Joint Use means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by
two or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E. means the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   Major Intersection means the intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   Occupancy means the presence of facilities on, over or under
right-of-way.



   Parallel Facility means a facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   Pavement Cut means The removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.



   Permittee means that entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant
to Sub-Sections D. and E. of this Section.



   Practicable means that which is performable, feasible or possible,
rather than that which is simply convenient.



   Pressure means the internal force acting radially against the walls of
a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   Petroleum Products Pipelines means pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.



   Prompt means that which is done within a period of time specified by
the Village.  If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30
calendar days.



   Public Entity means a legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   Restoration means the repair of a right-of-way, easement highway,
roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   Right-of-Way or Rights-of-Way means any street, alley, other land or
waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility and/or drainage easements, in which
the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the Village.  Right-of-way or
Rights-of-way shall not include any real or personal Village property that is
not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not
include Village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   Roadway means that part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   Sale of Telecommunications at Retail means the transmitting, supplying,
or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   Security Fund means that amount of security required pursuant to
Sub-Section J. of this Section.



   Shoulder means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   Sound Engineering Judgment means a decision(s) consistent with
generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   Telecommunications means this term includes, but is not limited to,
messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio
services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way
radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or
two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities.  Private
line means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations.  Telecommunications shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission; provided, however, that the provision of cable
service or video service to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers by
a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable
or video service from the ICC pursuant to Section 21-401 of the Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-201(R) does constitute
Telecommunications. Telecommunications shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
Telecommunications shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.



   Telecommunications Provider means any person that installs, owns,
operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   Telecommunications Retailer means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   Trench means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation
of an underground  facility.



   Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility
as defined in this Section.



   Vent means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases
or vapors from an underground casing.



   Video Service means that term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).



   Village means The Village of Orland Park, Cook and Will Counties,
Illinois.



   Water Lines means pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   Wet Boring means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger
to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



   C.   Annual Registration Required. 



      Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the Village Department of Public
Works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone
and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on
behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's
facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in Sub-Section H. of this
Section, in the form of a certificate of insurance.  A telecommunication
provider that has registered under this Section shall be deemed to have
satisfied the registration requirement under Section 3-7-2 of the Village
Code.



   D.   Permit Required; Applications and Fees.



      1.   Permit Required.  No person shall construct (as defined
in this Section) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within any Village right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the
facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined
in this Section), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the
right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Village Department
of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this Section. No permit shall be required for
installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises
where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.



      2.   Permit Application.  All applications for permits
pursuant to this Section shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and
shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may
designate.  The applicant may designate those portions of its application
materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential
information as proprietary or confidential by clearly marking each page of
such materials accordingly.



      3.   Minimum General Application Requirements.  The
application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized
representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:



         a)   The utility's name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



         b)   The applicant's name and address, if different than
the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;



         c)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy
numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any,
advising the applicant with respect to the application;



         d)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put.  The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to
the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis
on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



         e)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with
the Village:



            1.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating
the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
latest edition of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions
to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



            2.   An emergency contingency plan which shall
specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public.  Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this Sub-Section unless the Village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;



         f)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an Illinois registered professional
engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable
codes, rules, and regulations. Such plans shall at a minimum address the
Construction Standards described within the Sub-Section M. of this Section,
and include but not limited to:



            1.   Sufficient detail of existing right-of-way
and easements dimensioned from a section corner, lot corner or other known
survey monumentation;



            2.   To the extent required by the Village,
sufficient topographic information identifying all existing physical features
along and near



the proposed utility site(s), including but not limited to the edge of
roadway pavement, existing utilities, trees and bushes, street lights,
roadway signage, drainage ditches/swales, etc. Grading information shall be
provided for all proposed utility sites where existing drainage problems
exist.



            3.   Proposed permanent and temporary easements as
may be required to construct proposed utilities. Plats of Easement shall be
provided as necessary.



            4.   Detail drawings depicting the width, length,
height, color and materials for all utility structures proposed to protrude
above the ground surface.



            5.   Sufficient notes describing construction
methods, proposed depth of facilities, separation from existing utilizes,
proposed final grading plan, ground restoration specifications, and erosion
control plans as may be required.



         g)   Evidence of insurance as required in Sub-Section H.
of this Section;



         h)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as
required in Sub-Section J. of this Section;



         i)   Any request for a variance from one or more
provisions of this Section  (See Sub-Section U.); and



         j)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the Village.



      4.   Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types
of Utilities.  In addition to the requirements of Sub-Section D. 3) of this
Section, the permit application shall include the following items, as
applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit
application:



         a)   In the case of the installation of a new electric
power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video
service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any Certificate of
Public Convenience and Necessity or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to
obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



         b)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the
proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;



         c)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



         d)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate
that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District any each other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or



         e)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state
the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure,
and the design standard to be followed.



      5.   Applicant's Duty to Update Information.  Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village
within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.



      6.   Application Fees.  Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits
pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
_____________________________ ($________).  No application fee is required
to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



   E.   Action on Permit Applications.



      1.   Village Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Village Department of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. 
If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Department of
Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor.  If the Village Department of Public Works is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Section and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Department of
Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.  In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Village Department of Public Works, that the construction
proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the
requirements of this Section.



      2.   Additional Village Review of Applications of
Telecommunications Retailers.



         a)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act,
220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it
intends to commence work governed by this Section for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services.  Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior
to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation.  The
Village Department of Public Works shall specify the portion of the
right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.



         b)   In the event that the Village Department of Public
Works fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of
notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
not involving excavation for new construction or (ii) twenty-five (25) days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of
work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this Section.



         c)   Upon the provision of such specification by the
Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to Sub-Section D. of
this Section, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed.  Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of Sub-Sections D. 3 and D.
4 of this Section.



      3.   Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of
State Authorization Under  the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007.
Applications by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization
under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted
forty-five (45) days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted
upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village
codes, ordinances, and regulations.



   F.   Effect of Permit.



      1.   Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest
Created. A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this Section on Village rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in or adjacent the
rights-of-way.



      2.   Duration.  No permit issued under this Section shall be
valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually
begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



      3.   Pre-construction meeting required.  No construction
shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this Section prior to
attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who
will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting.  The
pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated
by the Village with such Village representatives in attendance as the Village
deems necessary.  The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work
under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas
where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of
other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid
disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.



      4.   Compliance with All Laws Required.  The issuance of a
permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules,
and regulations.



      5.   Business License Required.  All contractors and
subcontractors performing construction activities authorized under a permit
issued by the Village shall be properly licensed and bonded in accordance
with the requirements of the Village. Issuance of a permit by the Village
does not excuse contractors or subcontractors of the applicant from obtaining
the proper license to do business in the Village.



   G.   Revised Permit Drawings. 



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of as-built drawings or plans to the Village within
ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work.  The revised
drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the
actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit.  If any
deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this
Section, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with
Sub-Section U. of this Section.  If the Village denies the request for a
variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the
right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and
submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



   H.   Insurance.



      1.   Required Coverages and Limits.  Unless otherwise
provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure
and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility
as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed
officers, officials, consultants, agents, and employees as additional insured
on the policies listed in paragraphs a. and b. below:



         a.   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as X, C, and U coverages) and products-completed operations
coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily
injury or death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for
property damage resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all
other types of liability;



         b.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for
personal injury and property damage for each accident;



         c.   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and



         d.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.



   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this Sub-Section.



      2.   Excess or Umbrella Policies.  The coverages required by
this Sub-Section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella
policies.  Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over
underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss
covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy,
the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



      3.   Copies Required.  The utility shall provide copies of
any of the policies required by this Sub-Section to the Village within ten
(10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.



      4.   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages.  The
insurance policies required by this Sub-Section shall contain the following
endorsement:



      It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village President of
such intent to cancel or not to renew.



      Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.



      5.   Self-Insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a
portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
Sub-Section H. 1 of this Section.  A utility that self-insures is not
required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the
requirement for the naming of additional insureds under Sub-Section H. 1, or
the requirements of Sub-Sections H. 2, H. 3 and H. 4 of this Section.  A
utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required under Sub-Section H. 1 of this
Section, such as evidence that the utility is a private self insurer under
the Workers Compensation Act.



      6.   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility's
Liability.  The legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person
for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this Sub-Section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



      7.   Insurance Companies.  All insurance provided pursuant to
this Section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued
by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State
of Illinois.  [All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be
rated A- or better and of a class size X or higher by A.M. Best Company.]



   I.   Indemnification. 



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, consultants, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this  Section or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the
utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Section by the
Village, its officials, officers, employees, consultants, agents or
representatives.



   J.   Security.



      1.   Purpose.  The permittee shall establish a Security Fund
in a form and in an amount as set forth in this Sub-Section. The Security
Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Sub-Section at
the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit.  The Security Fund shall serve as security for:



         a)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all
the requirements of this Section;



         b)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the
Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes,
rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village
issued pursuant to this Section; and



         c)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all
damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by
reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this
Section including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this Section to perform that
the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of
the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due
the Village from the permittee pursuant to this Section or any other
applicable law.



      2.   Form.  The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to
the Village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond
in a form acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in
a form acceptable to the Village.  Any surety bond or letter of credit
provided pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:



         a)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the Village and the permittee;



         b)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to
the collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and



         c)   Shall provide a location convenient to the Village
and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.



      3.   Amount.  The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Department of
Public Works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, that the Village estimates are likely
to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.  The
dollar amount so determined by the Village shall be multiplied by 125% to
establish the Security Fund amount. Where the construction of facilities
proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations
in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in
one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in
another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of
restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Department of Public
Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a
single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit.  The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this Sub-Section 3. for any single phase.



      4.   Withdrawals.  The Village, upon fourteen (14) calendar
days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its
intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw
an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not
reimbursed the Village for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice
period.  Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:



         a)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by
the permittee hereunder;



         b)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities
that are due and unpaid;



         c)   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages,
claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or
incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or



         d)   Fails to comply with any provision of this Section
that the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in
the Security Fund.



      5.   Replenishment.  Within fourteen (14) calendar days after
receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn
from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the
amount specified in Sub-Section 3. of this Section J.



      6.   Interest.  The permittee may request that any and all
interest accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the
permittee by the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the
Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund
below the minimum balance required in Sub-Section 3. of this Section J.



      7.   Closing and Return of Security Fund.  Upon completion of
the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this Section or other applicable law.  In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a
result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs,
loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



      8.   Rights Not Limited.  The rights reserved to the Village
with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the
Village, whether reserved by this Section or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund
shall affect any other right the Village may have.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.



   K.   Permit Suspension and Revocation.



      1.   Village Right to Revoke Permit.  The Village may revoke
or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Section for one or more of the
following reasons:



         a)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



         b)   Non-compliance with this Section;



         c)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of
permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare; or



         d)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



      2.   Notice of Revocation or Suspension.  The Village shall
send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued
pursuant to this Section stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section K.



      3.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of
Revocation or Suspension.  Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:



         a)   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that
no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
Village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written
proof of such correction to the Village within five (5) working days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation; or



         c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore
the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof
of such removal to the Village within ten (10) working days after receipt of
the written notice of revocation. 



   The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this Sub-Section.



      4.   Stop Work Order.  In addition to the issuance of a
notice of revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order
immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth
within Sub-Section 1. of this Section K.



      5.   Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply.  If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of Sub-Section 3. of this
Section K., the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village:
(1) correct the deficiencies;  (2) upon not less than twenty (20) days
notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3)
after not less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. 
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of
removal.



   L.   Change of Ownership or Owner's Identity or Legal Status.



      1.   Notification of Change.  A utility shall notify the
Village no less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the transfer of
ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the
utility.  The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the
obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if
any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this
Section, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



      2.   Amended Permit.  A new owner shall request within thirty
(30) days of assuming its ownership responsibility that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, within said 30-day period, the new owner
shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to
remain on the Village's right-of-way.



      3.   Insurance and Bonding.  All required insurance coverage
or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



   M.   General Construction Standards.



      1.   Standards and Principles.  All construction in the
right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws
rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control
and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where
applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT
publications, as amended from time to time:



         a)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction;



         b)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



         c)   Highway Design Manual;



         d)   Highway Standards Manual;



         e)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



         f)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545);



         g)   Flagger's Handbook; and



         h)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight
Maintenance Operations.



      2.   Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. 
If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this Section, the Village Department of Public Works shall
determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles
apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Department
of Public Works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.



   N.   Traffic Control.



      1.   Minimum Requirements.  The Village's minimum
requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.



      2.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers.  The
utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective
devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and
local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers
when performing any work on the rights-of-way.



      3.   Interference with Traffic.  All work shall be phased so
that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



      4.   Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48)
hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access
to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to Sub-Section T. of this Section, the utility shall provide
such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.



      5.   Compliance.  The utility shall take immediate action to
correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought
to the utility's attention by the Village.



   O.   Location of Facilities.



      1.   General Requirements. In addition to location
requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility
facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location
requirements of this subsection.



         a)   No Interference with Village Facilities.  No
utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Department
of Public Works determines that the proposed location will require the
relocation or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will
otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the Village's
utility facilities.



         b)   Minimum Interference and Impact.  The proposed
location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of
the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin said right-of-way.



         c)   No Interference with Travel.  No utility facility
shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



         d)   No Limitations on Visibility.  No utility facility
shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of
the right-of-way.



         e)   Size of Utility Facilities.  The proposed
installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility
owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.



      2.   Appearance Standards.



         1)   The Village may prohibit the installation of
facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



         2)   A facility may be constructed only if its
construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or
terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents
and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the
lands being traversed.



         3)   Underground utilities are required for all new
construction on private property and are required in the following locations
as part of any regional road reconstruction or widening project: La Grange
Road from 131st Street to Interstate 80, 159th Street from 71st Court to
Ravinia Avenue, Harlem Avenue from 151st Street to 159th Street, and Ravinia
Avenue from 142nd Street to 163rd Street.  (Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



      3.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.



         a)   Overhead Parallel Facilities.  An overhead
parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway
only if:



            (1)   Lines are located as near as practicable to
the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



            (2)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as
remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6
m) behind the face of the curb, where available;



            (3)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as
remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet
(1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the
clear zone;



            (4)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a
highway; and



            (5)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located
within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to
the right-of-way line.



         b)   Underground Parallel Facilities.  An underground
parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway
only if:



            (1)   The facility is located as near the
right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m)
from and parallel to the right-of-way line;



            (2)   A new facility may be located under the
paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



            (3)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the
right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



      4.   Facilities Crossing Highways.



         a)   No Future Disruption.  The construction and design
of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
Village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



         b)   Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. 
Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or
drainage facilities.



         c)   90 Degree Crossing Required.  Crossing facilities
shall cross at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as
practicable.



         d)   Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An
overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



            (1)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC's rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



            (2)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of
the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



            (3)   Overhead crossings at major intersections
are avoided.



         e)   Underground Power or Communication Facility.  An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



            (1)   The design materials and construction
methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



            (2)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable
future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



         f)   Markers.  The Village may require the utility to
provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility
other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway.  Each marker
shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone
number.  Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal
regulations.  (49 C.F.R. §192.707 (1989)).



      5.   Facilities to be Located Within Particular
Rights-of-Way.  The Village may require that facilities be located within
particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular
highways.



      6.   Freestanding Facilities.



         a)   The Village may restrict the location and size of
any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way, or other public
places.



         b)   All freestanding facilities located within a
right-of-way shall be located underground to the greatest extent possible, as
determined by the Development Services Department, and to the extent that the
Development Services Department determines that it is not technically
possible to install any such facilities underground, such facilities shall be
substantially screened from view by landscaping pursuant to a landscaping
plan which shall be approved in advance by the Development Services
Department.  A utility shall screen any facility, lawfully established
within a right-of-way prior to the effective date of this Section, within a
reasonable period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) calendar
days after notification from the Village to screen that specific facility.
(Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



         c)   All freestanding facilities within any right-of-way
shall be so located so as to cause only the minimum possible interference
with the use of such right-of-way.  No freestanding facilities shall be
placed within any right-of-way in such a manner to interfere with the usual
travel on such right-of-way, nor shall such facilities limit the visibility
of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic within such right-of-way.



         d)   The owner of any freestanding facility shall
promptly comply with the reasonable requests of the Development Services
Department with respect to the location and screening of such facilities
within any right-of-way.  (Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



      7.   Facilities Installed Above Ground.  Above ground
facilities may be installed only if:



         a)   No other existing facilities in the area are
located underground;



         b)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



         c)   The proposed installation will be made at a
location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the
greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed
without adversely affecting safety.  Suitable designs include, but are not
limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical
configuration of conductors and cable.  Existing utility poles and light
standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional
utility poles is strongly discouraged.



      8.   Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.



         a)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to
bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that
all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable.  Other
means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater,
independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are
completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities
transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or
energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present
high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.



         b)   A utility shall include in its request to
accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure
supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. 
Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge
or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:



            (1)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property  in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



            (2)   The type, length, value, and relative
importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;



            (3)   The alternative routings available to the
utility and their comparative practicability;



            (4)   The proposed method of attachment;



            (5)   The ability of the structure to bear the
increased load of the proposed facility;



            (6)   The degree of interference with bridge
maintenance and painting;



            (7)   The effect on the visual quality of the
structure; and



            (8)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   P.   Construction Methods and Materials.



      1.   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of
Construction Methods.



         a)   Boring or Jacking.   All work shall be done in
accordance with the applicable Articles of Section 552 of the IDOT Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.



            (1)   Pits and Shoring.  Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Village Department of Public Works from the edge of the
pavement.  Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48
hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48
hours after boring or jacking operations are completed.  While pits are
open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades.  Shoring
shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will
safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it
during the boring or jacking operation.



            (2)   Wet Boring or Jetting.  Wet boring or
jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.



            (3)   Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6
Inches.  Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished
by directional drilling or with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter
of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by
more than one inch (25 mm), unless otherwise approved in advance by the
Village Department of Public Works.



            (4)   Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. 
Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either
jacking, directional drilling, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe
method.



            (5)   Tree Preservation.  Any facility located
within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or
protected shall be bored under or around the root system.



         b)   Trenching.  Trenching for facility installation,
repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the
applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction.



            (1)   Length.  The length of open trench shall be
kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line
testing.  Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any
time unless special permission is obtained from the Village Department of
Public Works.



            (2)   Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open
trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by
Section 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.  Where
practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway
and the trench as added protection.  Excavated material shall not be allowed
to remain on the paved portion of the roadway.  Where right-of-way width
does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



            (3)   Drip Line of Trees.  The utility shall not
trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be
preserved.



         c)   Backfilling.



            (1)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created
during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width,
depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.  When excavated
material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular
backfill shall be used.



            (2)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility.  If so ordered by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, the utility, at its expense, shall within ten (10) calendar days of
such order remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Village Department of Public Works.



         d)   Pavement Cuts.  Pavement cuts for facility
installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion
of the highway is closed to traffic.  If a variance to the limitation set
forth in this paragraph d) is permitted under Sub-Section U. of this Section,
the following requirements shall apply:



            (1)   Any excavation under pavements shall be
backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of
CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the Village Department of Public
Works.



            (2)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately.  Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
Village.



            (3)   All pavement removals shall be by straight,
full-depth saw cuts.



            (4)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or
resurfaced in the last three (3) years, pavement cut permits shall not be
issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work
considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or
unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



         e)   Encasement.



            (1)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand
the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads.  The casing shall
be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the Village.



            (2)   In the case of water main or service
crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous
pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway.  Casing may
be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and
carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
Village.  Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



            (3)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or
less, encasement may be eliminated.



            (4)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum
products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;



            (5)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or
petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide
that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



         f)   Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities.  Cover
shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the
following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 

TYPE OF FACILITY
 
MINIMUM COVER


Electric Lines  Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines
 
30 Inches (0.8 m)  18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by Village)


Gas or Petroleum Products
 
30 Inches (0.8 m)


Water Line
 
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection but no less than 6.0 Feet   
(1.8 m)


Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line
 
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection but no less than 4.0 Feet   
(1.2 m)



 



   Minimum cover for facilities crossing under streets shall be as
determined by the Village in each case.



      2.   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of
Facilities.



         a)   Electric Power or Communication Lines.



            (1)   Code Compliance.  Electric power or
communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed,
operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm.
Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce
Commission) entitled Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety Code.



            (2)   Overhead Facilities.  Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used.  Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed.  Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



            (3)   Underground Facilities.  (1) Cable may be
installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is
given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances
and side roads.  (2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking,
encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.  Encasement may
be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of moles,
whip augers, or other approved method which compress the earth to make the
opening for cable installation or (b) the installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.  (3) Cable
shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.



            (4)   Burial of Drops.  All temporary service
drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current
year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the Village.



            Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after
placement.



         b)   Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or
Communication Lines.  Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



            (1)   the use of moles, whip augers, or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



            (2)   jacking or boring with vented encasement
provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



            (3)   open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



            (4)   tunneling with vented encasement, but only
if installation is not possible by other means.



         c)   Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service.  Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated
in a Village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192
- Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR §192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.



         d)   Petroleum Products Pipelines.  Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping.  (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



         e)   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer
Lines or Drainage Lines.  Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.



         f)   Ground Mounted Appurtenances.  Ground mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions.  The
vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Village Department
of Public Works.  With the approval of the Village Department of Public
Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation-free area.  The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.



      3.   Materials.



         a)   General Standards.  The materials used in
constructing facilities within  rights-of-way shall be those meeting the
accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of
IDOT's Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the
requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards
established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.



         b)   Material Storage on Right-of-Way.  No material
shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the
Village Department of Public Works.  When such storage is permitted, all
pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be
distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a
manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way
maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property.  If material
is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the
Village.



         c)   Hazardous Materials.  The plans submitted by the
utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be
involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.



      4.   Operational Restrictions.



         a)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at
the discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare.  Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



         b)   These restrictions may be waived by the Village
Department of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital
utility services.



         c)   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the
hours of construction are those set forth in the Village of Orland Park
Municipal Code, as may be amended from time to time.



      5.   Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the Village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.  The
Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities.  When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and
physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)



   Q.   Vegetation Control.



      1.   Electric Utilities - Compliance with State Laws and
Regulations.  An electric utility shall regularly conduct all tree-trimming
and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the Village as permitted by law.



      2.   Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required.  Tree
trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the
right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws
and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal
maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
Section.



         a)   Application for Tree Trimming Permit. 
Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work
will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are
experienced in accepted tree pruning practices.  Tree trimming permits shall
designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will
be expeditiously accomplished.



         b)   Damage to Trees.  Poor pruning practices resulting
in damaged or misshapen trees is not permitted and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages.  The
Village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged. The formula
developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a
basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees.  The Village may
require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition. For tree removal see Section
6-305.1 Tree Preservation. (Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



      3.   Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance.  The
Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees
or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



      4.   Chemical Use.



         a)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no
utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees,
shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose, including the control of
growth, insects or disease.



         b)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Department of Public Works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.



   R.   Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Utility Facilities.



      1.   Notice.  Within ninety (90) days following written
notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect,
support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way
whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.



      2.   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities.  Within thirty (30)
days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way.  A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:



         a)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



         b)   If the facility was constructed or installed
without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



         c)   If the facility was constructed or installed
without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this Section; or



         d)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.



      3.   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The
Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located
within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency.  If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to
notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and
shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



      4.   Abandonment of Facilities.  Upon abandonment of a
facility within the rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify
the Village within ninety (90) days.  Following receipt of such notice the
Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility
if the Village Department of Public Works determines that such removal will
be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.  In the
event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the
facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the
abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of
all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.



   S.   Clean-up and Restoration.



      The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf
and terrain and other property within ten (10) calendar days after any
portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to
construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the
Village.  This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration
of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the
Village Department of Public Works.  Such cleanup and repair may be required
to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other
requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. 
The time period provided in this Sub-Section may be extended by the Village
Department of Public Works for good cause shown.



   T.   Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance.



      1.   General.  Facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the
utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.



      2.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures.  Emergencies may
justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



         a)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled
portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or
flaggers.  If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of
the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment
required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. 
Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no
other means of access to the facility is available.



         b)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Village Department of Public Works of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. 
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement
of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.



         c)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at
hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



      3.   Emergency Repairs.  The utility must file in writing
with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way
within 48 hours after an emergency repair.



   U.   Variances.



      1.   Request for Variance.  A utility requesting a variance
from one or more of the provisions of this Section must do so in writing to
the Village Department of Public Works as a part of the permit application. 
The request shall identify each provision of this Section from which a
variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



      2.   Authority to Grant Variances.  The Village Department of
Public Works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision
of this Section identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



      3.   Conditions for Granting of Variance.  The Village
Department of Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility
requesting the variance has demonstrated that:



         a)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



         b)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



      4.   Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance.  As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Department of Public Works
may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards
and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Section
but which carry out the purposes of this Section.



      5.   Right to Appeal.  Any utility aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made
by the Village Department of Public Works under the provisions of this
Section shall have the right to appeal to the corporate authorities of the
Village, or such other board or commission as it may designate.  The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk
within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination.  The corporate authorities of the Village shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
corporate authorities of the Village occurring at least seven (7) days after
the filing of the appeal.  The corporate authorities of the Village shall
timely decide the appeal.



   V.   Penalties.



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of the Code.  There may be times when
the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this Section.  Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit.  No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule
a permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed
upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.



   W.   Enforcement.



   Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Section.



   X.   Severability.



   If any section, Sub-Section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this Section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 4347 - 3/3/08)



ARTICLE 8:
NONCONFORMITITES



SECTION 8-101.   NONCONFORMITIES.



   A.   Purpose, Applicability.   The purpose of this Section is to
regulate and limit the continued existence of uses and structures established
prior to the effective date of these regulations that do not conform to these
regulations.  Any nonconformity created by a change in the classification of
property or the text of these regulations shall be regulated by the
provisions of this Section, with the "effective date" referenced below being
the date the text of these regulations or the Zoning Map is amended to render
a particular use, structure, or lot nonconforming.  Many nonconformities may
continue, but the provisions of this Section are designed to curtail
substantial investment in nonconformities and to bring about their eventual
improvement or elimination in order to preserve the integrity of these
regulations.



   B.   Nonconforming Uses.



      1.   Nonconforming uses of land or structures, and
nonconforming structures that contain nonconforming uses, may continue only
in accordance with the provisions of this Section.



      2.   Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow
the continuation of a nonconforming use.



      3.   A nonconforming use shall not be expanded, nor shall a
nonconforming use be enlarged by additions to the structure in which the
nonconforming use is located or the occupation of additional lands, unless
its nonconforming status is removed pursuant to Subsection F, or it complies
with the terms of Subsection C(4) below.



      4.   A structure in which a nonconforming use is located shall
not be moved unless the use thereafter conforms to the standards of the
zoning district or districts to which it is moved.



      5.   Except as provided in Subsection F, a nonconforming use
shall not be changed to any other use unless the new use conforms to the
standards of the zoning district in which it is located.  Once a
nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the nonconforming use shall
not be re-established.



      6.   Where a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned
for six (6) consecutive months or displaced for any period of time due to
structural damage under Subsection (7) below, then the use shall not be
re-established or resumed, and any subsequent use of the land or structure
shall conform to the requirements of these regulations.



      7.   Where a building or structure in which a nonconforming
use is located is destroyed or damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of its
gross building area, then the structure may be repaired or restored only for
uses which conform to the standards of these regulations for the zoning
district in which it is located. In the event that such damage or destruction
is less than fifty percent (50%) of the gross building area, repairs or
construction must be diligently pursued to completion and must be started
within one (1) year from the date of the partial destruction.



   C.   Nonconforming Structures.



      1.   A nonconforming structure devoted to a use permitted in
the zoning district in which it is located may continue only in accordance
with the provisions of this Section.



      2.   Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow
the continuation of nonconforming structures.



      3.   Except as provided in Subsection (4) or in Subsection F
below, a nonconforming structure shall not be expanded.



      4.   A nonconforming structure may be reconstructed or
expanded:



         a.   if it is nonconforming solely because of its
failure to comply with the off-street parking requirements of Section 6-306
of these regulations, and the enlargement will not increase the required
amount of off-street parking by more than three (3) additional spaces;



         b.   if the expansion will not increase the degree of
nonconformity;



         c.   if the structure is nonconforming as to its setback
and is located within the Old Orland Historic District; or



         d.   if it is nonconforming due to the use of government
exercising the powers of eminent domain and the reconstruction or expansion
conforms to zoning requirements. 



         This provision excludes the expansion of non-conforming
signs.  (Amd. Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



      5.   A nonconforming structure shall not be moved unless it
thereafter conforms to the standards of the zoning district in which it is
located.



      6.   Where a nonconforming structure is abandoned for twelve
(12) consecutive months, then the structure shall be removed or modified to
conform to the requirements of these regulations. (Amd. Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



      7.   Any part of a nonconforming structure which is destroyed
or damaged to less than    fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of such
structure may be repaired or restored if a building permit or a sign permit
for the repair or restoration is issued within six (6) months of the date of
the damage.  Any nonconforming structure which is destroyed or damaged to
fifty percent (50%) or more of its assessed value may be repaired or 
restored only if the structure conforms to the standards of these regulations
for the    zoning district in which it is located.  Assessed value shall
be determined by      reference to the official property tax assessment
rolls for the year the structure is      destroyed or damaged.  The
extent of damage or destruction shall be determined by the Village Engineer
by comparing the estimated cost of repairs or restoration with    the
assessed value.  (Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



      8.   No conforming sign shall be erected on the same premises
as an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been
removed or changed to a conforming sign.  However, in commercial retail
establishments, the fact that one particular establishment therein has a
nonconforming sign will not prohibit a different establishment therein from
erecting a conforming sign on the same premises.



      9.   A sign approved prior to December 12, 1977 will be
allowed to remain as non-conforming structures as long as the sign remains in
good repair.  If such sign is damaged beyond 50% of its size or destroyed,
or if the sign undergoes a change of use or ownership, the sign must
thereupon be removed or brought into conformance within six (6) months. 
(Ord. 3281 - 8/16/99 & Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00)



      10.   For signs approved subsequent to December 12, 1977, no
modification or replacement is required of the owner of the sign on February
3, 1992.  If the sign is damaged beyond 50% of its size or destroyed, the
replacement sign shall be required to conform with these regulations.  (Ord.
3281 - 8/16/99)



      11.   Any sign that was not previously approved by the Village
and that does not conform to these regulations (illegal signs) shall be
immediately removed at the expense of its owner.



   D.   Nonconforming Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures.



      1.   No nonconforming accessory use or accessory structure
shall continue after the principal use or structure is terminated by
abandonment, damage, or destruction unless such accessory use or accessory
structure thereafter is made to conform to the standards for the zoning
district in which it is located.



      2.   A nonconforming accessory use or accessory structure may
be expanded only if the nonconforming features of that use or structure are
not expanded so as to increase the degree of nonconformity.



      3.   Any nonconforming accessory use or accessory structure
shall be brought into conformity with these regulations whenever a
substantial improvement to, addition to, or change in the principal use or
structure on the property is proposed and approved.



      4.   In no event shall a nonconforming accessory use or
accessory structure continue later than five-and-one-half (5-1/2) years from
the effective date of these regulations.



   E.   Nonconforming Vacant Lots.



      1.   Except as provided below in Subsection (2), a
nonconforming vacant lot may be used for any of the uses permitted by these
regulations in the zoning district in which it is located, provided that the
use meets all limitations and minimum requirements for setbacks, height, open
space, and floor area established in these regulations for the zoning
district in which the lot is located.



      2.   If two adjacent nonconforming vacant lots are combined
under single ownership, and the combination results in the creation of a
single lot that is more than one-and-one-half (1 1/2) times the width or area
required in the zoning district, then the joint lot may be divided into two
(2) lots of equal width and area without being further classified as
nonconforming. (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



   F.   Termination of Status as a Nonconformity.



      1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections B and C
above prohibiting the continuation, reconstruction, or expansion of
nonconforming uses and structures, a nonconforming use or structure may be
deemed to be in conformity with these regulations, and may be allowed to
continue and to expand as a lawfully existing use or structure, through the
issuance of a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of this
Section.



      2.   To establish a nonconforming use or structure as a
lawfully existing use or structure, the owner of the property, or his or her
authorized agent, shall apply for a special use permit in accordance with the
procedures established in Chapter 5-105 of these regulations.



      3.   A special use permit shall not be issued for the
nonconforming use or structure unless it is to be improved according to the
following requirements:



         a.   A buffer conforming to the standards of Section
6-305 shall be provided between the nonconforming use or structure and any
abutting lot.  Where the nonconforming use or structure is residential and
the adjacent lot is located in a residential or agricultural district, a
Class C buffer shall be provided.  Where the nonconforming use or structure
is residential and the adjacent lot is located in a district other than a
residential or agricultural district, a Class D buffer shall be provided. 
Where the nonconforming use or structure is non-residential and the adjacent
lot is located in a residential or agricultural district, a Class D buffer
shall be provided.  Where the non-conforming use or structure is
non-residential and the adjacent lot is located in a district other than a
residential or agricultural district, a Class C buffer shall be provided. 
(Ord. 4610 - 12/20/10)



         b.   Any off-street parking area located on the lot
shall be improved to meet the landscaping standards established in Section
6-305 for the zoning district in which the parking area is located.



         c.   Any nonconforming sign, outdoor lighting,
off-street parking area, or other accessory structure or accessory use
located on the lot shall be terminated, removed, or brought into conformity
with these regulations.



         d.   No nonconforming structure shall be expanded so as
to increase the degree of nonconformity, such as by further encroachment into
a required setback.



         e.   Any expansion to the nonconforming use or structure
shall meet all off-street parking requirements, bulk regulations, and other
requirements established by these regulations for that use or structure and
the zoning district in which it is located.



      4.   Upon determining that the nonconforming use or structure
satisfies all of the above requirements, the Board of Trustees shall approve
that use or structure or for the expansion of that use or structure.  Upon
receipt of the special use permit the use or structure shall no longer be
treated as a nonconformity and shall be allowed to continue as a lawfully
existing use or structure unless the structure is abandoned for twelve (12)
consecutive months or the use is discontinued for three (3) consecutive years
or is destroyed or damaged to 100 percent of its assessed value.  This
status as a lawfully existing use shall apply only to the specific use or
structure for which the permit is issued and not to any other use or
structure that may be located on the lot. (Ord. 4926 - 9/15/14)



      5.   In no event shall the use or structure be allowed to
expand to greater than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area or lot area that
it occupied on the effective date of these regulations or on the effective
date of any amendment to these regulations which rendered the use or
structure nonconforming.



ARTICLE 9:
ENFORCEMENT



SECTION 9-101.   ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.



   The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the Village
Manager.  In addition to other remedies provided by these regulations and
other applicable laws, the Village Manager shall, when a violation has been
determined to exist:



   A.   Direct the Director of Development Services not to continue any
development review process for the developer until the violation has been
corrected;  (Ord. 3672 – 8/5/02; Amd. Ord. 5167 – 2/20/17)



   B.   Inform the violator that no further work under an existing
approval may proceed until the violation has been corrected.



      In the event that a violator has been previously determined to
have violated a provision of these regulations within the prior five (5)
years, the Development Services Director may require that the violator
implement appropriate mitigation measures for the site where the violation
was committed.  Such measures may include installation of landscaping and
requirements for posting a performance guarantee acceptable to the Village
such as cash bond, letter of credit or, at the discretion and approval of the
Board of Trustees, other security methods to ensure compliance with the order
of the Development Services Director. (Amd. Ord. 4996 – 6/15/15)



SECTION 9-102.   PENALTIES.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of these regulations shall upon conviction be fined not less than
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.  Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.  (Ord. 3354 - 4/17/00; Amd. Ord.
5126 - 9/19/16)



   In the event any building or structure is used, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of these regulations, the Village
Manager or any owner or tenant of real property in the same contiguous zoning
district as the building, structure or land in question, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding



      1.   To prevent the unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,  maintenance, or use,



      2.   To prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or
land,



      3.   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in
or about the premises, or



      4.   To restrain, correct, or abate the violation.  When any
such action is instituted by an owner or tenant, notice of such action shall
be served upon the Village of Orland Park at the time suit is begun by
serving a copy of the complaint on the President of the Board of Trustees.



ARTICLE 10:
EFFECTIVE DATES AND SEVERABILITY



SECTION 10-101.   EFFECTIVE DATE.



   These regulations shall become and be effective immediately upon its
passage, approval and publication in the manner provided by law.



SECTION 10-102.   SEVERABILITY.



   If any section or specific provision or standard of these regulations
or any zoning district boundary that now exists or may exist in the future is
found by a court to be invalid for any reason, the decision of the court
shall not affect the validity of any other section, provision, standard, or
district boundary of these regulations except the provision in question. 
The other portions of these regulations not affected by the decision of the
court shall remain in full force and effect.


