
Orland Hills, IL Code of Ordinances


TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter



         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section headings



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Official time



   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Amendments to code



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Reference to public office or officer



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Ordinances saved



   10.16   Technical codes



   10.17   Historical and statutory references



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification by and for the village of Orland Hills shall be
designated as the code of Orland Hills and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD.  The Board of Trustees of the
village.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The President and Board of Trustees. (ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5 § 1-1-2)



   COUNTY.  Cook County, Illinois.



   COUNTY BOARD.  The County Board



of Cook County, Illinois.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.07)



   COURT.  Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.



   DECREE.  Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.24)



   ELECTORS.  Persons qualified to vote for elective officers  at 
municipal  elections.  (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 § 1- 1-2)



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  Words used for an executive or ministerial officer
may include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally  or  in  special  cases.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.08)



   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the
day on which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER
means at any time after that date.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.08)



   HIGHWAY,ROAD, or STREET.  May include any road laid out by authority
of the United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this
state, and all bridges thereupon. (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.16)



   ILCS.  Illinois Compiled Statutes.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves, or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.10)



   MUNICIPALITIES.  The meaning established in Section l of Article VII
of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970. (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 §
1.27)



   OATH.  Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.  (ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 70 § 1.12)



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, or tenant in common of the whole or part of the property, and includes
any beneficiary of a land trust which owns property.



   PERSON.  Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures, and bodies politic as well as individuals. 
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.05)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   POLICE OFFICERS.  Policemen employed and in the service of the
municipality.  POLICE FORCE  shall be construed to include such persons in
the employ of a municipality as members of the Department of Police, who are
or shall hereafter be appointed and sworn as policemen.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70
§ 1.20)



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PRESIDENT.  The President of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Orland Hills.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof, or
any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for  the  use  of  pedestrians.  (ILCS 
Ch.  625,  Act 5 § 1-188)



   SPECIAL DISTRICTS.  The meaning established in Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970. (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.29)



   STATE.  The State of Illinois.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of the premises, alone or with others.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The municipal code hereby
adopted, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the
adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections. 



   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  The meaning established in Section l of
Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.28)



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Orland Hills, Illinois.



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes printing, electronic, and any other
mode of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any
person is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required
by law, it shall be (1) the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he
is unable to write, his proper mark, (2) an electronic signature as defined
in the Electronic Commerce Security Act, except as otherwise provided by
law.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.15)



   YEAR.  A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR
alone is equivalent to the expression "Year of Our Lord." (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70
§ 1.10)



(Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 10.03  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference
purposes only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage.  Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or
judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.



   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following rules will be followed.



      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.03)



      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders. 
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.04)



      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future. 
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.02)



      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense
requires it.



   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be
excluded.  If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day  shall  also 
be  excluded.  (ILCS  Ch.  5, Act 70 § 1.11)



   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more
municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority of the officers or persons.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 1.09)



   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision
of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding that
construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code may be
repugnant thereto.



   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the
President and Board of  Trustees  may  be fully carried out.  (ILCS Ch.
5, Act 70 § 1.01)



   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, so far as they are the same
as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the
prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 2)



(Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 10.05  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 3)



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section.



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder.



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder.



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment.  The investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 85
§ 2)



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or  amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70 § 4)



(Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the
context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or
revised was not intended.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.09  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which  amend,  repeal,
or in any way affect  this  code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the
case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by
the omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall
be prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of
ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a
new code of ordinances by the Board of Trustees.



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section
or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application, and to this end the provisions are severable.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Such references shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer
or office, unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances to the extent they are in conflict with the provisions of
this code or are repeated herein.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Board of Trustees or a certain municipal officer or employee to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intent of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving that purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent
thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.



§ 10.16  TECHNICAL CODES.



   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall
automatically become a part of this code and shall be made available for
public inspection by the village.  Further, to the extent of any conflict
between the technical provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted
by reference, the most restrictive provision shall prevail.



§ 10.17  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   If an ILCS cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section is nearly identical to the statute.  Example: 
((ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 § 3.1-5-5)) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-85).  If an ILCS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should
refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



§ 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   The municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act.



Statutory reference:



   Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140 § 1 et seq.



(Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
village code shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $750 for any one offense
and the person may be confined in the village or county jail for a period of
not more than six months.



   (B)   Default; labor.  Any person in default of payment of any fine
or costs imposed may be committed to the county jail until the fine, penalty,
and costs are fully paid.  Any person imprisoned under the provisions of
this code may be put to work for the benefit of the village for the term of
his imprisonment.  The committed person shall be allowed, exclusive of
board, a credit as provided by statute for each day’s work.



   (C)   License.  When a person is convicted of a violation of any
section of this village code any license previously issued to him or her by
the village may be revoked by the court or by the Board of Trustees.



   (D)   Application. 



      (1)   The penalty provided in this section shall be applicable
to every section of this village code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.  Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this village code where any duty is prescribed or obligation
imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be
unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed
or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this village
code.



      (2)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable
or is created by different clauses or sections of this village code the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.



      (3)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any
act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this village code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this section shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or
continues.



   (E)   Collections. Whenever any fine, charge, penalty or payment is
due pursuant to any provision in this village code and is not paid after the
village sends, mails or otherwise delivers notice (unless a different period
is stated elsewhere in this village code) to the person responsible for such
fine, charge, penalty or payment (the “responsible person”), the village
may transfer such fine, charge, penalty or payment to a collection agency
retained by the village. Any such collection agency shall, for purpose of the
collection of such fine, charge, penalty or payment, be deemed to be an agent
of the village. All costs incurred by the village for the collection of any
fines, charges, penalties or payments transferred to any such collection
agency shall be assessed against the responsible person as an additional
fine, charge, penalty or payment, subject to any applicable statutory limits.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75; Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord.
2017-006, passed 5-3-17)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES



      31.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS



      32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



      33.   TAXATION



      34.   PUBLIC RECORDS



      35.   PERSONNEL POLICY



      36.   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY



      37.   CODE OF ETHICS



      38.   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN



      39.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



Section



   30.01   Governing body



   30.02   Meetings



   30.03   Quorum



   30.04   Rules and order of business



   30.05   Compensation



   30.06   Electronic attendance at meetings



§ 30.01  GOVERNING BODY.



   The legislative and governing body of the village shall consist of the
President of the Village and six Trustees, who shall possess the
qualifications for office, be elected by the legal voters of the village,
take the oath of office and perform the duties provided by the Illinois
Statutes.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



Cross-reference:



   For provisions concerning the President, see §§ 31.025 through 31.030



§ 30.02  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Village Board of Trustees shall hold its regular meetings
in the Orland Hills Village Hall, 16033 South 94th Avenue, Orland Hills, on
the first and third Wednesdays of each month at the hour of 8:00 p.m. and no
notice of such regular meeting shall be required.



   (B)   Special meetings may be held at any time on call of the
President or any three or more Trustees.  Such call shall be in writing,
duly signed, and shall be presented to the Clerk, who shall proceed
immediately to cause notice of the same to be served upon the President and
Trustees in person or by registered letter.  Such notice shall describe in
brief the nature or object of the call.



(Ord. 65-0-003, passed 5-19-65; Am. Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75; Am. Ord.
76-22, passed 8-18-76; Am. Ord. 77-12, passed 6-15-77; Am. Ord. 93-04, passed
1-12-93; Am. Ord. 93-30, passed 5-14-93; Am. Ord. 95-12, passed 7-5-95)



§ 30.03  QUORUM.



   A majority of the corporate authorities shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel
the attendance of absentees under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 30.04  RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The following rules of order and conduct of village business for the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village are hereby adopted;



   (A)   Rule 1.  The President shall, if present, take the chair at
the hour appointed for the meeting of the Board.  If he is not present, the
Board of Trustees shall elect a temporary chairperson from among themselves
who shall act in the President's stead.  The meeting being called to order,
the roll of members shall be called, and if a quorum is present the presiding
officer shall cause the journal of the last preceding meeting or meetings to
be read unless such reading is dispensed with by vote of the Board.



   (B)   Rule 2.  The President shall preserve order and decorum. 
The President may speak to points of order in preference to any member and
shall decide points of order subject to an appeal of the Board of Trustees by
any two members, on which appeal no member shall speak more than once unless
by leave of the Board.



   (C)   Rule 3.  Every question shall be distinctly stated by the
President before it is open for debate.  Every motion shall be reduced to
writing if the President or any member shall so demand.



   (D)   Rule 4.  The President may call on any Trustee to perform the
duties of Chairperson; no such substitution, however, shall extend beyond the
adjournment of the particular meeting.



   (E)   Rule 5.  Every member previous to speaking to any questions
shall audibly address the presiding officer as "Mr. President" or "Mr.
Mayor".  Such member shall not, however, speak further until he is
recognized and named.



   (F)   Rule 6.  (Reserved)



   (G)   Rule 7.  The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose
and of any resolution or motion to create any liability against the village
or for the expenditures or appropriation of its money, shall require the
concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the Village Board,
including the President.  The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question
of the passage of the designated ordinances, resolutions, or motions and
recorded in the journal of the Village Board.  Likewise, the yeas and nays
shall be taken upon the passage of any other resolution or motion at the
request of any Trustee, and shall be recorded in the journal.



   (H)   Rule 8.  Every member present when a vote is taken shall vote
unless excused by the Board of Trustees, or unless he shall be directly
interested in the matter pending, in which case such member shall not vote. 
Any member refusing to vote or passing his vote, shall be counted as voting
with the majority.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



   (I)   Rule 9. 



      (1)   The following standing committees are hereby established
for the Board of Trustees:



         (a)   Finance



         (b)   Police and Fire



         (c)   Public Works



         (d)   Developmental Planning and Zoning



         (e)   Youth, Education and Recreation



         (f)   Economic Development/ Environmental



      (2)   Committees will be assigned and chosen from among the
Board members themselves by a majority vote.  The President shall break all
ties amongst the Board members pertaining to appointment to committees and
the Chairperson of each committee.



      (3)   The Economic Development/ Environmental standing
committee shall address issues relating to the development of the Village's
economic base, such as long range planning, comprehensive planning, business,
development, business relations and environmental concerns. This committee
shall, at least quarterly, meet with members of the Village's business
community to address their concerns in fostering support for current
establishments as well as preparing for future development.  This committee
shall promulgate the development and regular updating of a Village
Comprehensive Plan.  (Am. Ord. 93-30, passed 5-14-93; Am. Ord. 99-12, passed
5-26-99)



   (J)   Rule 10.



      (1)   The President shall be an ex officio member of each
committee; said ex officio member may participate at all committee meetings
but not vote on said committees.



      (2)   The Board shall elect not less than two of its members
to serve on each committee.  The exact number of Trustees on each committee
shall be determined by the Board from time to time by motion.



      (3)   No committee meeting shall occur unless a quorum of the
members assigned to the committee are present for the meeting.  The
President shall not constitute a member of a committee for the purpose of
establishing a quorum.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75; Am. Ord. 87-06, passed -  - ; Am. Ord. 93-52,
passed 9-1-93)



   (K)   Rule 11.  Special committees may be appointed by the
President for the consideration of any particular question or matter.



   (L)   Rule 12.  All committees to whom any matter may be referred
shall report in writing if requested by any member.  Minority reports may be
submitted signed by the dissenting member or members.



   (M)   Rule 13.  On the acceptances of a final report from a special
committee, such committee shall stand discharged without vote unless it be
otherwise ordered.  All reports made by committees or officers of the
village, all resolutions adopted, all ordinances as presented and passed, all
communications, petitions, and the like received, and, generally all papers
presented to be acted on, shall be filed and carefully preserved by the Clerk.



   (N)   Rule 14.  All petitions or communications shall be addressed
to the President and Board of Trustees and shall be in writing and filed with
the Clerk.



   (O)   Rule 15.  When a Trustee wishes to present a communication,
petition, order, resolution, or other original matter, he shall briefly state
its nature before presenting the same.



   (P)   Rule 16.  No person, except a member of the Board, shall be
permitted to address the President or the Board without the consent of the
President.



   (Q)   Rule 17.  All standing committees shall have the power in
case of emergency to correct the cause of such emergency, the cost of which
shall not exceed $500.



   (R)   Rule 18.  The order of business of this Board shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Calling the roll of members.



      (2)   Minutes of last meeting or meetings.



      (3)   Reports of committees and officers.



      (4)   Old business.



      (5)   New business.



      (6)   Adjournment.



(Ord. 71-4, passed  -  - ; Am. Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75; Am Ord. 89-12,
passed 5-10-89)



   (S)   Rule 19.  The President shall decide all questions of order,
and, in all cases not covered by these rules or where they are not
applicable, the Board shall be governed by parliamentary law as laid down in
the current edition of "Roberts' Rules of Order."



   (T)   Rule 20.  When a question is before the Board, no motions
shall be in order but to adjourn; lay on the table; previous question;
postpone indefinitely; postpone to a certain time, to commit; and amend. 
These motions shall be privileged and have precedence in the order named.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 30.05  COMPENSATION.



   Beginning May 1, 1989, the Trustees shall receive $150 for every
regular, or special meeting attended; salary may be received for two
unattended meetings, per annum.



(Ord. 88-26, passed  9-28-88)



§ 30.06  ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



   (A)   Rules statement. Any member of the corporate authorities may
attend any open or closed meeting of the village via electronic means (by
telephone or video only) provided that such attendance is in compliance with
these rules and any applicable laws.



   (B)   Prerequisite. Any member of the corporate authorities may
attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following conditions:



      (1)   A quorum is physically present throughout the meeting
and a majority of the corporate authorities votes to approve the electronic
attendance at the meeting.



      (2)   The member shall notify the Village Clerk at least 24
hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.



      (3)   The member must assert one of the following three
reasons why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:



         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal
illness or disability;



         (b)   The member cannot attend because of employment
purposes or the business of the Village; or



         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or
other emergency.



   (C)   Voting procedures. After a roll call establishing a quorum is
physically present, the presiding officer shall call for a motion that a
member shall be permitted to attend the meeting electronically after
specifying the reason entitling the absent member to attend electronically.
The motion must be approved by a vote of a majority of the corporate
authorities.



   (D)   Adequate equipment required. The member participating
electronically and other members of the corporate authorities must be able to
communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all
communications at the meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at
any meeting, the Village shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this
objective at the meeting site.



   (E)   Minutes. Any member attending electronically shall be
considered an off-site attendee and counted as present electronically for
that meeting if the member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall
also reflect and state specifically whether each member is physically present
or reflect and state specifically whether each member is physically present
or present by electronic means.



   (F)   Rights to remote member. A member permitted to attend
electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting
and participate in the same capacity as those members physically present,
subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted
and adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard,
considered, and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any
member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and
his or her vote counted and recorded by the Village Clerk and placed in the
minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may
leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member, provided the member
attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.



   (G)   If the Mayor is attending a meeting electronically, a trustee
physically present at the meeting site will be appointed the presiding
officer for that meeting via motion and approval by the corporate authorities.



   (H)   Committees, boards, and commissions. These rules shall apply
to all committees, board, and commissions established by authority of the
corporate authorities.



(Ord. 2007-003, passed 1-17-07)



CHAPTER 31:  VILLAGE OFFICIALS



Section



General Provisions



   31.001   Designation of officers



   31.002   Term of appointed officers



   31.003   Oath



   31.004   Bond; execution and approval



   31.005   Failure of officers to qualify



   31.006   Compensation



   31.007   Surrender of village property



   31.008   General duties



   31.009   Books, papers subject to examination



   31.010   Contracts for supplies



   31.011   Liability of officers



Village President



   31.025   Election and qualifications



   31.026   Bond



   31.027   Executive duties; compensation



   31.028   President Pro Tempore



   31.029   Appointments



   31.030   Powers and duties



Village Administrator



   31.045   Creation of position



   31.046   Employment; qualifications



   31.047   Bond



   31.048   Duties and responsibilities



   31.049   Compensation



   31.050   Conflict of interest prohibited



   31.051   Professional development



Village Clerk



   31.065   Bond



   31.066   Duties



   31.067   Compensation



Village Treasurer



   31.080   Bond



   31.081   Duties



Village Attorney



   31.095   Establishing



   31.096   Compensation



   31.097   Duties



   31.098   Bond



Director of Public Works



   31.110   Establishment; appointment



   31.111   Compensation



   31.112   Duties



   31.113   Retaining services of consulting engineer



Assistant Director of Public Works



   31.116   Establishment; appointment



   31.117   Compensation



   31.118   Duties



Other Officers



   31.125   Building Commissioner as conservator of the peace



   31.126   Community Service/Inspector



   31.127   Village Collector



   31.128   Village Finance Director



   31.129   Village Recreation Director



   31.130   Assistant Village Recreation Director



Deputy Clerk



   31.140   Deputy Clerk



   31.141   Duties



   31.142   Compensation



   31.143   Bond



Comptroller



   31.150   Comptroller



   31.151   Duties



   31.152   Compensation



   31.153   Bond



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.001  DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   Among the officers of the village to be appointed by the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, and
whose offices are hereby created and established, are the following:



      (1)   Village Treasurer.



      (2)   Chief of Police.



      (3)   Village Attorney.



      (4)   Building Commissioner.



      (5)   Inspectors in all departments.



      (6)   Director of Civil Defense.



      (7)   All deputies to officers.



      (8)   Village Administrator.



      (9)   Director of Public Works.



   (B)   All appointees may, from time to time, be suspended or removed
from office by the President and Board of Trustees, and all vacancies may be
filled in like manner.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.002  TERM OF APPOINTED OFFICERS.



   All such officers shall hold their appointive offices until the first
Monday of May in each year following their appointments and until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified; subject to removal at any
time by the President and Board of Trustees, with or without specification of
cause therefor.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.003  OATH.



   (A)   All officers of the village, whether elected or appointed,
shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and
subscribe the following oath or affirmation:



         I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be), that I
will support the Constitution of the United States and the  Constitution of
the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the
office of         , of the Village of Orland Hills to the best of my
ability.



   (B)   The oath or affirmation so subscribed shall be filed in the
office of the Clerk.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.004  BOND; EXECUTION AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   The officers of the village shall give bonds in the sums and
within the time respectively stated in the sections of this code defining the
powers and duties of the several officers, and departments of the village;
and in each case, provided by law.  In all cases not specifically provided
for, the officers of the village shall give such bonds and within such time
as the President and Board of Trustees may require, or as may be required by
law.  Should good cause exist in the judgment and discretion of the Board of
Trustees any officer may be required, from time to time, to give additional
bonds in such sum and within such time as the Board may by resolution direct.



   (B)   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the village is required as
a prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit or the exercise of any special privilege, the
surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in this state as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provision to the contrary by ordinance.



   (C)   Every officer of the village shall procure, as surety upon any
bond the officer may be required to give, a responsible surety company or
corporation licensed to do business in the state as a surety company.



   (D)   The bonds of all village officers shall be subject to the
approval of the President and Board of Trustees.  After the approval, as
aforesaid, the Clerk shall endorse thereon the date thereof and file the same
in his office except the bond of the Clerk, which shall be filed with the
Treasurer.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.005  FAILURE OF OFFICERS TO QUALIFY.



   If any person elected or appointed to any office of the village shall
fail to qualify by taking, subscribing, and filing the oath of office, and
making, executing, and filing his official bond, as herein provided within
ten days after he is officially notified of his election or appointment, the
office shall become vacant.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.006  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The compensation paid to the elected and appointed officials
of the village and to the various employees thereof shall be set from time to
time by the President and Board of Trustees.



   (B)   No officer, deputy to an officer, employee, inspector, or
person acting as a representative of the village shall retain any license
fee, permit fee, inspection fee, or compensation for any service in his
capacity as such, for any thing, act, or service required to be done or
authorized by this code, but all fees are to be turned over to the Village
Clerk.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.007  SURRENDER OF VILLAGE PROPERTY.



   Any  person having been an officer  or  employee of the village,
whose term has expired or who has resigned or been removed from office,
shall, within ten days after notification and request, deliver to his
successor in office all property, books, and effects of every description in
his possession belonging to the village or appertaining to his office.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.008  GENERAL DUTIES.



   Each officer, besides the specific duties which may be required by
virtue of said office, shall also perform such other and further duties, and
be subject to such rules and regulations as the President and Board of
Trustees may, from time to time, require, or by ordinance provide and
establish.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.009  BOOKS, PAPERS SUBJECT TO EXAMINATION.



   All books, papers, vouchers, warrants, entries, accounts, and memoranda
of every officer and employee of the village may be examined at any time by
the President, and the President and Board of Trustees may by resolution,
call upon any officer to make a report in writing of any subject matter which
the Board may designate in such resolution and within such time as said
resolution may prescribe.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.010  CONTRACTS FOR SUPPLIES.



   (A)   All contracts for supplies of any kind or nature let by an
officer of the village or Board of Trustees, where the amount of such
contract exceeds $2000 shall be furnished by contract and let to the lowest
responsible bidder, after advertising for the same unless the Board of
Trustees, by a vote of two-thirds of all the Trustees elected, specifically
waives this provision before purchasing supplies.



   (B)   Advertising shall be in a newspaper of general circulation in
the village and bids submitted to and received by the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.011  LIABILITY OF OFFICERS.



   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



VILLAGE PRESIDENT



§ 31.025  ELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   There shall be elected a President of the village, who shall hold his
office for four years and until his successor is elected and qualified.  He
shall be a citizen of the United States, a qualified elector, and shall have
resided within the corporate limits of the village at least one year next
preceding the election at which he is a candidate.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.026  BOND.



   The President of the village shall before entering upon the duties of
office execute a bond to the village in the penal sum of $1,000 with sureties
to be approved by the Board of Trustees conditioned as prescribed by law.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.027  EXECUTIVE DUTIES; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The President of the Board of Trustees shall perform the
duties and exercise the powers conferred upon the mayor of a city.



   (B)   The President shall devote such time to the duties of his
office as the faithful discharge thereof may require.  Beginning May 1,
1989, the President shall receive $150 for every regular, or special meeting
attended; salary may be received for two unattended meetings, per annum.



   (C)   The President of the Board of Trustees may exercise the same
veto powers, and with like effect, as the mayor of a city; and the Board of
Trustees may pass ordinances over such veto in like manner as a city council.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75; Am. Ord. 88-26, passed 9-28-88)



§ 31.028  PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE.



   The Board of Trustees shall from time to time elect one of its members
to serve as President Pro Tempore of the village or as acting chairman in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35. The trustee so elected by
the Board of Trustees shall assume the duties of President Pro Tempore when
required by law.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75; Am. Ord. 97-10, passed 4-16-97)



§ 31.029  APPOINTMENTS.



   The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall appoint all officers of the village whose appointments are
not otherwise provided for by statute.  Whenever a vacancy shall occur in
any office which by statute or ordinance the President is authorized to fill,
he shall, at the regular meeting of the Board of Trustees next occurring,
communicate to the Board of Trustees the name of his appointee to such
office, and pending the consent by the Board of Trustees as to such
appointment, he may designate some suitable person to discharge the duties of
said office.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.030  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Generally.  The President shall supervise the conduct of all
appointed officers and see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the
duties of their respective offices.  He shall inquire into all reasonable
complaints made against them and cause all their neglects or violations of
duties to be promptly corrected, and he shall, from time to time, give the
Board of Trustees such information relative to the affairs of the village as
he may deem proper and recommend to their consideration any measure he may
deem expedient, tending to the well-being, security, and improvement of the
village.



   (B)   Approval and veto of ordinances.  The President shall
carefully inspect all ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees and fix his
official signature to such as he may approve and return them to the Village
Clerk.  Such ordinances as he shall not approve shall be returned to the
Board of Trustees, with his objections thereto in writing, at the next
regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, occurring after the passage
thereof.  Such veto may extend to any one or more items or appropriations
contained in any ordinance making appropriations, or to the  entire
ordinance and in case the veto only extends to a part of such ordinance, the
residue thereof shall take effect and be in force; but in case the President
shall fail to return any ordinance with his objections thereto by the time
aforesaid, he shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance and the same
shall take effect accordingly.



   (C)   Sign licenses, permits, and commissions.  The President shall
sign such commissions, licenses, permits, and warrants granted, issued, or
ordered by the Board of Trustees or authorized by the ordinances of the
village, as may be required by this code.



   (D)   Warrants signed by President.  All warrants drawn upon the
Treasurer must be signed by the President and countersigned by the Village
Clerk and must state the particular fund to which same is chargeable and the
person to whom payable, and for what purpose the same was drawn and no money
shall be otherwise paid than upon warrants so drawn.



   (E)   Tax titles; conveyance.  Upon such terms as may be agreed
upon with the consent of the Finance Committee and the Board of Trustees, the
President and Village Treasurer may sell and convey any and all lots and
parcels of land to which a title is held by the village under sale and
conveyance for the village taxes or assessments.



   (F)   Powers as to litigation.  The President shall sign, and is
hereby authorized to sign in behalf of the village all instruments necessary
to the prompt prosecution or defense of any or all actions brought by or
against the village, including bonds for injunction.



   (G)   Inspections of records.  The President shall have power at
all times to examine and inspect the books, records, and papers of any agent,
employee, or officer of the village.



   (H)   Additional powers.  In addition to the above, the President
shall perform all such other duties and have all additional powers that are
or may be prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois, or the provisions
of this code.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.045  CREATION OF POSITION.



   There is hereby created the position of Village Administrator, an
administrative position of the village. 



(Ord. 87-17, passed 12-9-87)



§ 31.046  EMPLOYMENT; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Village Administrator shall be selected by and serve at
the pleasure of the Village President and Village Board and under such terms
and conditions as the Village Board shall determine and are permitted under
law.



   (B)   The Village Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of
executive, administrative, and professional qualifications with special
emphasis on actual experience and knowledge of municipal administration and
of the duties and responsibilities as set forth herein.



   (C)   During the absence or disability for any reason of the Village
Administrator, the Village President and Village Board may designate some
properly qualified person to perform the duties of the position of Village
Administrator.



(Ord. 87-17, passed 12-9-87)



§ 31.047  BOND.



   Before assuming the duties of the position, the Administrator shall
qualify for and obtain a fidelity bond in an amount to be specified by the
Village President and Village Board, conditioned upon the faithful and proper
performance of his duties, with an insurance corporation satisfactory to the
Village President and Village Board and licensed to do business in the State
of Illinois as surety.  Such bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk
after being approved by the Village President and Village Board. The cost of
such bond shall be borne by the village.



(Ord. 87-17, passed 12-9-87)



§ 31.048  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Village Administrator, except as otherwise required or prohibited
by law, shall serve as the chief administrative officer of the village and
shall be the direct representative of the Village President and Village Board
of Trustees in the transaction of the official business of the village and in
all matters concerning the citizens of the village and, to the extent not
prohibited by law, shall perform the duties assigned to him by the Village
President and Village Board, including, but not limited to, those duties and
authorities specifically provided for herein as follows:



   (A)   To observe, review, evaluate, and coordinate the work of
department heads and the employees for whom they are responsible and assist
or advise them in resolving unusual or difficult problems as may be necessary.



   (B)   When and as directed by the Village President and the Village
Board, to coordinate Village Board functions with those of other village
boards and commissions, such as the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners,
the Planning, Zoning and Development  Commission, and with other
governmental agencies, such as fire protection and sanitary districts, park
districts, the public schools, other municipalities, county governments, and
the State of Illinois and its agencies, and to keep the Village President and
Village Board fully advised of major activities, problems, and issues of
which they should be informed.



   (C)   To serve as the Personnel Officer of the village and to make
recommendations to the Village President and Village Board concerning the
hiring, appointment, suspension, promotion, demotion, discipline, removal, or
termination of village employees except those over whom such matters are
specifically prohibited by law or ordinance (i.e., police officers); to
devise and recommend to the Village President and Village Board policies and
procedures relating to employment standards and practices, personnel
compensation, job classification, performance evaluation, merit pay,
training, professional development, employee relations, labor relations,
personnel actions, and other related matters.



   (D)   To be responsible for preparation of the annual village budget
or appropriation ordinance, in accordance with such guidelines as may be
provided by the Village President and Village Board.



   (E)   To report regularly to the Village President and Village Board
on the current and projected fiscal condition of the village and the current
status of expenditures relative to the village budget or appropriation
ordinance, and to assure that proper accounting procedures are followed with
regard to the finances, income, and expenditures of the village.



   (F)   To be fully informed concerning current and pending state and
federal legislation affecting the village and to keep village officials fully
informed of such matters.



   (G)   To be fully informed and, under the direction of the Village
President and the Village Board, to take appropriate action on matters
regarding the availability of state  and federal  grants in  aid for 
local programs,and to assist department heads or village staff in procuring
such funds.



   (H)   To coordinate, as directed by the Village President and the
Village Board, matters relating to economic and community development, land
use, long- range planning, and other matters relating to the continued
improvement and economic well-being of the village.



   (I)   Except as otherwise provided by law or directed by the Village
President and Village Board, to be responsible for receiving and handling
complaints, suggestions, applications for permits and licenses, and other
such matters and to take appropriate action thereon, or to refer such matters
to the appropriate village office or official.



   (J)   To be responsible for the proper maintenance and upkeep of the
Village Hall and all village-owned real estate and personal property.



   (K)   To authorize all purchase orders and contracts for services,
supplies, materials, and equipment, or for contractual services, involving
the expenditure of not more than $3,000, provided, however, no such purchase
order or contract shall be authorized without a prior unexpended and
unencumbered appropriation in sufficient amount for such purpose.



   (L)   To prepare or direct the preparation of the preliminary agenda
for the Village Board meetings, and to keep the Village President and Village
Board informed concerning the background and issues relating to items
scheduled for action or discussion by the Village Board; and where
appropriate, to take necessary action to implement Village Board policies,
ordinances, resolutions, and instructions.



   (M)   On his own initiative, or as directed by the Village President
and Village Board, to conduct research and prepare reports concerning matters
for which the Village President and Village Board are responsible.



   (N)   As may be required or directed by the Village President and
Village Board, to review, monitor, and oversee village operations and make
recommendations to the Village President and Village Board as to how such
operations may be conducted in a more efficient and economical manner.



   (O)   To  coordinate and supervise the administrative, clerical,
and staff functions of the village central office, to include the development
and implementation  of  procedural  manuals,  operating policies,
administrative systems, and other matters necessary for the efficient
administrative operation of the village.



   (P)   To attend all regular and special meetings of the Village
Board, and all committee meetings as directed by the Village Board, and to
provide the Village President and Village Board with information and
assistance necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of such meetings.



   (Q)   To act, when directed, as the representative of the Village
President and Village Board at meetings with village residents,
representatives of other governmental agencies or other organizations and to
fully and properly represent the interests of the village at such meetings.



   (R)   To meet with citizens of the village when necessary to hear
and investigate complaints or suggestions regarding village business or
services, to initiate corrective action when necessary, and to take any other
such action which may be necessary to ensure the efficient delivery of
municipal services, provided that such actions are within the guidelines and
policies established by the Village President and Village Board, and provided
further that the Village President and Village Board are kept fully informed
of all such matters requiring their attention.



   (S)   To take any other such action as may be directed by the
Village President and the Village Board not otherwise prohibited by law or
ordinance.



(Ord. 87-17, passed 12-9-87; Am. Ord. 95-02, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 95-06,
passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 95-15, passed 8-16-95)



§ 31.049  COMPENSATION. 



   The Village Administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed from time to time by the Village President and Village Board of
Trustees in accordance with law.



(Ord. 87-17, passed 12-9-87)



§ 31.050  CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITED.



   The Village Administrator shall comply fully with the "conflict of
interest" provisions set forth from time to time in the Illinois Municipal
Code (Chapter 65) and the Illinois Corrupt Practices Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act
105 § 1 et seq. regardless of whether such statutory provisions  are 
made  expressly  to  the  position  of Village Administrator.  The
Village Administrator shall also  not  be  interested  directly  or 
indirectly in any matters requiring decisions or recommendations to be made
to the village or any of its commissions, boards, or committees, and
specifically including zoning and other legislative decisions, unless
expressly exempted by law or by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 87-17, passed 12-9-87; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 31.051  PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.



   The Village Administrator shall be expected and encouraged to maintain
membership in and attend conferences and meetings of organizations and
associations for the purpose of enhancing and maintaining professional
expertise in municipal administration, providing that expenses relating to
membership in such organizations and attendance at such meetings shall have
been previously approved by the Village President and Village Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 87-17, passed 12-9-87)



VILLAGE CLERK



§ 31.065  BOND.



   The Village Clerk shall before entering upon the duties of his office,
extend to the Village a bond in the penal sum of $3,000, with sureties to be
approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned as provided by law.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.066  DUTIES.



   The Clerk shall, in addition to the duties now imposed upon that
officer by statute, perform the following duties.



   (A)   The Clerk shall keep his office, in the village hall, for the
transaction of village business during usual daily business hours.



   (B)   The Clerk shall issue notices of meeting to the President and
members of the Village Board of Trustees, and when directed by that body, to
the members of the different committees of that body and to all persons whose
attendance will be required before that body or any such committee when so
directed; he shall also issue and cause to be served notices of said meetings.



   (C)   The Clerk shall attest all the licenses granted by the
President or Board of Trustees under the provisions of this code.



   (D)   The Clerk shall without delay deliver to the officers of the
village and to the various committees all bills, resolutions, communications,
and other documents referring to such officers and committees.



   (E)   The Clerk shall without delay deliver to the President all
ordinances or resolutions under his charge which may require approval or
other action by the President with all papers and information on which the
same were founded.



   (F)   The Clerk shall keep the corporate seal and affix the same to
all papers which require it.  He shall keep all records and papers belonging
to the village and attend all meetings of the President and Board of
Trustees, and keep a full record of its proceedings in the journal.  He
shall make proper copies of all papers duly filed in his office and make
transcripts from the journal and other records and files of his office,
certified by him under the corporate seal.



   (G)   All ordinances passed by the President and Board of Trustees
shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book kept for that purpose before the
next regular meeting after they go into effect.  If the ordinance requires
publication, the Clerk shall cause the same to be duly published.  The Clerk
shall note at the foot of the records of each ordinance a memorandum of the
date of its passage and approval or otherwise becoming effective, and if
published, the date of the publication of such ordinances.  The original
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk with a certificate of publication
or posting attached to the ordinance requiring publication.



   (H)   It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk, within five days
after the result of an election is declared or an appointment made, to notify
in writing all persons elected or appointed to office.  Unless such persons
shall respectively qualify in ten days after such notice, the office shall
become and be vacant.



   (I)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk, on or before the second
Tuesday in December in each year, to file with the County Clerk of Cook
County, Illinois, a certified copy of the ordinance in which the total amount
of appropriations for all corporate purposes of the village legally made are
levied and assessed for the current fiscal year.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.067  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Beginning May 1, 1989, the Village Clerk shall receive $150
for every regular or special meeting attended; salary may be received for two
unattended meetings, per annum. 



(Ord. 88-26, 9-28-88)



   (B)   The compensation of the Village Clerk shall be paid out of the
General Fund from the proper appropriation for all his services, including
attending meetings, keeping minutes, records, seal and files and recording
the same; for his keeping and attending his office at the village hall during
daily business hours; and for his other clerical duties relating to the
general business of the village.  Said salary shall be paid in monthly
installments upon proper warrants.  All fees are to be turned in to the
Village Treasury.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



VILLAGE TREASURER



§ 31.080  BOND.



   The Village Treasurer before entering upon the duties of his office
shall execute to the village a bond conditioned for the faithful discharge of
his duties with sureties to be approved by the President and Board of
Trustees in a sum of not less than $3,000.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75)



§ 31.081  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to
the village and shall render at the end of each and every month, and more
often if required, a statement under oath, to the Board of Trustees, showing
the state of the treasury at the date of such account and the balance of the
money in the treasury.  The statement shall set forth all the moneys
received by him, and on what account they shall have been received; also all
moneys paid out by him and on what account they shall have been paid.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall cause to be kept books of account, in such
manner as to accurately show all moneys received by him, from whom, and on
what account they shall have been received; also all moneys paid out by him
and on what account they have been paid.  The books shall be kept in such
manner as to be readily understood and investigated.  The books and all
papers and files of said office shall at all times be open to the examination
of the President and Board of Trustees or any member thereof.



   (C)   The Village Treasurer shall keep by double entry a full
detailed account of all village funds, general tax receipts and receipts from
other sources, also a Bond Account, Sinking Fund Account, and Forfeit Account
in the village ledger.  He shall keep a "special fund" ledger in which all
special funds shall be kept separately by numbers and names of the special
funds, showing the total amount of each fund and installment of same to be
collected and each amount to show the total collections and disbursements on
account of same.



   (D)   Each warrant, as soon as it is issued by the Clerk and signed
by the President, shall be registered by the Village Treasurer in the warrant
account with each fund, which shall be kept by him, showing under separate
headings the dates and amounts of payments made on the same and when
canceled, and he shall, on registering each warrant, cancel the same and mark
same "Paid by Treasurer" with the date of each payment.



   (E)   All funds and money belonging to the village in the custody of
the Village Treasurer shall be kept on deposit with such bank or banks as
shall be designated by the President and Board of Trustees by resolution, as
a depository for such funds and money.  Said bank or banks shall not be
qualified to receive funds or money of this village until it has furnished
the corporate authorities with two copies of the last two sworn statements of
resources and liabilities which the bank is required to furnish the Auditor
of Public Accounts or to the Comptroller of Currency.



   (F)   The Village Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility
for all funds or money which he deposits in said bank or banks while the
funds and money are so deposited; provided, however, that the amount of such
deposits shall not exceed 75% of the bank's or banks' capital stock and
surplus and the Village Treasurer shall be responsible for funds or money
deposited in the bank or banks in excess of this limitation.  Such funds or
money shall be subject to withdrawal from time to time upon checks or
combination voucher-checks signed by either the Village Treasurer, or the
President, or the Chairman of the Finance Committee.



   (G)   The Village Treasurer shall also perform such additional
duties as may be prescribed from time to time by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 § 3-10-1
et seq.



(Ord. 75-15, passed 7-30-75; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



VILLAGE ATTORNEY



§ 31.095  ESTABLISHING.



   There is hereby created the office of Village Attorney.  The Village
Attorney shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees.



§ 31.096  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of the Village Attorney shall be determined from time
to time by the corporate authorities.



§ 31.097  DUTIES.



   The Village Attorney shall perform the following duties:



   (A)   The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all
suits or actions at law or equity to which the village or any of its officers
or employees may be a party.



   (B)   The Village Attorney shall, when requested, draft or supervise
the drafting of contracts, leases or other documents or instruments, to which
the village may be a party as well as all ordinances and resolutions.



   (C)   The Village Attorney shall prosecute all ordinance violation
cases.



§ 31.098  BOND.



   The Village Attorney shall post a bond as may be required by the Board
of Trustees from time to time.



DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS



§ 31.110  ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Director of Public Works of the
village.  The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the Village
President with the  advice  and  consent  of the Board  of  Trustees,
and shall continue to hold office until notified in writing that his services
are no longer required.



('65 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 31.111  COMPENSATION.



   The salary of the Director of Public Works shall be established from
time to time by ordinance.



('65 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 2) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 31.112  DUTIES.



   The Director of Public Works shall perform the following duties:



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall have charge of and be
responsible for the planning, installation, maintenance, repair, improvement,
or removal of all public improvements within the village, including but not
limited to the following:  public streets, curb gutters, sidewalks,
crosswalks, alleys, drains, ditches, gutter culverts, water mains, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, and other structures or appurtenances thereto.



   (B)   He shall have charge of the operation and maintenance of all
public sewers and drains of the village.



   (C)   He shall have charge of all buildings, grounds, and equipment
belonging to the village, except such as is expressly delegated to the
supervision or control of other departments, boards, or officers.



   (D)   When requested by the President or Board of Trustees, the
Director of Public Works shall submit written reports concerning the progress
of any specific public improvement or operations.



('65 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 3) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 31.113  RETAINING SERVICES OF CONSULTING ENGINEER.



   In such instance where the performance of his duties requires the
services of an engineer, the Director  of  Public Works may, by and with
the consent of the Village President and Board of Trustees, retain the
services of a consulting engineer for a specified purpose.



('65 Code, Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 4) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS



§ 31.116  ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Public
Works.  The Assistant Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the
Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 98-03, passed 3-4-98)



§ 31.117  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of the Assistant Director of Public Works shall be
determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 98-03, passed 3-4-98)



§ 31.118  DUTIES.



   The Assistant Director of Public Works shall assist the Director of
Public Works in the performance of his duties as specified by ordinance and
shall perform such additional duties as may be directed from time to time by
the Director of Public Works, the President or Board of Trustees.  It is
specifically contemplated by the President and Board of Trustees that these
duties shall include the responsibility to assist in the formulation of
policy.



(Ord. 98-03, passed 3-4-98)



OTHER OFFICERS



§ 31.125  BUILDING COMMISSIONER AS CONSERVATOR OF THE PEACE.



   The Building Commissioner and his assigns of the village are hereby
designated as conservators of the peace and are hereby empowered to:



   (A)   Arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who are found violating any municipal ordinance or criminal law of
the state relating to design, construction, alteration, enlargement,
equipment, repair, demolition, removal, conversion, use, or maintenance of
all buildings and structures within the village.



   (B)   To commit the arrested person for examination.



   (C)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight
or Sunday in any safe place, or until they can be brought before the proper
court.



   (D)   To issue citations within the limits of the village to a
person who the Building Commissioner or his assigns reasonably feel has
violated any ordinance of the village or law of the state relating to the
matters set forth in division (A) above.



(Ord. 82-14, passed  -  - )



§ 31.126  COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER/INSPECTOR.



   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Community Service
Officer/Inspector.



   (B)   The Community Service Officer/Inspector shall perform the
duties assigned to him by the Village President and Board of Trustees,
including, but not limited to the following:



      (1)   To serve as a sworn police officer.



      (2)   To insure compliance of all village ordinances and codes
and to coordinate code compliance with village residents, businesses and
contractors.



      (3)   To coordinate activities between village departments and
the Village Police Department and other law enforcement agencies.



      (4)   To prepare reports for the Building Department, Public
Works Department, Police Department, Recreation Department and village
administration.



      (5)   To maintain records and files for citations  issued by
the Police Department; to  maintain incident and report files for the
Building Department, Public Works Department, Recreation Department and
Police Department.



      (6)   To secure and maintain evidence and associated records.



      (7)   To provide community oriented information to the public
and other governmental agencies.



      (8)   To process a request from village departments for
special information.



   (C)   The Community Service Officer/Inspector shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the Village President and
Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 94-15, passed 6-6-94)



§ 31.127  VILLAGE COLLECTOR.



   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Village Collector.



   (B)   The Village Collector shall perform the duties assigned to
him/her by the Village President and Board of Trustees, including but not
limited to the duties given to village collectors by state statute.



   (C)   The Village Collector shall receive such compensation as shall
be fixed from time to time by the Village President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 97-32, passed 7-2-97)



§ 31.128  VILLAGE FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Village Finance
Director.



   (B)   The Village Finance Director shall perform the duties assigned
to him/her by the Village President and Board of Trustees and/or Village
Administrator, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Direct, coordinate and be responsible for matters
relating to taxation, accounting, auditing, payroll and risk management.



   (C)   The Village Finance Director shall receive such compensation
as shall be fixed from time to time by the Village President and Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 97-32, passed 7-2-97)



§ 31.129  VILLAGE RECREATION DIRECTOR.



   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Village Recreation
Director, who shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The Village Recreation Director shall perform the duties
assigned to him/her by the Village President and Board of Trustees and/or
Village Administrator, including but not limited to:  Direct the Village's
Recreation Department and supervise all programs and activities conducted by
the Recreation Department.



   (C)   The Village Recreation Director shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 7-19-00)



§ 31.130  ASSISTANT VILLAGE RECREATION DIRECTOR.



   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Assistant Village
Recreation Director, who shall be appointed by the Village President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The Assistant Recreation Director shall perform the duties
assigned to him/her by the Village President and Board of Trustees and/or
Village Administrator and/or Village Recreation Director.



   (C)   The Assistant Village Recreation Director shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 2000-13, passed 7-19-00)



DEPUTY CLERK



§ 31.140  DEPUTY CLERK.



   There is hereby established the position of Deputy Clerk pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10 who shall be appointed by the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 4-16-97)



§ 31.141  DUTIES.



   The Deputy Clerk shall perform such duties as are assigned by the
Village Clerk.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 4-16-97)



§ 31.142  COMPENSATION.



   The Deputy Clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be determined
by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 4-16-97)



§ 31.143  BOND.



   The Deputy Clerk shall post a bond as may be determined by the Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 4-16-97)



COMPTROLLER



§ 31.150  COMPTROLLER.



   There is hereby established the position of Comptroller pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5 who shall be appointed by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 97-11, passed 4-23-97)



§ 31.151  DUTIES.



   The Comptroller shall perform the following duties subject to the
direction of the Village Administrator:



   (A)   Work closely with and assist the Village Treasurer in the
performance of the Treasurer's duties;



   (B)   Be responsible for all day-to-day financial activities of the
village;



   (C)   Direct, coordinate and be responsible for the collection,
investment and disbursement of village funds;



   (D)   Advise the Village Administrator and Corporate Authorities on
all matters relating to the village finances;



   (E)   Supervise the work of village employees assigned to the
Comptroller;



   (F)   Receive all invoices from suppliers and check with department
heads to determine that all items on purchase orders have been delivered to
the village;



   (G)   (1)   Keep a bond register showing all outstanding bonds to
the village; the number and the date of issuance and expiration of such
bonds; the name and address of persons to whom such bonds are issued; the
identity of the fund out of which such bonds are payable, and, if payable out
of a special assessment fund, the installment number to which such bonds
belong; and the village bonds that are purchased, paid or canceled;



      (2)   The Comptroller shall prepare an annual report
describing the bonds sold or paid during the year and the terms of such sales
or the amount paid, with each and every item of expense thereof.



   (H)   Submit to the corporate authorities a report of his or her
estimate, as nearly as possible of the money necessary to defray the expenses
of the village during the current fiscal year. For the purpose of making this
report, the Comptroller is authorized to require all officers to submit
statements of the condition and expense of their respective offices or
departments, with any proposed village improvements and  the  probable 
expense thereof,  all  unperformed contracts and the amount of all
unexpected appropriations of the preceding year. In this report, the
Comptroller shall:



      (1)   Classify the different objects and purposes of
expenditure, giving, as nearly as possible, the amount required for each;



      (2)   Show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year
from all sources;



      (3)   Show the amount of liabilities upon which interest is to
be paid;



      (4)   Show the bonds and debts payable during the year, when
due and payable; and



      (5)   Such other information as may be requested by the
Corporate Authorities or Village Administrator.



(Ord. 97-11, passed 4-23-97)



§ 31.152  COMPENSATION.



   The Comptroller shall receive such compensation as shall be determined
by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 97-11, passed 4-23-97)



§ 31.153  BOND.



   The Comptroller shall post a bond as may be determined by the Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 97-11, passed 4-23-97)



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Board of Fire and Police Commissioners



   32.001   Creation and composition



   32.002   Appointment; terms



   32.003   Qualifications, oath, and removal



   32.004   Powers and duties



   32.005   Compensation



Board of Local Improvements



   32.015   Creation



   32.016   Powers and duties



Parks and Recreation Commission



   32.030   Establishment



   32.031   Composition



   32.032   Meetings



   32.033   Duties



   32.034   Restriction on obligations



   32.035   Recreation Committee



Planning, Zoning and Development Commission



   32.050   Establishment



Police Department



   32.065   Establishment



   32.066   Positions established; appointment



   32.067   Personnel bound by rules and regulations



   32.068   Part-time police officerS



   32.069   Uniform allowance



   32.070   Administrator; establishment; appointment



   32.071   Deputy police chief



Police Pension Board



   32.080   Establishment



Public Works Commission



   32.085   Creation and Composition



   32.086   Appointment; terms



   32.087   Meetings



Special Events Commission



   32.095   Creation and appointment



   32.096   Appointment; terms



   32.097   Meetings



Finance Commission



   32.105   Establishment



   32.106   Composition



   32.107   Meetings



   32.108   Duties



   32.109   Restriction on obligations



Code Hearing Department



   32.120   Adoption



   32.121   Definitions



   32.122   Code Hearing Department established



   32.123   Hearing procedures not exclusive



   32.124   Instituting hearing code proceedings



   32.125   Subpoenas; defaults



   32.126   Continuances; representation at code hearings



   32.127   Hearing; evidence



   32.128   Qualifications of hearing officers



   32.129   Findings; decision; order



   32.130   Review under administrative review law



   32.131   Judgment on findings, decision and order



   32.132   Impact on existing administrative adjudication system



Tourism and Convention Bureau



   32.145   Chicago Southland Convention and Visitors Bureau



Veterans Commission



   32.160   Establishment and membership



   32.161   Terms of office



   32.162   Organization



   32.163   Meetings



   32.164   Functions



   32.165   Duties and responsibilities



BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.001  CREATION AND COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
consisting of three members. They shall be officers of the village as
provided by statute.



(Ord. 87-05, passed  -  -87)



§ 32.002  APPOINTMENT; TERMS.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the
Village President by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees.  The
terms of office of the members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall be three years and until their respective successors shall be appointed
and qualified; provided, that no such appointments shall be made by any
President within 30 days before the expiration of his term of office.  The
President shall appoint the first members of such Board, one of whom is
appointed to serve until the end of the current municipal year in which such
appointment is made, another shall serve until the end of the municipal year
next ensuing, and the third shall serve until the end of the municipal year
second next ensuing; provided, that each of the first members of the Board
shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified.



(Ord. 87-05, passed  -  - 87)



§ 32.003  QUALIFICATIONS, OATH, AND REMOVAL.



   The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have
such qualifications as are now or may hereafter be required of them by law. 
Each member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall take oath or
affirmation of office and pledge the faithful performance of the duties of
his office.  The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
be subject to removal from office in the same manner as other officers of the
village.



(Ord. 87-05, passed  -  -87)



§ 32.004  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such powers and
duties as are now, or as may hereafter be given to it by law.



(Ord. 87-05, passed  -  -87)



§ 32.005  COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall serve
with such compensation as the corporate authorities may determine and provide
by ordinance.



(Ord. 87-05, passed  -  -87)



BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



§ 32.015  CREATION.



   There is hereby established the Board of Local Improvements for the
village which shall consist of three members.



(Ord. 65-0-005, passed 6-16-65; Am. Ord. 66-0-002, passed 1-19-66; Am. Ord.
66-0-007, passed 11-5-66; Am. Ord. 67-0-005, passed  -  -67)



§ 32.016  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it by statute or ordinance.



(Ord. 65-0-005, passed 6-16-65; Am. Ord. 66-0-002, passed 1-19-66; Am. Ord.
66-0-007, passed 11-5-66; Am. Ord. 67-0-005, passed  -  -67)



PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 32.030  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established an Advisory Parks and Recreation Commission
for the village.



(Ord. 85-15, passed  -  - )



§ 32.031  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.  An attempt will be made to select individuals from
geographically diverse areas within the village and representatives of
various recreation oriented organizations in the community. 



   (B)   The initial appointments will be as follows:  two members for
one year, two members for two years, two members for three years, and the
chairperson for four years.  Thereafter, appointments or reappointments will
be for three years.  Appointments to fill vacancies in unexpired terms will
be for the remainder of the term.



(Ord. 85-15, passed  -  - )



§ 32.032  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Meetings of the Parks and Recreation Commission will be held
on the third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m.  Other meetings may be
scheduled as needed with proper notification to members and the public.



   (B)   A majority of the seven Commissioners must be present for a
quorum to be declared and for motions to be acted upon.



   (C)   Each Commissioner must attend a minimum of nine of the twelve
scheduled meetings per year.  If a Commissioner fails to attend the minimum
number of meetings, another individual may be appointed to fulfill the
remainder of the term.



   (D)   A secretary will be appointed from among the Commission
members, or the Commission may defer secretarial responsibilities to a
designated Recreation Department staff member.



(Ord. 85-15, passed  -  - ; Am. Ord. 93-33, passed 6-2-93; Am. Ord. 93-40,
passed 6-16-93)



§ 32.033  DUTIES.



   From time to time the Parks and Recreation Commission will:



   (A)   Conduct surveys to determine the recreation needs and desires
of the various age groups within the village.



   (B)   Solicit citizen input, particularly from areas surrounding
potential park sites, or where recreational activities are contemplated.



   (C)   Conduct feasibility studies on potential recreation sites,
with regard to use or improvements.



   (D)   Prepare plans detailing the improvements.



   (E)   Gather data on the cost of proposed improvements/construction
including possible donation of materials or labor.



   (F)   Make recommendations to the Youth, Education, and Recreation
Village Board Committee on park and recreation issues.



   (G)   Seek funding from the corporate authorities, donation, grants,
or other sources.



   (H)   Upon approval of the project and funding, prepare a report
detailing the work to be accomplished, including procurement of materials and
equipment, and the responsibility thereof.  Prepare a schedule for
implementation, development, or construction and a tentative completion date.



   (I)   Coordinate with the Village Recreation Department or other
affected department, for assistance required in the performance of any of the
duties of the Commission..



   (J)   Obtain final approval of the Board of Trustees for
implementation of the plan.



   (K)   Oversee and participate in the development/ construction and
provide a final report to the Board upon completion of the project.  Interim
reports may be requested by the Board if the project is of longer duration.



(Ord. 85-15, passed  -  - ; Am. Ord. 93-40, passed 6-16-93)



§ 32.034  RESTRICTION ON OBLIGATIONS.



   The Park and Recreation Commission shall not in any way obligate the
village, or village funds to any project.



(Ord. 85-15, passed  -  - )



§ 32.035  RECREATION COMMITTEE.



   The Recreation Committee is comprised of the Village President and
three Trustees appointed by the Village President.  The Committee will act
as liaison between the Park and Recreation Commission and the Board of
Trustees.  They will promptly place recommendations and requests from the
Commission before the Board as a whole.  They will provide the Commission
with the Board's response in an expeditious manner.



(Ord. 85-15, passed  -  - )



PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 32.050  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission, see §§ 159.160 through 159.174 and § 159.200.



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.065  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Village Police Department is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes .



(Ord. 88-03, passed  -  -88; Am. Ord. 88-42, passed 12-28-88)



§ 32.066  POSITIONS ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The Village Police Department shall consist of the following
sworn personnel:  One Chief of Police; one commander; and such numbers of
patrolmen as may be authorized by the corporate authorities from time to time.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees.



   (C)   The commander shall be appointed from among the sergeants, by
the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. 
The appointment shall be a duty assignment and not a promotion in rank.



   (D)   All other full-time sworn police positions will be subject to
the appointment, promotion and discipline procedures as established by the
Village Fire and Police Commission, pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes.



   (E)   Non-sworn personnel may be employed by the Police Department
to perform such duties as designated by the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 88-03, passed  -  -88; Am. Ord. 88-42, passed 12-28-88; Am. Ord.
91-05, passed 2-13-91; Am. Ord. 92-60, passed 12-23-92; Am. Ord. 93-29,
passed 4-21-93; Am. Ord. 94-24, passed 8-17-94)



§ 32.067  PERSONNEL BOUND BY RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   All personnel of the Village Police Department, both sworn and
non-sworn, are bound by the rules and regulations, and policy and procedures
manual as promulgated by the Police Department and approved by the Village
Board.



(Ord. 88-03, passed  -  -88; Am. Ord. 88-42, passed 12-28-88)



§ 32.068  PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.




   (A)   Employment.  The village may employ part-time police officers
from time to time as it deems necessary.





   (B)   Duties. A part-time police officer shall have all the
responsibilities of a full-time police officer, and such specific duties as
delineated in the General Orders of the Village Police Department, but the
number of hours a part-time officer may work within a calendar year is
restricted.  Part-time police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or
direct full-time police officers.  Part-time police officers shall be
trained in accordance with the Illinois Police Training Act (Ch. 50, Act 705,
§§ 1 et seq.) and the rules and requirements of the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board.





   (C)   Hiring standards. Any person employed as a part-time police
officer must meet the following standards:





      (1)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of
sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.





      (2)   Be at least 21 years of age.





      (3)   Pass a medical examination.





      (4)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.





      (5)   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver’s license.





      (6)   Possess no prior felony convictions.





      (7)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must
have been honorably discharged.





   (D)   Discipline. Part-time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the Chief of Police.  Part-time police officers serve at the
discretion of the village authorities, shall not have any property rights in
this employment, and may be removed by the village authorities at any time. 
Part-time police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and General
Orders issued by the Village Police Department.




(Ord. 86-15, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 7-26-89; Am. Ord. 2012-008,
passed 4-18-12; Am. Ord. 2012-021, passed 12-19-12; Am. Ord. 2015-001, passed
1-21-15; Am. Ord. 2015-008, passed 8-5-15)



§ 32.069  UNIFORM ALLOWANCE.



   (A)   A clothing allowance shall be provided by the village to the
employees to the Police Department in the amounts as specified.



      (1)   Full-time employee - $350 per year.



      (2)   Part-time police officer - $175 per year.



      (3)   Part-time, non-sworn employee as specified in enabling
legislation or by authority of the President and Board of Trustees.



   (B)   This disbursement of funds will be completed by draft on May
15 and November 15 of each year, directly to the involved employees, at a
rate of one-half of the total amount due.



   (C)   The amount specified as inventory maintenance in the budget
for the fiscal year by the President and Board of Trustees shall remain in
the general fund and is subject to obligation by the Chief of Police by
established purchase order procedures.



(Ord. 90-36, passed 6-27-90)



§ 32.070  ADMINISTRATOR; ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Police Department
Administrator. The Police Department Administrator shall be appointed by the
Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The compensation of the Police Department Administrator shall
be determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees.



   (C)   The Police Department Administrator shall assist the Chief of
Police in the administration and operation of the Police Department, and
shall perform such other non-law enforcement duties as may be directed from
time to time by the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 99-30, passed 10-20-99)



§ 32.071  DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF.



   In accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-4, the position of
deputy police chief is hereby created in the village.  The deputy police
chief shall be appointed by the Chief of the Police Department.  The salary
of the deputy police chief shall be determined from time to time by the
corporate authorities of the village.



(Ord. 2007-021, passed 12-19-07)



POLICE PENSION BOARD



§ 32.080  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a Police Pension Board pursuant to Article
3 of the Illinois Pension Code.



(Ord. 90-54, passed 11-14-90)



PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION



§ 32.085  CREATION AND COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Public Works Commission consisting of five
members.



(Ord. 93-43, passed 6-16-93)



§ 32.086  APPOINTMENT; TERMS.



   (A)   The Public Works Commissioners shall be appointed by the
Village President, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The terms of office of the members of the Public Works
Commission shall be three years and until their respective successors shall
be appointed.



   (C)   The President shall appoint the first members of such Board as
follows:



      (1)   One of whom is appointed to serve until the end of the
current municipal year in which such appointment is made;



      (2)   Another two shall serve until the end of the municipal
year next ensuing;



      (3)   The fourth and fifth shall serve until the end of the
municipal year second next ensuing; and



      (4)   Provided that each of the first members of the Board
shall serve until his or her successor is appointed.



(Am. Ord. 93-43, passed 6-16-93)



§ 32.087  MEETINGS.



   Each Commissioner must attend a minimum of nine of the twelve scheduled
meetings per year.  If a Commissioner fails to attend the minimum of
meetings, another individual may be appointed to fulfill the remainder of the
term.  A secretary will be appointed from among the Commission members.



(Am. Ord. 93-43, passed 6-16-93)



SPECIAL EVENTS COMMISSION



§ 32.095  CREATION AND COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Special Events Commission consisting of 12
members.



(Ord. 93-44, passed 6-16-93; Am. Ord. 95-42, passed 11-15-95)



§ 32.096  APPOINTMENT; TERMS.



   (A)   The Special Events Commissioners shall be appointed by the
Village President, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The terms of office of the members of the Special Events
Commission shall be three years and until their respective successors shall
be duly appointed and qualified.



   (C)   The President shall appoint the members of the Commission as
follows:



      (1)   Those members currently appointed, as of November 15,
1995, shall serve their respective terms as currently exist (staggered,
alternating three year terms);



      (2)   The new members shall be assigned to terms that parallel
those that currently exist, providing for a proportionate number of members
assigned to each term.



(Ord. 93-44, passed 6-16-93; Am. Ord. 95-42, passed 11-15-95)



§ 32.097  MEETINGS.



   Each Commissioner must attend a minimum of 75% of the meetings per
year.  If a Commissioner fails to attend the minimum of meetings, another
individual may be appointed  to fulfill  the remainder  of the term. A
secretary will be appointed from among the Commission members.



(Ord. 93-44, passed 6-16-93)



FINANCE COMMISSION



§ 32.105  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a Finance Commission for the village.



(Ord. 95-26, passed 10-4-95)



§ 32.106  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The Finance Commission shall consist of three members
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees. An attempt will be made to select individuals with a background
in business and finance.



   (B)   The initial appointments will be as follows: one member for
one year, one member for two years, and one member for three years.
Thereafter, appointments or reappointments will be for three years.
Appointments to fill vacancies in unexpired terms will be for the remainder
of the term.



   (C)   The Commission members shall not receive any compensation for
their services on behalf of the village.



(Ord. 95-26, passed 10-4-95)



§ 32.107  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Meetings of the Finance Commission will be held as requested
by the Finance Committee, the Village President or the Board of Trustees as
may be necessary to discharge the assignments charged to it from time to time.



   (B)   A chairman and secretary shall be appointed from among the
Commission members.



(Ord. 95-26, passed 10-4-95)



§ 32.108  DUTIES.



   The Commission shall do the following:



   (A)   Meet with the Finance Committee, when requested  by the 
Committee,  to review,  discuss and analyze the financial status of the
village, its fiscal policies, revenues and expenditures.



   (B)   To perform such studies and make such recommendations
regarding all financial aspects of the village as may be requested by the
Finance Committee, the Village President or the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 95-26, passed 10-4-95)



§ 32.109  RESTRICTION ON OBLIGATIONS.



   The Finance Commission shall not in any way obligate the village, or
village funds to any project.



(Ord. 95-26, passed 10-4-95)



CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT



§ 32.120  ADOPTION.



   The village hereby adopts ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2.2-1 et seq. in
its current form and as it may be amended from time to time for the
adjudication of municipal code violations to the extent permitted by the
Illinois Constitution and the Illinois Municipal Code.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.121  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CODE. Any municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations
that must be adjudicated pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1 et seq.
in its current form and as may be amended from time to time, and (ii) any
offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a
traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any
reportable offense under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-204.



   HEARING OFFICER. A municipal employee or an officer or agent of the
village, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:



      (1)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine
whether or not a code violation exists;



      (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested
parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;



      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of
the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and



      (4)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order
stating whether a code violation exists.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.122  CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Code Hearing Department in the
village.



   (B)   The function of the Code Hearing Department is to expedite the
prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth in this
subchapter.



   (C)   The Code Hearing Department may adjudicate any violation of a
municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations that must be
adjudicated pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1 et seq. in its
current form and as amended from time to time, and (ii) any offense under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or similar offense that is a traffic regulation
governing the movement of vehicles except for any reportable offenses under
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-204.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.123  HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   This subchapter does not preclude the village from using other methods
to enforce the provisions of its Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.124  INSTITUTING HEARING CODE PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue
a code violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the
violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates:



      (1)   The name and address of the defendant;



      (2)   The type and nature of the violation;



      (3)   The date and time the violation was observed; and



      (4)   The names of the witnesses of the violation.



   (B)   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the Code
Hearing Department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of
the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for
that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more
than 63 days after the violation is reported.



   (C)   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in
the files of the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the village in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence
of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated,
and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the
defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the
hearing.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.125  SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS.



   (A)   At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer
assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party, direct
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.



   (B)   If on the date set for the hearing the defendant or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to
the existence of a code violation.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.126  CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS.



   (A)   No continuances shall be authorized by a hearing officer in
proceedings under this subchapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.



   (B)   Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
subchapter shall not exceed 39 days.



   (C)   The case for the village may be presented by an attorney
designated by the village or by any other municipal employee, except that the
case for the village shall not be presented by any employee of the Code
Hearing Department. The case for the defendant may be presented by the
defendant, the defendant’s attorney, or any other agent or representative
of the defendant.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.127  HEARING; EVIDENCE.



   The hearing officer shall preside at the hearing, shall hear testimony
and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of a
code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.128  QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS.



   Prior to conducting proceedings under this subchapter, hearing officers
shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the
following:



   (A)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they
will conduct;



   (B)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that
they will administer;



   (C)   Observation of administrative hearings; and



   (D)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on
evidence and issuing final orders.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.129  FINDINGS; DECISION; ORDER.



   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. Payment of any penalty or fine and
the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the
Code of Ordinances, unless the Board of Trustees provide otherwise.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.130  REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW.



   The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be
subject to review in the Circuit Court of Cook County. The provisions of the
Administrative Review Act and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decisions
and order of a hearing officer.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.131  JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER.



   (A)   A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative
Review Law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.



   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review
under the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination
of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the Circuit
Court of Cook County, in which the village is located, for purpose of
obtaining a judgement of findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this
section shall prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings,
decisions, and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order
was issued in accordance with this subchapter and the applicable municipal
ordinances. If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order
was entered in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter and the
applicable municipal ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for
a hearing under this subchapter and for judicial review as provided in this
subchapter:



      (1)   The court shall render judgement in favor of the village
and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision,
and order, plus costs. The judgement shall have the same effect and may be
enforced in the same manner as other judgements for the recovery of money; or



      (2)   The court may also issue any other orders and
injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the
hearing officer to correct a code violation.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



§ 32.132  IMPACT ON EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM.



   This subchapter shall not affect the validity of systems of
administrative adjudication that were authorized by state statute, including
village ordinances, and which were in existence prior to the effective date
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2005-003, passed 1-5-05; Am. Ord. 2006-028, passed 11-15-06)



TOURISM AND CONVENTION BUREAU



§ 32.145  CHICAGO SOUTHLAND CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU.



   The Village of Orland Hills hereby acknowledges the Chicago Southland
Convention and Visitors Bureau as the village’s convention and visitors
bureau of record for the marketing and promotion of the tourism industry.



(Res. No. 2005-1003, passed 2-2-05)



VETERANS COMMISSION



§ 32.160  ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.



   The Orland Hills' Veterans Commission (Commission) is hereby
established. The Orland Hills' Veterans Commission shall consist of seven
members, all residents of the village, to be appointed by the President with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Not less than three members
of the Commission shall be veterans of the armed forces of the United States
of America. Commission members shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 2009-011, passed 10-21-09)



§ 32.161  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   At the time of the original appointments to the Commission, two members
shall be appointed for a term of four years; two members shall be appointed
for a term of three years; two members shall be appointed for a term of two
years; and one member shall be appointed for a one-year term. Thereafter, all
member shall be appointed for a term of four years.



(Ord. 2009-011, passed 10-21-09)



§ 32.162  ORGANIZATION.



   The Veterans Commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and
secretary from its membership at its first organizational meeting, such
officers to serve for terms of one year. Any vacancies in such offices shall
be filled by the Commission for the balance of any unexpired terms.



(Ord. 2009-011, passed 10-21-09)



§ 32.163  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall meet as often as is necessary to carry out its
obligations, but not less than once every two months, at such times as the
chairman may designate. Any three members of the Commission may, in writing,
request the chairman to call a special meeting for a specific purpose and the
chairman shall call such meeting for such purposes, in accordance with such
request.



(Ord. 2009-011, passed 10-21-09)



§ 32.164  FUNCTIONS.



   The Commission shall advise the President and Board of Trustees
regarding the service needs of veterans, provide educational programs,
sponsor events regarding the history and commemoration of veterans, preserve
veterans' monument and memorials and coordinate the Memorial Day and Veterans
Day observations.



(Ord. 2009-011, passed 10-21-09)



§ 32.165  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall perform all duties necessary to
effectuate the purposes of the Commission.



   (B)   The Commission may raise funds through events or activities to
support its effort hereunder and shall have authority to disburse such funds,
however the maintenance of all such funds, including keeping records for the
receipt and disbursement thereof, shall be carried out by the village's
Treasurer's Office.



   (C)   The Commission shall submit a report of its activities to the
President and Board of Trustees once each year in May.



(Ord. 2009-011, passed 10-21-09)



CHAPTER 33:  TAXATION



Section



Retailers Occupation Tax



   33.001   Imposition of tax



   33.002   Report required



   33.003   Payment



Service Occupation Tax



   33.015   Imposition of tax



   33.016   Report required



   33.017   Payment



Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax



   33.020   Imposition of tax



Municipal Utility Tax



   33.030   Definitions



   33.031   Imposition of tax



   33.032   Transactions in interstate commerce



   33.033   Tax to be in addition to payment for products or services



   33.034   Returns



   33.035   Credit



   33.036   Recovery of amount



   33.037   Effective date



Municipal Electric Utility Tax



   33.040   Municipal Electric Utility Tax



Telecommunication Carriers



   33.050   Definitions



   33.051   Surcharge imposed



   33.052   Certified list of network connections exempt



   33.053   Imposition date



   33.054   Reimbursement for expenses



   33.055   Remittance and return



   33.056   Credit against surcharge due



Hotel Accommodations Tax



   33.065   Title



   33.066   Definitions



   33.067   Imposition of tax



   33.068   Tax borne by lessee



   33.069   Collection



   33.070   Payment and penalty for nonpayment



   33.071   Records



   33.072   Suspension or revocation of licenses



   33.073   Proceeds



Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee



   33.085   Definitions



   33.086   Registration of telecommunications providers



   33.087   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee



   33.088   Collection, enforcement, and administration of
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fees



   33.089   Compliance with other laws



   33.090   Existing franchises and licenses



   33.091   Penalties



   33.092   Enforcement



   33.093   Severability



   33.094   Conflict



   33.095   Waiver and fee implementation



Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax



   33.105   Tax imposed



   33.106   Collection and enforcement



Motor Vehicle Lessor Tax



   33.115   Definitions



   33.116   Tax imposed



   33.117   Tax not paid; interest; late filing penalty



   33.118   Recordkeeping; burden of proof



Tax Increment Financing



   33.130   Interested Parties registry



Rights and Responsibilities Related to Locally Imposed Taxes



   33.140   Title



   33.141   Scope



   33.142   Definitions



   33.143   Notices



   33.144   Late payment



   33.145   Payment



   33.146   Certain credits and refunds



   33.147   Audit procedure



   33.148   Appeal



   33.149   Hearing



   33.150   Interest and penalties



   33.151   Abatement



   33.152   Installment contracts



   33.153   Statute of limitations



   33.154   Voluntary disclosure



   33.155   Publication of tax ordinances



   33.156   Liens



Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ and Municipal Service Occupation Taxes



   33.165   Imposition of taxes



   33.166   Collection; enforcement



 



   33.999   Penalty



   Appendix:  Tax Increment Financing



RETAILERS OCCUPATION TAX



§ 33.001  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of
1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5 et seq.



(Ord. 76-18, passed 5-5-76)



§ 33.002  REPORT REQUIRED.



   Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in the village shall file on or before the last day of
each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue, required
by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3, or any section with the state statutes
subsequently amending that section.



(Ord. 76-18, passed 5-5-76)



§ 33.003  PAYMENT.



   At the time the report required by this subchapter is filed, there
shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby
imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property
during the preceding month.



(Ord. 76-18, passed 5-5-76)



SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



§ 33.015  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this village in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost price of
all tangible personal property transferred by said servicepeople either in
the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident  to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5.



(Ord. 76-18, passed 5-5-76)



§ 33.016  REPORT REQUIRED.



   Every supplier or serviceperson required to account for municipal
service occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9, or any section
of the Illinois Compiled Statutes amending that section.



(Ord. 76-18, passed 5-5-76)



§ 33.017  PAYMENT.



   At the time the report required by this subchapter is filed, there
shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby
imposed.



(Ord. 76-18, passed 5-5-76)



SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



§ 33.020  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
under the provisions of Section 5025 and 5030 of the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act, P.A. 92-0526 is hereby changed to 5.00%.



(Ord. 2002-022, passed 12-4-02)



MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX



§ 33.030  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. 



      (1)   The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling gas, water, or electricity, for use or consumption and
not for resale as the case may be; and for all services rendered in
connection therewith valued in money, or otherwise, including cash, credit
services, and property of every kind and material and for all services
rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.



      (2)   GROSS RECEIPTS  shall not include receipts received
from the village for the sale to said village of any of the utility products
or service mentioned above.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court.



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75; Am. Ord. 82-02, passed-  -82; Am. Ord. 2002-023,
passed 12-4-02)



§ 33.031  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:



   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption, within the corporate
limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross
receipts therefrom.



   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling electricity for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of
gross receipts therefrom.



   (C)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling water for use or consumption within the municipality,
and not for resale, at a rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75; Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed 2-7-01; Am. Ord.
2002-023, passed 12-4-02)



§ 33.032  TRANSACTIONS IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE.



   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may
not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made
subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor
shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling gas, water, or electricity be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this subchapter for transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the “Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act.”



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75; Am. Ord. 2002-023, passed 12-4-02)



§ 33.033  TAX TO BE IN ADDITION TO PAYMENT FOR PRODUCTS OR SERVICES.



   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money or value of
products or services furnished to this village by the taxpayer or
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes, or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75)



§ 33.034  RETURNS.



   (A)   Each taxpayer shall make a quarterly return to the Village
Clerk, stating:



      (1)   His or her name;



      (2)   His or her principal place of business;



      (3)   His or her gross receipts during which the tax is
imposed;



      (4)   Amount of tax; and



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



   (B)   On or before the last day of every third month, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the Village Clerk for a corresponding three
months period.



   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided  for 
shall,  at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Clerk, the
amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the
taxpayer may, if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his
or her total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for
which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with
prompt adjustments or later payments based upon any differences between such
billings and the taxable gross receipts.



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75)



§ 33.035  CREDIT.



   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment, provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three years prior to the filing of the claim therefor shall be
so credited.



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75)



§ 33.036  RECOVERY OF AMOUNT.



   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75)



§ 33.037  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall take effect after publication  and the tax
provided for herein shall  be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined
in § 33.030, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after
April 1, 1975.



(Ord. 75-6, passed 4-1-75)



MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX



§ 33.040  MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX.



   (A)   Definitions.  The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



      PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation,
limited liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its
political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a
receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of
any court.



      PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person
having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under
the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or
whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licenses or qualified
to do business in this state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL.  Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in Section 8-11-12 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-12), directly in the
generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.



   PURCHASER.  Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate
limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.



   TAX COLLECTOR.  The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Orland Hills.



   (B)   Municipal electric utility tax imposed.



      (1)   Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2) and any and all other applicable
authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the village as the following rates, calculated on a
monthly basis for each purchaser:



         (a)   For the first 20,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.582 cents per kilowatt- hour.



         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.364 cents per kilowatt- hour;



         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.303 cents per kilowatt- hour;



         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consume in a month: 0.296 center per kilowatt- hour;



         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.266 cents per kilowatt- hour;



         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.236 cents per kilowatt- hour;



         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.200 cents per kilowatt-hour;



         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.150 cents per kilowatt-hour;



         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt- hours used or
consumed in a month: 0.110 cents per kilowatt-hour;



         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month: 0.080 cents per kilowatt-hour.



      (2)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other
revenue measures imposed by the village, the United States of America, the
State of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the State of Illinois.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division,
the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or
collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the
United States or the Constitution of the State of Illinois.



      (4)   The tax provided for in Section (a) of Section 20-164
shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by
residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after
September 1, 1998, and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity
by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with Section 16-104 of the
Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104), or the first bill
issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever occurs sooner.



   (D)   Collection of municipal electric utility tax.



      (1)   Subject to the provisions of division (F) regarding the
delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this division
shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in the State of Illinois who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser and is
recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge
for delivering the electricity.



      (2)   Any tax required to be collected by this division, and
any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the
person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering
electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of
electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible after
reasonable charges are thereafter collected, the person delivering the
electricity shall be obligated to remit such tax to the village.



      (3)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax
from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to such gross charge an amount equal to 3.0% of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the village upon request. For purposes of this division, any partial
payment of a billed amount, it not specifically identified by the purchaser
shall be deemed to be the delivery of electricity.



   (E)   Tax remittance and return.



      (1)   Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a
return in a form prescribed by the Village Treasurer. The return and
accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be
collected under this division.



      (2)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect
the tax from the purchaser or its excused from collecting the tax under this
division, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the
Village Treasurer and pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or
before the last day of the month during which the electricity is used or
consumed.



   (F)   Resales of electricity.



      (1)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this
village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person
unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number
issued by the Village Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who
delivers the electricity and certifies to that person that the sale is either
entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.



      (2)   If a person who receives electricity in the village
claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply
to the Village Treasurer for a resale number. In such application, the
applicant shall state facts showing that it is not liable  for  the  tax
imposed by this  division  on  any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the Village Treasurer may reasonably
require.



      (3)   Upon approval of the location, the Village Treasurer
shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to
the applicant.



      (4)   The Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of
any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this section for
electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number (1) was obtained
through misrepresentation, or (2) is no longer necessary because the person
having obtained the number has discontinued making resales.



      (5)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this section directly to the Village Treasurer pursuant to subsection (2) of
division (E) on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes
and shall collect the tax pursuant to division (D) and remit the tax pursuant
to subsection (1) of division (E) on the amount of electricity delivered by
the reseller to a purchaser.



      (6)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having
an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this
section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion
of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person
reports to the Village Treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered to
the reseller and such other information that the Village Treasurer may
reasonably require.



   (G)   Books and records.  Every tax collector and every tax payer
required to pay the tax imposed by this division shall keep accurate books
and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and
records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to
any tax liability under this division. The books and records shall be subject
to and available for inspection by the village at all times during business
hours of the day.



   (H)   Credits and refunds.  Notwithstanding any other  provision
of the Code of Ordinances, in  order to permit sound fiscal planning and
budgeting by the village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or a
credit for, a tax imposed under this division unless that person files a
written claims for refund or credit no later than one year after the date on
which the tax was paid or remitted to the Village Treasurer.



(Ord. 98-23, passed 8-19-98)



TELECOMMUNICATION CARRIERS



§ 33.050  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply:



   NETWORK CONNECTION.  The number of voice grade communication channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier's public
switched  network  without the intervention of any other telecommunications
carrier's switched network which would be required to carry the subscribed an
interpremises traffic.



   SERVICE ADDRESS.  The location of the subscriber's telecommunications
facilities accessing the network connection or connection(s) that are subject
to the surcharge.  If this is not a defined location, service address shall
mean that location of a subscriber's primary use of the network connection as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois
where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER.  Any natural individual, firm, trust,
estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure,
corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or
a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order
of any court engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity.



(Ord. 89-34, passed 12-13-89)



§ 33.051  SURCHARGE IMPOSED.



   (A)   A surcharge is hereby imposed at a rate of $1 per month per
network connection upon the monthly billed subscribers of telecommunication
carriers residing within Orland Hills for funding of a "9-1-1" emergency
telephone system.



   (B)   A monthly billed subscriber shall be deemed to reside within
the village if the service address, as hereinafter defined, is located within
the village.



(Ord. 89-34, passed 12-13-89)



§ 33.052  CERTIFIED LIST OF NETWORK CONNECTIONS EXEMPT.



   The Village Clerk shall provide any telecommunications carrier
collecting the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections
assigned to the village to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge.  The
certified list may be revised by the village on 60 days' prior written notice
provided to the telecommunications carriers.



(Ord. 89-34, passed 12-13-89)



§ 33.053  IMPOSITION DATE.



   The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of  the  month 
following the expiration of 90 days from the date the Village Clerk certified
to any of the telecommunication carriers who are required to collect the
surcharge that the referendum has passed.



(Ord. 89-34, passed 12-13-89)



§ 33.054  REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSE.



   Each telecommunications carrier is hereby authorized and instructed to
deduct 3% from the gross amount of surcharge collected prior to remittance
under § 115.06 as reimbursement for the expense of accounting and collecting
the surcharge.



(Ord. 89-34, passed 12-13-89)



§ 33.055  REMITTANCE AND RETURN.



   (A)   Every telecommunications carrier shall remit to the Village
Treasurer the amount of surcharge collected for each calendar month within 30
days following expiration of each month to which the surcharge applies, net
of any network or other "9-1-1" system charge then due to the particular
telecommunication carrier as shown on an itemized bill and the 3% accounting
and collection charge described in § 33.054.



   (B)   Simultaneously with the remittance described in division (A)
above, each telecommunication carrier shall make a return to the Village
Treasurer for the period to which the remittance applies stating as follows:



      (1)   The name of the telecommunication carrier.



      (2)   The telecommunication carrier's principal place of
business.



      (3)   The number of network connections to which the surcharge
applies.



      (4)   The amount of surcharge collected.



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



(Ord. 89-34, passed 12-13-89)



§ 33.056  CREDIT AGAINST SURCHARGE DUE.



   If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was
not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any surcharge due, or to become due, under this chapter; provided
that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filling
of a claim therefor shall be so credited.  Ninety days prior notice shall be
given to the Emergency Telephone System Board on any credit against a
surcharge due.



(Ord. 89-34, passed 12-13-89)



HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX



§ 33.065  TITLE.



   Pursuant to the ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 § 8-3-14, as amended, this
subchapter shall be known and cited as the Hotel Accommodations Tax
Regulations and the tax herein imposed shall be known and cited as the Hotel
Accommodations Tax.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92)



§ 33.066  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS.  A room or rooms in any building or structure
kept, used, or maintained as or advertised or held out to the public to be an
inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, dormitory, or place, where
sleeping, rooming, conference, or exhibition accommodations are furnished for
lease or rent, whether with or without meals, in which ten or more such
accommodations are used or maintained for guests, lodgers, or roomers.  The
term HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS does not include an accommodation which a person
occupies, or has the right to occupy, as his domicile and permanent residence.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, for profit,
non-profit or otherwise.  Whenever the term PERSON is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to corporations shall
include the officers thereof, and as applied to any other entity, the owners
of part-owners thereof.



   TREASURER.  The Treasurer of the village.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92)



§ 33.067  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed and shall accrue and be collected a tax, as
herein provided, upon the rental or leasing of any hotel accommodations in
the village at the following rates:



      EFFECTIVE DATE   RATE



      April 27, 1993         2-½%



      April 27, 1994         3%



      April 27, 1995         3-½%



      EFFECTIVE DATE   RATE



      April 27, 1996         4%



      April 27, 1997         4-½%



      April 27, 1998         5%



(Ord. 92-45,  passed  10-28-92; Am. Ord. 93-20, passed 4-5-93)



§ 33.068  TAX BORNE BY LESSEE.



   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of a tax shall be
borne by the lessee or the tenant of any such hotel accommodations.  The tax
herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.  It shall be
the duty of every owner, manager, or operator of hotel accommodations to
secure that tax from the lessee or tenant of the hotel accommodations and pay
over to the Treasurer that tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the
Treasurer and as otherwise provided by this subchapter.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92)



§ 33.069  COLLECTION.



   The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager, or
operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge or rent
to which it applies.  Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice,
receipt, or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge, or rent
payable upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged, and
shown separately.  The hotel accommodations tax shall be paid to the
Treasurer or the authorized representative of this office on a monthly
basis.  The tax shall be due on or before the fifteenth day of the
succeeding month.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92)



§ 33.070  PAYMENT AND PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT.



   (A)   Every owner, manager, or operator of hotel accommodations
within the village shall file a sworn tax return on a monthly basis with the
Treasurer showing tax receipts received with respect to hotel accommodation 
space  rented or leased during  the preceding monthly period, upon forms
prescribed by the Treasurer.  At the time of filing the tax return, the
owner, manager, or operator of hotel accommodations shall pay to the
Treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.



   (B)   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at
the rate of 2% per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be
added and collected.  Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as
herein provided, upon the request of the Treasurer the corporation counsel
shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the
tax in behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction with cost
of such enforcement to be borne by the owner.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92)



§ 33.071  RECORDS.



   Every owner, manager, or operator of hotel accommodations in the
village shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents, or charges
made or charged, and occupancies taxable under this subchapter.  The
Treasurer, or his designate, shall at all reasonable times have full access
to those books and records.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92)



§ 33.072  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   If the President. after hearing held by or for him, shall find that any
person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this subchapter,
he may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by that tax evader.  The
owner, manager, or operator of the hotel accommodations shall have an
opportunity to be heard and such hearing shall not be held less than five
days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, addressed to the
owner, manager, or operator at his last known place of business.  The
suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the
owner, manager, or operator of hotel accommodations from his civil liability
for the payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92)



§ 33.073  PROCEEDS.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
subchapter, including penalties, shall be distributed monthly as follows:



   (A)    Five percent of the first one percent shall be retained by
the village to defray the costs of administering and processing the
imposition and collection of the tax.



   (B)   Ninety-five percent of the first one percent collected shall
be paid to the Chicago Southland Convention and Visitors Bureau for the sole
purpose of promoting tourism and conventions.



   (C)   The remaining amount will be retained by the village for the
purpose of promoting tourism and conventions within the municipality or
attract nonresident visitors to the community.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92; Am. Ord. 93-20, passed 4-6-93)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE



§ 33.085  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:



   GROSS CHARGES.  The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for
the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within
the village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in
money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services,
and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid.  GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel point within the village, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within the  village,  and  charges 
for  that  portion  of  the interstate-inter-office channel provided
within the village. However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a
charge made under: (i) the fee imposed by this section, (ii) additional
charges added to a purchaser's bill under ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 9-221 or
9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (v) 911 surcharges, or (vi) the tax
imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside the village;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time- sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are desegregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the village;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;



      (7)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excusable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made);



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated
telecommunications devices; or



      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided to the village.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any municipal street, alley, water or
public-right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes,
including utility easements wherein the village has acquired the right and
authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with
telecommunications facilities. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real
or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include village buildings and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
public right-of-way.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE OR ANY LIKE
TERM.  Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such
place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in this state.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when 
the  gross  charge  made  by  one  such corporation to another such
corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for
their use or consumption and not for sale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS.  The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location,
as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales
for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable
or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to
the village  through  an open video system as defined  in the Rules of the
Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or
hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  (1) Any telecommunications retailer; and
(2) Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns,
operates or controls equipment in the public right-of- way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER.  Includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at
retail as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the
satisfaction of the village furnishes adequate security to ensure collection
and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such
retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications
in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within the village.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C.
§332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile
radio services, and paging services.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.086  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this chapter
shall register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of
this chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later,
on a form to be provided by the village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to § 34.88(C)
of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered  with 
the  village  pursuant  to  § 34.88(A) has an affirmative duty to submit
an amended registration form or current return as required by § 34.88(C), as
the case may be, to the village within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the village.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.087  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.



   (A)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of
all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or received
in the village.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in § 34.88 of this chapter.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.088  COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Collector the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the village  not  later  than  the  last  day  of  the 
month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer;
provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount
not to exceed 2% of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by
it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting
the fee.



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Collector, which shall contain such information as the Village Collector may
reasonably require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by
the telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under §
34.88(A) by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in
the same manner as the original charge for such services.



   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to become due, under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment provided, however, the Village Collector may
request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written
substantiation for such credit.  However, no claim for such credit may be
made more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless,
(1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the
village within the applicable statutory period of limitations, and (2) the
credit derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications
retailer during the applicable statutory period of limitations.



   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts as described immediately below:



      (1)   GROSS CHARGES for purposes of the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act;



      (2)   GROSS RECEIPTS for purposes of the municipal utility tax
as prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;



      (3)   GROSS CHARGES for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax as prescribed in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17 of the
Illinois Municipal Code;



      (4)   GROSS REVENUE for purposes of the tax on annual gross
revenue of public utilities prescribed in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 2-202 of
the Public Utilities Act.



   (G)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit
the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
chapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due
to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the
village plus 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an
audit, plus any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an
amount not to exceed 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in
an audit. The sum shall be paid to the village within 21 days after the date
of issuance of an invoice for same.



   (H)   The Village Collector, or his or her designee, may promulgate
such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be
required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers
that are registered pursuant to § 34.88 of this Chapter of such regulations.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.089  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:



   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and



   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of
or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided; and



   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and



   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the
right-of-way.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.090  EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.



   Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between
telecommunications retailers and the village entered into before the
effective date of this subchapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way
shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any
fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.091  PENALTIES.



   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the
Village Municipal Code.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.092  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.093  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
subchapter is for any reason  held  invalid  or  unconstitutional  by 
any  court  of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.094  CONFLICT.



   This subchapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances
adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



§ 33.095  WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.



   (A)   The village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other
compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the
village by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village
franchise, license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer
during the time the village imposes the Telecommunications Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee provided for in this subchapter is subject to
being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by
the telecommunications retailer from the customer.



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by
certified mail/return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer
with whom the village has a franchise.



   (C)   The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in
this subchapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the
month not less than 90 days after the village provides written notice by
certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has
an existing franchise, license, or similar agreement that the village waives
all compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and
collected by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure
maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective
date as established in the preceding sentence.



(Ord. 97-44, passed 11-5-97)



MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX



§ 33.105TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in the village, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
8-11-7, the Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax Act, at the rate
1.00% of the gross receipts from such business.



(Ord. 97-47, passed 11-19-97)



§ 33.106COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Consent and authority are given to the State Department of Revenue to
collect and enforce the tax imposed by § 33.105 and all civil penalties that
may be assessed as an incident thereto for and in behalf of the village
pursuant to the Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax Act.



(Ord. 97-47, passed 11-19-97)



MOTOR VEHICLE LESSOR TAX



§ 33.115  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, when any of the following words or
term are used herein they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to
them in this section:



   LEASING (or any similar term).  Any transfer of the possession or the
right to possession of a motor vehicle to a user for a valuable consideration.



   LESSOR.  Any person who leases a motor vehicle on a daily or weekly
basis.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 1-146 of The Illinois Vehicle Code.



   VILLAGE. means the Village of Orland Hills.



(Ord. 97-47, passed 11-19-97)



§ 33.116  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of leasing motor
vehicles within the village to a lessee on a daily or weekly basis in the
amount of $2.75 per vehicle per rental period specified in the lease
agreement.



   (B)   Any tax herein imposed is in addition to any other taxes
authorized by law.



   (C)   The lessor shall be required to pay this tax to the village as
provided in division (E) below. The lessor shall be allowed to pass this tax
along to lessees as a separate charge on rental bills or invoices.



   (D)   This tax shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Any lessor who is a governmental body.



      (2)   Any lessor who is a motor vehicle dealer. For purposes
of this section a motor vehicle dealer is any person or entity licensed by
the Illinois Secretary of State to sell new and/or used motor vehicles.



      (3)   Any lessor upon whom the imposition of the tax would
violate the United States Constitution or the Constitution of the State of
Illinois.



   (E)   Except as provided herein, the lessor shall pay this tax on a
monthly basis, with the tax due on motor vehicles leased within the month by
the last day of the following month. A remittance return shall accompany each
monthly payment.  The form of such remittance return shall be prescribed by
the village, and such return shall include the number of motor vehicles
leased within that month and any other reasonable information the village
deems necessary. The remittance returns shall be filed and signed by the
lessor under penalty as provided in §§ 33.83 and 33.99 of this chapter. The
village may allow a lessor to pay this tax on an annual basis, if the
lessor's average monthly tax liability is less than $20, with the tax due for
the calendar year by the last day of January of the following year. A
remittance form prescribed by the village, with requirements similar to the
monthly remittance return referred to above, shall be signed and filed by the
lessor with his annual payment.



(Ord. 97-47, passed 11-19-97; Am. Ord. 99-08, passed 2-17-99)



§ 33.117  TAX NOT PAID; INTEREST; LATE FILING PENALTY.



   (A)   Any tax not paid when due shall bear interest at 2% per month,
or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid.



   (B)   In addition to any interest charged, any tax not paid when due
shall subject the lessor failing to pay such to a 10.00% late payment
penalty, unless a late filing penalty is due as provided in division (C)
below. This penalty shall be calculated upon the amount of tax underpaid.



   (C)   In addition to any interest charge, any remittance return not
filed when due shall subject the lessor failing to file such to a 10.00% late
filing penalty calculated upon the total tax liability due for such filing
period.



   (D)   Any payment or return not physically received by the village
by the due date shall be considered late.



   (E)   All payments received shall first be applied to penalty due,
then interest due and finally the tax due for the period the payment is made
for.



   (F)   The lessor shall be required to pay all tax, interest and
penalty due, except that if the village finds that any late payment or late
filing was due to reasonable cause, the penalty for such shall not apply.



(Ord. 97-47, passed 11-19-97)



§ 33.118  RECORDKEEPING; BURDEN OF PROOF.



   (A)   Every lessor subject to the tax imposed herein shall keep
accurate and complete books and records of the lessor's leasing business
which shall include invoices, rental agreements, annual inventories of motor
vehicles available for rental and other pertinent papers and documents. All
such books and records which are required to be kept by this chapter shall be
kept in the English language and shall, at all times during business hours of
the day, be subject to inspection by the village or its duly authorized
agents and employees.



   (B)   It shall be presumed that all leases of motor vehicles are
subject to tax under this chapter until the contrary is established. The
burden of proving that a lease is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the
lessor.



(Ord. 97-47, passed 11-19-97)



TAX INCREMENT FINANCING



§ 33.130  INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY.



   (A)   The Village Clerk or his or her designee, is hereby authorized
and directed to create an "Interested Parties" Registry in accordance with
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4-4.2 of the Act for each Redevelopment
Project Area created under the Act and not terminated by the village, whether
now existing or created after the date of the adoption of this section.



   (B)   In accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4.2 of the
Act, the village hereby adopts the Registration Rules,  as set forth in the
Appendix, as Registration Rules for each such "Interested Parties" Registry.
The Board of Trustees may amend such Registration Rules from time to time as
may be necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purpose
intended by the Act.



(Ord. 2001-04, passed 2-7-01)



RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO LOCALLY IMPOSED TAXES



§ 33.140  TITLE.



    This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally
Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance."



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.141  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the village's
procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.142  DEFINITIONS.



   Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them
as follows:



   ACT.  The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act."



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The village's President and Board of Trustees.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The Village Administrator or his/her
designee is charged with the administration and collection of the locally
imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents, to the
extent they are authorized by the Local Tax Administrator to act in the Local
Tax Administrator's stead. The Local Tax Administrator shall have the
authority to implement the terms of this subchapter to give full effect to
this subchapter. The exercise of such authority by the Local Tax
Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this subchapter and the Act.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX.  Each tax imposed by the
village that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village, other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.



   NOTICE.  Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE.  Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax, and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the village.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Orland Hills, Illinois.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.143  NOTICES.



   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
Local Tax Administrator. The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax
Administrator as follows:



   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to
the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or



   (B)   Personal service or delivery.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.144  LATE PAYMENT.



   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is (a) physically received by the village on or before the due date, or (b)
received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S.
postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village,
with adequate postage prepaid.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.145  PAYMENT.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order:



   (A)   First, to the tax due for the applicable period;



   (B)   Second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and



   (C)   Third, to the penalty for the applicable period.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.146  CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily
paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a
locally imposed and administered tax is declared in validly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction.



However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if
the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at
the time of payment, or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be two or less years after the end of the calendar year in which
payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax
Administrator, in writing, a claim for credit or refund together with a
statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.



      (2)   Within 30 days of the receipt by the Local Tax
Administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax
Administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial;
or



         (c)   Provide a written notice that the Local Tax
Administrator cannot make a determination within the initial 30-day period,
in which event a decision shall be made within 60 days of the receipt of the
claim.



      (3)   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in
whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for
refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 3% per annum, based on a
year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.147  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter:



   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and
if the date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
Local Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time.



   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the village.



   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the
taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the Tax Administrator's determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.



   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 60 days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.148  APPEAL.



   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the Local Tax Administrator's issuance of a protest able notice
of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding
any tax. The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal,
refund and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax Administrator
within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the Local Tax Administrator shall fix the



time and place for hearing, and shall give written notice to the taxpayer.
The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within 30 days of receipt of the
written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a
later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 60 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.149  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer has filed a timely written protest and
petition for hearing under § 33.148, the Local Tax Administrator shall
conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing the Local Tax Administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer shall be provided with a copy of the written
decision.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.150  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.



   (A)   Interest.  The village hereby provides for the amount of
interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the
tax to be 5% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days
elapsed.



   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties.  If a tax return is not
filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a
late filing penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on
a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due
shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of
tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty
shall be assessed, equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing
or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by
the controlling ordinance.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.151  ABATEMENT.



   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty, or failure to file penalty if
the Local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.152  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer
for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The Local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered, unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
Local Tax Administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period, or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the Local Administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.153  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   The village, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner, and inform taxpayers of any amounts
due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.



   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed, or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (B)   If any tax return is not filed, or if during any four-year
period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by
the village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due, or end of the calendar year
in which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (C)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.154  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the
amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application, but not more than four years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary
disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or
penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if
the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax, along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application, or the date
agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.155  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



§ 33.156  LIENS.



   The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid,
the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to
be improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall:



   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village’s expense;



   (B)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and



   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.



(Ord. 2001-05, passed 2-7-01)



NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ AND MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES



§ 33.165  IMPOSITION OF TAXES.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of
tangible personal property titled and registered with an agency of this
State’s government, at retail in the village at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged
in the village in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1%
of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
servicemen as an incident to a sale of service. Such “Non- Home Rule
Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” and the “Non-Home Rule Municipal
Service Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable to the sale of food for
human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared
for immediate consumption) and prescription and non- prescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine-testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics.



   (B)   The imposition of these non-home rule taxes is in accordance
with, and subject to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1.1,
8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4



(Ord. 2009-004, passed 5-6-09; Am. Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-19-17)



§ 33.166  COLLECTION; ENFORCEMENT.



   The taxes imposed by this subchapter and all civil penalties that may
be assessed as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue
shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2009-004, passed 5-6-09; Am. Ord. 2017-005, passed 4-19-17)



§ 33.999  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty for violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 33.065 through 33.073, except
when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300 for the first
offense and not less than $200 nor more than $500 for the second and each
subsequent offense in any 180-day period; provided, however, that all actions
seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions
subject to the provisions of the Illinois Civil Practice Act (ILCS Ch. 765,
Act 205, § 1 et seq.).  Repeated offenses in excess of three within any
180-day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration for a
term not to exceed six months under the procedure set forth in ILCS Ch. 725,
Act 5, § 100-1 et seq.).  A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded
as committed each day upon which each person shall continue any such
violations.



(Ord. 92-45, passed 10-28-92; Am. Ord. 93-20, passed 4-6-93)



APPENDIX:  TAX INCREMENT FINANCING



 



TIF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY REGISTRATION RULES



   (A)   Definitions.  As used in these Registration Rules, the
following terms shall have the definitions set



forth below.



      (1)   ACT.  The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act,
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-1 et seq. as amended from time to time.



      (2)   INTERESTED PARTY(S). Any individual or organization or
entity registered in a specific registry who has registered in such registry
and whose registration has not been terminated in accordance with these
Registration Rules.



      (3)   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA.  A Redevelopment Project
Area that (a) is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a
"Redevelopment Project Area" under the Act and (b) is subject to the
"Interested Parties" Registry requirements of the Act.



      (4)   REGISTRATION FORM.  The form appended to these
Registration Rules or such revised form as may be approved by the village
consistent with the requirements of the Act.



      (5)   REGISTRY or REGISTRIES.  Each Interested Parties
Registry, and all such Registries, collectively, established by the village
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4.2 of the Act for the
Redevelopment Project Area.



      (6)   VILLAGE.  The Village of Orland Hills, an Illinois
municipal corporation.



   (B)   Establishment of registry.  The village shall establish a
separate Interested Parties Registry for each Redevelopment Project Area,
whether existing as of the date of the adoption of these rules or hereafter
established. The village shall establish a new registry whenever it has
identified an area for study and possible designation as a Redevelopment
Project Area. In any event, the process of establishing the new registry must
be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the notices required by
division (J) of these rules or any other notices required by the Act with
respect to the proposed Redevelopment Project Area.



   (C)   Maintenance of registry.  The registries shall be maintained
by the Village Clerk or his or her designee. In the event the village
determines that an individual other than the Clerk should maintain the
registries, the village may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the
registries to such other department, provided that the village (i) gives
prior written notice to all Interested Parties not less than 30 days prior to
such transfer and (ii) publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village.



   (D)   Registration by residents.  An individual seeking to register
as an Interested Person with respect to a Redevelopment Project Area must
complete and submit a registration form to the Village Clerk.



   (E)   Registration by organization.  An organization seeking to
register as an Interested Person with respect to a Redevelopment Project Area
must complete and submit a registration form to the Village Clerk.



   (F)   Determination of eligibility.  All individuals and
organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation complies
with these Registration Rules shall be registered in the applicable registry
within ten business days of the Village Clerk's receipt of all such
documents. The Clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration, Interested Parties shall be
entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
these rules, or as otherwise required under the Act, with respect to the
applicable Redevelopment Project Area. If the Village Clerk determines that a
registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete
or does not comply with these Registration Rules, the Clerk shall give
written notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant
shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form
and supporting documentation.



   (G)   Renewal and termination.  An Interested Person's registration
shall remain effective for a period of three years. At any time after such
three-year period, the Village Clerk may provide written notice by regular
mail to the Interested Person, stating that such registration shall terminate
unless the Interested Person renews such registration within 30 days of the
Clerk's mailing of written notice. To renew such registration, the Interested
Person shall, within such 30-day period, complete and submit the same
registration form then required for initial registrants operations in the
village. The registration of all individuals and organizations whose
registration form is submitted in a timely manner and complies with these
Regulation Rules shall be renewed for an additional, consecutive three-year
period. If the Village Clerk determines that a registrant's renewal
registration form is incomplete or does not comply with these Registration
Rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant at the address
specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such registrant,
specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any
defects and resubmit a new registration form within 30 days of receipt of the
Clerk's notice. If all defects are not corrected within 30 days of the
Interested Person's receipt of the Village Clerk's notice, the Interested
Person's registration shall be terminated. Any Interested Person whose
registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a
first-time registrant.



   (H)   Amendment to registration.  An Interested Party may amend its
registration by giving written notice to the Village Clerk by certified mail
of any of the following: (i) change in address for notice purposes; (ii) in
the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact person; and
(iii) a termination of registration. Upon receipt of such notice, the Clerk
shall revise the applicable registry accordingly.



   (I)   Registries available for public inspection.  Each registry
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. The
registry shall include the name, address and telephone number of each
Interested Person and, for organizations, the name and phone number of a
designated contact person.



   (J)   Notices to be sent to interested parties. Interested Parties
shall be sent the following notices and any other notices required under the
Act with respect to the applicable Redevelopment Project Area:



      (1)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a) of the
Act, notice of the availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and
eligibility report, including how to obtain this information, such notice
shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after the adoption
of the ordinance fixing the public hearing for the proposed redevelopment
plan;



      (2)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a) of the
Act, notice of changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not (1) add
additional parcels of property to the proposed Redevelopment Project Area;
(2) substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the redevelopment
plan; (3) substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment project; or (4) increase the number of low or very low income
households to be displaced from the Redevelopment Project Area, provided
that, measured from the time of creation of the Redevelop- ment Project Area,
the total displacement of inhabited households will exceed ten; such notice
shall be sent by mail not later than ten days following the village's
adoption by ordinance of such changes;



      (3)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d)(9) of
the Act for redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the
displacement of residents from ten or more inhabited residential units, or
that contain 75 or more inhabited residential units, notice of the
availability of the annual report described by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-74.4-5(d), including how to obtain the annual report; such notice shall be
sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after completion of the
certified audit report;



      (4)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-6(e) of the
Act, notice of the preliminary public meeting required under the Act for a
proposed Redevelopment Project Area that will result in the displacement of
ten or more inhabited residential units, or which will contain 75 or more
inhabited residential units; such notice shall be sent by certified mail not
less than 15 days before the date of such preliminary public meeting;



      (5)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-6(e) of the
Act, notice of the preliminary public meeting required under the Act for a
proposed Redevelopment Project Area that will result in the displacement of
ten or more inhabited residential units, such notice will be sent by
certified mail not less than 15 days before the date of such preliminary
public meeting.



   (K)   Non-interference.  These Registration Rules shall not be used
to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the ability of eligible organizations
and individuals to register for receipt of information to which they are
entitled under the act.



   (L)   Amendment of Registration Rules.  These Registration Rules
maybe amended by the village,  subject to and consistent with the
requirements of the Act.



(Ord. 2001-04, passed 2-7-01)



   TIF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION FORM



Registration Rules.  If you would like to register on the Interested Parties
Registry for one or more tax increment financing (TIF) Redevelopment Project
Area, please complete Part A of this form.



Registration for Organizations.  If you would like to register on the
Interested Parties Registry for one or more tax increment financing (TIF)
Redevelopment Project Areas, please complete Part B of this form.



PART A:  REGISTRATION FOR MUNICIPAL RESIDENTS  (Please Print)



Name                                               
                                                   
                                                   
                                           



Street Address                                         
                                                   
                                                   
                                 



Zip Code                                             
                             Home Telephone           
                                                   
           



Fax Number                                           
                         E-mail Address               
                                                   
           



Please list the TIF(s) you are interested in below:



PART B: REGISTRATION FOR ORGANIZATIONS (Please Print)



Organization Name                                       
                                                   
                                                   
                           



Contact Name                                           
                                                   
                                                   
                                 



Street Address                                         
                                                   
                                                   
                                 



City                                               
                            State                 
                                          Zip Code   
                         



Telephone    (      )                                 
                Fax    (    )                     
                                                   
                         



E-mail address                                         
                                                   
                                                   
                                 



Please list the TIF(s) you are interested in below:



Please return this form to:   TIF Interested Parties Registry



                  Village Clerk's Office



                  16033 South 94th Avenue



                  Orland Hills, IL 60477-4623



Signature/Title                                         
                                                   
                                  Date             
                           



(Ord. 2001-04, passed 2-7-01)



NOTICE - VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILLS



TAX INCREMENT FINANCING REDEVELOPMENT



PROJECT AREAS NO. 1 AND NO. 2



REGISTRATION FOR INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY



Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4.2 of the Tax Increment
Allocation Redevelopment Act, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-1, et seq. (the
"Act"), the Village of Orland Hills (the "Village") is required to establish
an Interested Parties Registry ("Registry" or "Registries") for each Tax
Increment Financing ("TIF") Redevelopment Project Area created pursuant to
the Act (a "Redevelopment Project Area") whether existing as of the date of
this notice or hereafter established. On March 14, 2000, the village adopted
an ordinance authorizing the establishment of Registries by the Village Clerk
("Clerk") and adopting Registration Rules for such Registries. The purpose of
this notice is to inform Interested Parties of the Registries and
Registration Rules for the Registries and to invite Interested Parties (as
defined below) to register in the Registry for any Redevelopment Project Area.



Any individual or organization requiring information pertaining to activities
within the Redevelopment Project Areas (an "Interested Party") is entitled to
register in the Registry for any Redevelopment Project Area. Organizations
include, but are not limited to, businesses, business organizations, civic
groups, not-for-profit corporations and community organizations.



An organization seeking to register as an Interested Party with respect to a
Redevelopment Project Area must also complete and submit a Registration Form
to the Clerk.



Interested Party Registries are being established for the following TIF
Redevelopment Project Areas, which have either been adopted by the village or
which the village has decided to consider establishing:



   ORLAND TOWNE CENTER



All individuals and organizations whose Registration Forms comply with the
Registration Rules, either in person or by mail, to the Village Clerk,
located at 16033 South 94th Avenue, Orland Hills, Illinois 60477-4623, will
be registered in the applicable Registry within ten (10) days of the Clerk's
receipt of all such documents. The Clerk will provide written notice to the
registrant confirming such registration. Upon registration, Interested
Parties will be entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be
delivered under the Act with respect to the applicable Redevelopment Project
Area. If the Clerk determines that a registrant's Registration Form is
incomplete or does not comply with the Registration Rules adopted by the
Village, the Clerk will give written notice to the registrant specifying the
defects. The registrant will be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit
a new Registration Form and supporting documentation. An Interested Party's
registration will remain effective for a period of three years. Rules of the
renewal and amendment of an Interested Party's registration are included with
the Registration Form that may be obtained as described herein.



Each Registry will be available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk during normal business hours. The Registry will include the name,
address and telephone number of each Interested Person and/or organizations,
the name and phone number of a designated contact person.



Interested Parties will be sent the following notice and any other notices
required under the Act with respect to the applicable Redevelopment Project
Area.



   (i)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a) of the Act,
notice of the availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility
report, including how to obtain this information; such notice will be sent by
mail within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance
fixing the public hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan;



   (ii)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4(a) of the Act,
notice of changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not (1) add
additional parcels of property to the proposed development project areas; (2)
substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the redevelopment
plan; (3) substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment project; or (4) increase the number of low or very low income
households to be displaced from the Redevelopment Project Area, provided
that, measured from the time of creation of the Redevelopment Project Area,
the total displacement of inhabited households will exceed ten; such notice
will be sent by mail not later than ten days following the Village's adoption
by ordinance of such changes;



   (iii)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(c) of the Act,
notice of amendments to previously approved redevelopment plans that do not
(1) add additional parcels of property to the Redevelopment Project Area; (2)
substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment plan; (3)
substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project; (4) increase
the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment
plan by more than 5% after adjustment for inflation from the date the plan
was adopted; (5) add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized
list of redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or (6)
increase the number of low or very low income households to be displaced from
the Redevelopment Project Area, provided that measured from the time of
creation of the Redevelopment Project Area the total displacement of
inhabited households will exceed 10; such notice will be sent by mail not
later than ten (10) days following the Village's adoption by ordinance of
such amendment;



   (iv)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the
Act, for redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the
displacement of residents from ten (10) or more inhabited residential units
or that contain seventy-five (75) or more inhabited residential units, notice
of the availability of this information, including how to obtain the report,
required by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d) of the Act; such notice will
be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after completion of the
certified audit report;



   (v)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-6(e) of the Act,
notice of the preliminary public meeting required under the Act for a
proposed Redevelopment Project Area that will result in the displacement of
ten (10) or more inhabited residential units, such notice will be sent by
certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of such
preliminary public meeting.



Registration Forms can be picked up at the office of the Village Clerk, 16033
South 94th Avenue, Orland Hills, Illinois 60477-4623.



Registration Forms can be obtained by Interested Parties in person or by
their representatives.



Registration Forms will not be mailed or faxed. If you require additional
information, please call the office of the Village Administrator at (708)
349-6666.



(Ord. 2001-04, passed 2-7-01)



CHAPTER 34:  PUBLIC RECORDS



Section



   34.01   Requests to be in writing



   34.02   When inspection of records to take place



   34.03   Copies of records available



   34.04   Use of village equipment, searching for information



   34.05   Costs and charges



   34.06   Reduction or waiver of fees



   34.07   Determination of applicable time periods



   34.08   Notices of extension and denial



   34.09   Duties, powers, and responsibilities of Village Clerk



   34.10   Appeal procedure



   34.11   Records requested for furthering of a commercial enterprise



   34.12   New records created



§ 34.01  REQUESTS TO BE IN WRITING.



   (A)   All requests for production, copying, inspection, or
certification of public records shall be made in writing, in substantially
the form as set forth in Form No. 1984-1-A, which shall be incorporated
herein by reference.



   (B)   All requests should be directed to the Village Clerk, at the
village hall,  who is hereby designated as the person from whom records
shall be obtained.  If such requests are presented in person at the village
hall, they shall be handed to the Village Clerk, or in the absence of the
Village Clerk, to another employee as designated by the President of the
Board of Trustees.



   (C)   All requests submitted by mail shall be deemed received only
upon actual receipt at the village hall, regardless of postmark or date of
mailing.  All requests shall be time stamped upon their receipt.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.02  WHEN INSPECTION OF RECORDS TO TAKE PLACE.



   All records may be inspected at the village hall during normal business
hours.  No records may be removed from the office at any time.  However,
with respect to employee personnel records, the inspection may take place
before or after normal business hours if the employee so requests.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.03  COPIES OF RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   All copies of records requested will be made available for pick-up at
the village hall.  Copies of records or certifications will be mailed only
if the requestor establishes that it is impossible to pick up the records at
the village hall and an advance deposit for postage and all copying charges
is made by the person requesting the records of documents.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.04  USE OF VILLAGE EQUIPMENT, SEARCHING FOR INFORMATION.



   Only village personnel shall be permitted to use village equipment or
to search through village files, records, or storage areas.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.05  COSTS AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The village hereby establishes the following costs and charges
which it finds and determines to be the actual costs of reproduction:



      (1)   Copies of records:  $.50 per page per side.



      (2)   Certification of documents:  $2.50 per document.



   (B)   Payment  is required  in  cash or by cashiers or 
certified  check at the time the records are delivered.  These same charges
shall apply to copies or certifications of personnel records.  For any
requests that require ten or more single sided pages (or five or more double
sided pages), the village shall require an advance deposit to cover copying
costs prior to the copies being made.  Any delay in excess of 24 hours in
receipt of such deposits shall not be included in determining the applicable
time period for production of the records.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84; Am. Ord. 99-36, passed 12-1-99)



§ 34.06  REDUCTION OR WAIVER OF FEES.



   Any requests that the fees in § 34.05 be reduced or waived must be
made in writing at the time the request for the records is presented.  The
person seeking the reduction or waiver shall state specifically how the
production of the requested information primarily benefits the general public
as set forth in Section 6(b) of the Freedom of Information Act (hereinafter
referred to as Act).



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.07  DETERMINATION OF APPLICABLE TIME PERIODS.



   In determining the applicable time periods for production of records,
notices of extension, and notices of denial, the seven or 14 working day
periods shall not include the day the request was initially received. 
Supplemental, amended, or additional requests shall not relate back to the
initial time of filing, but shall be considered as new requests for purposes
of determining all applicable time periods.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.08  NOTICES OF EXTENSION AND DENIAL.



   Notices of extension and notices of denial issued on behalf of the
village shall be conclusively deemed to have been given if mailed within the
applicable time period regardless of the date of actual receipt by the party
requesting the records.  All such notices shall include a verified proof of
mailing in substantially the following form:



      "I              , being duly sworn on oath state that I
served the original of the foregoing (Notice of Extension of Time) (Notice of
Denial) by mail, addressed to               , at             ,
this           day of                               ,
198  .



                                 



Subscribed and sworn to



before me this       day   



of             , 1984.



                             



      Notary Public



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.09  DUTIES, POWERS, AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF VILLAGE CLERK.



   In view of the abbreviated time periods specified in the Freedom of
Information Act, the following duties, powers, and responsibilities are
hereby delegated:



   (A)   The Village Clerk is authorized to issue notices of extension
of time and notices of denial pursuant to Section 3 and Section 9 of the Act
on behalf of the village.  These notices shall be in substantially the form
as set forth in Form No. 1984-1-B and Form No. 1984-1-C, which shall be
incorporated herein by reference.



   (B)   Prior to issuing any such notices, the Village Clerk shall
consult with the Village Attorney.



   (C)   The notice of appeal form (Form No. 1984-1-D) shall be
available at the village hall upon request.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.10  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   If an appeal is taken by the person requesting the records to the
President, the President may rule on such appeal individually or, if time
permits, may submit the matter to the village hall for determination. 
Notice of the ruling on such appeal shall be given to the requestor, in the
form substantially as set forth in the Form No. 1984-1-E, which shall be
incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.11  RECORDS REQUESTED FOR FURTHERING OF A COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE.  As used in the Act shall
include both profit and not-for-profit ventures.



      (2)   FOR THE PURPOSE OF FURTHERING A COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE. 
As used in the Act, shall include any information requested which could be,
or is likely to be, used in or as part of any solicitation on behalf of a
commercial enterprise.



   (B)   If the Village Clerk reasonably believes that the records
requested might be for the purpose of furthering a commercial enterprise,
then the requesting party shall be required to supply a further statement or
explanation of the purpose for which the production of records is sought,
which statement shall be under oath and substantially the form set forth in
the Form No. 1984-1-F, which shall be incorporated herein by reference.



   (C)   The applicable time periods for the production of records
shall be measured from the date this explanatory statement is received by the
Village Clerk.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



§ 34.12  NEW RECORDS CREATED.



   (A)   The Village Clerk shall maintain the following two new records:



      (1)   An index of the various categories of records maintained
by the village.



      (2)   A central office file that will include copies of all
notices of denial of records, classified and organized by the nature of the
exemption claimed in denying the records and if possible, also indexed and
filed by the nature of the records requested.



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall be responsible for seeing that these
records are kept current.



(Ord. 84-08 A, passed  - -84)



CHAPTER 35:  PERSONNEL POLICY



Section



General Provisions



   35.001   Purpose of rules



   35.002   Definitions



   35.003   Administration of rules



   35.004   Positions covered by rules



   35.005   Additional rules for sworn law officers



   35.006   Departmental rules



   35.007   Employee safety belt use; policy



   35.008   Prevailing wage standards



Hiring Policies for Non-Sworn Police Officers



   35.010   Nondiscrimination



   35.011   Reserved



   35.012   Reserved



   35.013   Reserved



   35.014   Reserved



   35.015   Recruitment



   35.016   Job descriptions



   35.017   Selection



   35.018   Medical exam



   35.019   Probationary period; new employees



   35.020   Probationary period; promotions



   35.021   Seniority



Relationships with Other Employees



   35.030   Chain of command



   35.031   Relationship with Board of Trustees



   35.032   Relationship with other departments



Conditions of Employment



   35.040   Hours of work



   35.041   Overtime for full-time police officers



   35.042   Overtime and compensatory pay



   35.043   Reserved



   35.044   Reserved



   35.045   Reserved



   35.046   Reserved



   35.047   Call-back pay



   35.048   Salary increases



   35.049   Attendance



   35.050   Pay day



   35.051   Policy governing reimbursement of employee and officer
travel, meal, and lodging expenses



   35.052   Performance review



Payroll System



   35.060   Salary schedule established



   35.061   Payment of regular salaries



   35.062   Overtime; additional compensation



   35.063   Written report of all salary payments



Employee Benefits



   35.065   Holidays



   35.066   Vacation pay



   35.067   Sick days



   35.068   Court leave



   35.069   Bereavement leave



   35.070   Military reserve leave



   35.071   Extended leave of absence



   35.072   Health insurance plan



   35.073   Worker's compensation



   35.074   Employee education and training



   35.075   Uniforms



   35.076   Pension programs



Employee Conduct



   35.085   Employee performance records



   35.086   Gifts



   35.087   Equipment usage



   35.088   Political activities



   35.089   Disciplinary action procedures



   35.090   Possible causes for disciplinary action



   35.091   Grievance procedures



   35.092   Secondary employment



   35.093   Resignations



   35.094   Personnel records



   35.095   Policy prohibiting sexual harassment



   35.096   C.O.B.R.A. (Federal Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act)



   35.097   Drug and alcohol-free workplace policy



   35.098   Family and Medical Leave Act



   35.099   Workplace violence policy



   35.100   Public Safety Employee Benefits Act



   Appendix A:  Organizational chart



   Appendix B:  Travel, meal, and lodging expense reimbursement form



   Appendix C:  Vacation request form



   Appendix D:  Sick leave form



   Appendix E:  Paid leave of absence form



   Appendix F:  Unpaid leave of absence form



   Appendix G:  Written warning report



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.001  PURPOSE OF RULES.



   The purpose of these personnel rules is to establish codified personnel
procedures and principles for the village. The rules are an attempt to make
the village's personnel administration as efficient and equitable as possible.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.002  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms below will be defined as follows for the purpose of these
rules:



   ANNIVERSARY DATE.  The first date of continuous full-time employment
with the village.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES.  The Board of Trustees of the Village of Orland
Hills.



   DAYS.  Shall mean calendar days.



   DEPARTMENT HEAD.  The officially appointed head of the Public Works,
Police, Building, Recreation or other designated department. The DEPARTMENT
HEAD supervises all employees of his/her department and reports directly to
the Village Administrator. The DEPARTMENT HEAD may delegate some of his
responsibilities under these rules to another member of the department.



   EXEMPT SUPERVISORY AND CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEES.  The following
employees are considered exempt supervisory and confidential employees under
the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act: Village Administrator, Chief
of Police, Building Commissioner, Executive Secretary, Administrative
Assistant, Assistant Director of Public Works, Police Administrator,
Recreation Director and Public Works Director.



   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.  An individual regularly employed and working a
basic work week of at least 40 hours on average.



   HOURLY EMPLOYEE.  Includes all employees who are paid based on an
hourly rate of pay.



   OVERTIME.  Overtime pay shall be based on the number of hours actually
worked in a week, and shall be exclusive of sick days.



   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE.  An individual regularly employed by the village
and working a schedule of less than 40 hours per week, but not more than 1900
hours per year. Part-time employees shall not be eligible for paid sick
leave, vacation leave, holidays or medical insurance, but may be eligible for
overtime if they work in excess of 40 hours in a workweek, expense
reimbursement and/or uniform allowances.



   PAY PERIOD.  For all employees is a period of 14 days as determined by
time schedules currently in use by the village. Such a period always
commences on a Monday at 12:00 a.m. and terminates on a Sunday at 11:59 p.m.



   REGULAR EMPLOYEE.  An individual regularly employed full-time or
part-time with the village, with the exception of all elected officials,
members of boards, committees, commissions, village-related volunteer
organizations, and regular village consultants, such as the Village Engineer
and Village Attorney.



   SALARIED EMPLOYEE.  All employees who are paid according to an
employee contract.



   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE.  An individual who is hired for a specified period
of time, not to exceed a one-year period.



   UNEXCUSED ABSENCE.  An unexcused absence occurs whenever an employee
is not available to work on a regular workday, except for the approved use of
vacation, holidays, personal days, compensatory time or sick days, or when
the employee is on worker's compensation or long-term disability.



   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR. The chief administrative officer of the village.



   WORK PERIOD.  Shall be determined from time to time by the village.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.003  ADMINISTRATION OF RULES.



   The Village Administrator is the village's personnel officer, and shall
be charged with the overall responsibility for administration of these rules.
Employee questions regarding these rules should be directed to his/her
immediate supervisor. The Village Administrator may delegate some of the
responsibilities, under these rules, to other individual(s).



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.004  POSITION COVERED BY RULES.



   These rules shall apply to all regular and temporary employees of the
village, except as otherwise noted. Employees covered by collective
bargaining agreement with the village shall be governed by the collective
bargaining agreement.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.005  ADDITIONAL RULES FOR SWORN LAW OFFICERS.



   The rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
and the statutes of the state of Illinois, where applicable (including ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-1 et seq.) and shall also apply to sworn officers in
addition to these personnel rules. If these personnel rules conflict with
state statute or the rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the
state statutes or the rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall prevail.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.006  DEPARTMENTAL RULES.



   These personnel rules shall not limit the power of department heads to
make departmental rules which do not conflict with these personnel rules.
Departmental rules shall be approved by the department head, Village
Administrator and Village Board. Copies of said rules shall be distributed to
all employees to whom the rules are applicable. When the departmental rules
conflict with these personnel rules, the personnel rules shall take
precedence. Valid departmental rules shall be enforceable in the same manner
as these personnel rules.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.007  EMPLOYEE SAFETY BELT USE; POLICY.



   (A)   While operating or riding in the front seat of a municipal or
private vehicle on official business of the village, all employees shall use
a safety belt restraining system in the manner prescribed by the
manufacturer, in compliance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-603.1.



   (B)   This policy shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Persons unable to use the safety belt system for medical
or physical reasons, as evidenced by a physician's statement;



      (2)   Persons occupying a seating position or a vehicle not
equipped with a safety belt assembly;



      (3)   Persons operating a motor vehicle in reverse; or



      (4)   Persons operating motor vehicle with a model year prior
to 1965.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.008  PREVAILING WAGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   (1)   To the extent and as required by the Prevailing Wage
Act (Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.), the general prevailing rates of wages
in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the village is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rates of wages for
construction work in the Cook County area, as determined by the Department of
Labor of the State of Illinois as of June of the current year (See Exhibit
"A" attached to Ordinance 2017-013). The definition of any terms appearing in
this section , which are also used in the Act, shall be the same as in the
Act.



      (2)   As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the
prevailing rates of wages by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois
shall supersede the Department's June determination and shall apply to any
and all public works construction undertaken by the village. The definition
of any terms appearing in this section, which are also used in the Act, shall
be the same as in the Act.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply the
general prevailing rates of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment except public works construction undertaken by the village to the
extent required by the Act.



(Ord. 2000-11, passed 6-21-00; Am. Ord. 2001-011, passed 6-6-01; Am. Ord.
2002-004, passed 6-6-02; Am. Ord. 2003-013, passed 6-18-03; Am. Ord.
2004-007, passed 6-16-04; Am. Ord. 2005-010, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord.
2006-012, passed 6-7-06; Am. Ord. 2007-008, passed 6-20-07; Am. Ord.
2009-006, passed 7-1-09; Am. Ord. 2010-010, passed 7-20-10; Am. Ord.
2011-004, passed 6-15-11; Am. Ord. 2012-014, passed 7-18-12; Am. Ord.
2015-005, passed 6-17-15; Am. Ord. 2017-009, passed 6-21-17; Am. Ord.
2017-013, passed 10-4-17)



HIRING POLICIES FOR NON-SWORN POLICE OFFICERS



§ 35.010  NONDISCRIMINATION.



   (A)   The village accepts for employment and promotes its employees
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age,
marital status, national origin, ancestry or disability, and bases
appointments and promotion on merit, experience and other qualifications
applied fairly to all applicants and in accordance with the principles of
Equal Employment Opportunity.



   (B)   The village shall comply with existing federal, state and
local nondiscrimination guidelines as they pertain to employment with the
village, and shall comply with the provisions of Title I of the Americans
with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and Article 2 of the Illinois Human Rights Act.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§§ 35.011 - 35.014  RESERVED



§ 35.015  RECRUITMENT.



   (A)   Anyone interested in employment with the village may fill out
an application at Village Hall. Applications will be kept on file for a
period of one year from the date of filing. Depending on the job opening and
the situation, employment announcements may be posted on bulletin boards in
village offices. Additional announcements in papers, professional journals,
college recruitment offices and other sources may be utilized for some
positions. Qualified on-file applications, as well as applications received
after vacancy announcement but before the posted deadline, shall be reviewed.



   (B)   No person shall be hired by the village if that person is
related, as defined in this section, to an elected official of the village,
currently in office. A RELATIVE is defined as any of the following: spouse,
brother, sister, mother, father, grandparent, legal guardian, ward,
grandchild, child, cousin, niece, nephew, aunt, or uncle.



   (C)   No person shall be hired by the village nor shall any
contractor to the village have any person perform any work on behalf of the
village pursuant to a contract with the village until such time as the
employee, contractor or service personnel have undergone a criminal
background check. No person shall be hired by the village nor shall any
contractor to the village allow any personnel to perform any service if that
employee or individual has been convicted of a felony of any nature or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00; Am. Ord. 2004-003, passed 4-7-04)



§ 35.016  JOB DESCRIPTIONS.



   Each department head, with the approval of the Administrator, shall
develop, maintain and/or amend job descriptions for each position within the
department. Job descriptions shall be descriptive and explanatory, and shall
list all of the essential functions of the position; however, they need not
be restrictive, and the listing of particular examples of duties shall not
preclude the assignment of other tasks when considered necessary by the
department head.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.017  SELECTION.



   The hiring of all regular full-time and part-time employees (except for
the Chief of Police, Police Administrator, Village Administrator, Director of
Public Works, Recreation Director, Assistant Director of Public Works, and
Building Commissioner) shall be made by the Village Administrator, with the
advice and consent of a majority vote of the Board of Trustees then holding
office. It is the policy of the village to hire employees on the basis of
merit, without regard to the applicant's race, color, sex, marital status,
age, national origin, religion or disability. The selection of Chief of
Police, Police Administrator, Village Administrator, Director of Public
Works, Recreation Director, Assistant Director of Public Works and Building
Commissioner shall be according to state statute and other village ordinances.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.018  MEDICAL EXAM.



   (A)   Applicants for full-time employment shall be required to
submit a physical exam, at the village's expense, following a conditional
offer of employment but before actual employment takes place. Physical exams
for part-time employees may also be required following a conditional offer of
employment as directed by the Village Administrator.



   (B)   Regular full-time and part-time employees who are required to
undergo a physical exam will be requested to sign a statement of
understanding, in which they agree to reimburse the village for the cost of
the physical if they choose to terminate employment with the village within
six months of being hired. If the village terminates the employee, there will
be no obligation for the employee to reimburse the village for the physical
exam.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.019  PROBATIONARY PERIOD; NEW EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   All full-time and part-time employees must undergo a
probationary period at the beginning of their employment. This period will be
one year for police officers and all other full and part-time employees. This
period will be used to assist new personnel in adjusting to his/her position,
as well as to judge the employee's performance in his/her new role.



   (B)   During or at the completion of the probationary period, the
employee's performance shall be reviewed as discussed in the performance
review section.



   (C)   If at any time during the probationary period, the supervisor
or department head, with the concurrence of the Administrator, determines
that the service of the employee has been unsatisfactory, the employee may be
separated from service without the right to appeal.



   (D)   During or at the end of the probationary period, the employee
may be dismissed at any time by the department head with the approval of the
Village Administrator, and shall not be entitled to the remedies set forth in
these rules. Temporary employees can be dismissed at any time by the
department head with the approval of the Village Administrator. Probationary
periods may be extended with the approval of the department head and the
Village Administrator one time for a period not to exceed one year.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.020  PROBATIONARY PERIOD; PROMOTIONS.



   All employees receiving a promotion, or all employees moving from
part-time to full-time status, must also undergo a three-month probationary
period for the new position. These periods can also be extended with the
approval of the department head and the Village Administrator. On or before
the completion of the probationary period, the employee shall either be
formally reclassified in the new position, returned to the old position, or
discharged. The employee would not have the right to appeal the
reclassification decision, but would have the right to appeal any discharge.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.021  SENIORITY.



   Seniority is an employee's length of continuous service since the first
date of full-time employment with the village (anniversary date) or date of
re- employment. If more than one person starts work on the same day,
seniority will be determined by the sequence of employee number as assigned
by the village. Seniority will be terminated when an employee:



   (A)   Voluntarily separates from village employment;



   (B)   Retires;



   (C)   Is laid off for a period in excess of two years or fails to
report to work within five days, or fails to arrange to report to work within
14 days after notice is mailed by certified letter by the village to the last
address on village records; or



   (D)   Is discharged.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



RELATIONSHIPS WITH OTHER EMPLOYEES



§ 35.030  CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   The chain of command is followed according to the organizational chart
(see Appendix A following this chapter).



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.031  RELATIONSHIP WITH BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   All requests or orders of work from individual members of the Board of
Trustees must be approved by the employee's supervisor and the Village
Administrator.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.032  RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS.



   Interdepartmental relationships are encouraged, especially when the
relationship has the potential to improve village services and programs. The
appropriate forum for discussing interdepartmental relationships and problems
will be decided by the Village Administrator. Employees are encouraged to
suggest to their supervisor ways that interdepartmental relationships can
improve the village. Problems with interdepartmental relationships should be
presented to the Village Administrator.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT



§ 35.040  HOURS OF WORK.



   (A)   The schedule of hours worked by each employee will be decided
by each department, based upon the department's needs, with the approval of
the Village Administrator.



   (B)   Meal breaks and rest breaks are scheduled by each department.
Rest breaks will be paid but the employee must remain on the premises or at
their work station. Rest breaks will not exceed ten minutes every four hours.
Meal breaks are unpaid unless the employee is required to perform any duties
while eating.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.041  OVERTIME FOR FULL-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.



   (A)   All full-time police officers shall receive compensatory time
for all hours worked in excess of 80 hours during a 14-day period.
Compensatory time shall accrue at a rate equal to 1.5 hours for each hour
worked in excess of 80 hours during that 14-day period.



   (B)   No officer shall be allowed to accumulate more than 100 hours
of compensatory time.



   (C)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to
promulgate the appropriate General Order to implement the compensatory time
program in a manner consistent with the requirements of the Police Department.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.042  OVERTIME AND COMPENSATORY TIME.



   (A)   Overtime shall only consist of authorized work in excess of 40
hours in a work week for all employees except full-time police officers.



   (B)   All overtime must be authorized in advance by the department
head. Overtime hours will be assigned as equitably as practical.



   (C)   Non-supervisory (hourly) employees shall be compensated at a
rate of 1½ times their regular rate of compensation for authorized work in
excess of 40 hours per week, and only after 40 hours are completed.



   (D)   Sick days are not considered hours worked.



   (E)   Non-supervisory (hourly) employees called in to work on a
village-approved holiday shall be compensated at 1½ times the rate of pay in
addition to the regular holiday rate of pay for hours worked, except if the
employee fails to work or takes a sick day before or the day after the
holiday. In that case, the employee will not receive 1½ times the rate of
pay until the employee has worked in excess of 40 hours for that work week.



   (F)   Employees called out for emergency overtime work on Saturday
and Sunday shall be compensated on the basis of 1½times the employee's base
pay.



   (G)   Department heads shall not be eligible for overtime
compensation; however, the Village Administrator, at his discretion, may
grant compensatory time off as he deems advisable due to long hours worked
from time to time by such employees.



   (H)   The Office Supervisor shall be compensated at 1½ times the
regular rate of pay for authorized hours worked in excess of 40 hours per
week, unless otherwise stipulated in an employment agreement.



   (I)   In lieu of overtime pay, employees may elect to accumulate
compensatory time up to a maximum of 200 hours.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§§ 35.043 - 34.046  RESERVED.



§ 35.047  CALL-BACK PAY.



   All regular and temporary employees shall receive a minimum of
two-hour's pay if at any time they have (a) satisfactorily completed the
regularly scheduled work, including any daily overtime; (b) have left the
work premises; and (c) are then called back to duty. If the employee works
more than two hours, they will be paid for the actual time worked.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.048  SALARY INCREASES.



   The village will pay all employees according to the Village Pay Plan.
The Pay Plan steps shall be approved by the Board of Trustees from time to
time.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.049  ATTENDANCE.



   Any employee who expects to be late shall notify his/her supervisor
according to department rules. All hourly employees must keep track of the
time they begin and end each work day, and the time spent on meal breaks.
Employees will either be required to fill out a time sheet or punch a time
clock. Each employee must use only one time card or time sheet for each
two-week pay period. Employees must have their time cards or time sheets
completely filled out and signed by the department head and Village
Administrator no later than noon on Monday after the pay period ends to
ensure getting paid on the usual pay day.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.050  PAY DAY.



   The Board of Trustees shall, from time to time, establish pay periods
for full-time and part-time employees, subject to such terms and conditions
as the Board of Trustees may deem appropriate.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.051  POLICY GOVERNING REIMBURSEMENT OF EMPLOYEE AND OFFICER TRAVEL,
MEAL, AND LODGING EXPENSES.



   (A)    Purpose.  The Board of Trustees will reimburse employee and
officer travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred in connection with
pre-approved travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred on behalf of the
village. Employees and officers are expected exercise the same care in
incurring expenses for official business as a prudent person would in
spending personal funds.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ENTERTAINMENT.  Includes, but is not limited to, shows,
amusements, theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public
or private entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event.



      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by
employees and officers of the village, or charges of the village, involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.



   (C)   Authorized types of official business.  Travel, meal, and
lodging expenses shall be reimbursed for employees and officers of the
village only for purposes of official business conducted on behalf of the
village, which includes, but is not limited to, off-site or out-of-town
meetings related to official business and pre-approved seminars, conferences
and other educational events related to the employee’s or officer’s
official duties.



   (D)   Maximum allowable expenses.



      (1)   Maximum expenses.  Travel, meal, and lodging expenses
incurred by any employee or official must not exceed $1,200, unless otherwise
approved in an open meeting by a majority roll-call vote of the Board of
Trustees.



      (2)   Personal automobiles.  Mileage reimbursement will be
based on mileage from the work location office to the off-site location of
the official business, not from the employee’s or officer’s residence,
unless the distance from the employee’s or officer’s residence is less
than the mileage from the work location office to the off-site location. When
attending a training event or other off-site official business directly from
an employee’s or officer’s residence, no reimbursement will be made if
the distance is less than the mileage of a normal commute to the workplace.
An employee or officer will be reimbursed at the prevailing IRS mileage rate.
The traveler will only be reimbursed up to the price of a coach airfare
ticket if they drive to a location for which airfare would have been less
expensive.



      (3)   Automobile rentals.  Travelers will be reimbursed for
the cost of renting an automobile, including gasoline expense, only as
limited in this section. Travelers using rental cars to conduct official
business are required to purchase insurance through the rental agency or
provide proof of personal insurance equivalent to the rental agencies
insurance. Car rental insurance will cover the vehicle during personal use,
e.g., using the vehicle after the conference has ended.



      (4)   Tolls.  The village will reimburse an employee for
incidental tolls associated with approved travel.



      (5)   Public transportation.  In the case of local training
or official business where an employee or officer chooses to use public
transportation, reimbursement for use of public transportation will be made
upon documentation of a paid receipt. When attending training or business
directly from an employee’s or officer’s residence, no reimbursement will
be made if the distance is less than the mileage of a normal commute to the
workplace. If the distance is greater than the traveler’s normal commute,
reimbursement will be paid at the differential of the commute less the
mileage of a normal commute to the workplace.



      (6)   Hotel/motel accommodations.  The traveler will be
reimbursed for a standard single room at locations convenient to the business
activity. In the event of a change in plans or a cancellation, the traveler
must cancel the hotel/motel reservation so as not to incur cancellation
charges.



      (7)   Meals.  No payment or reimbursement may be made for
personal supplies, alcoholic beverages, or entertainment. If some meals are
included in the prepaid registration fees, the employee or officer of the
village may not be reimbursed for those meals.



      (8)   Vacation in conjunction with business travel.  In cases
where vacation time is added to a business trip, any cost variance in
airfare, car rental, lodging and/or any other expenses must be clearly
identified on the travel, meal, and lodging expense report form and paid by
the traveler.



      (9)   Accompanied travel.  When a traveler is accompanied by
others not on official business, any lodging, transportation, meals or other
expenses above those incurred for the authorized traveler will not be
reimbursed by the village.



      (10)   Parking.  Parking fees at a hotel/motel will be
reimbursed only with a receipt.



   (E)   Approval of expenses.



      (1)   Travel, meal, and lodging expenses that are in excess of
the maximum $1,200 incurred by any employee must be previously approved in an
open meeting by a majority roll-call vote of the Board of Trustees.



      (2)   Travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by any
member of the Board of Trustees must be approved by roll-call vote at an open
meeting of the Board of Trustees.



      (3)   Travel, meal, and lodging expenses advanced as a per
diem to any employee or any member of the Board of Trustees must be approved
by roll-call vote at an open meeting of the Board of Trustees prior to
payment. Documentation of expenses must be provided in accordance with
divisions (C), (D) and (F) of this section, and any excess from the per diem
must be repaid.



   (F)   Documentation of expenses.



      (1)   Before an expense for travel, meals, or lodging may be
approved under division (E) of this section, the following minimum
documentation must first be submitted, in writing, to the Board of Trustees
on a travel, meal, and lodging expense form:



         (a)   An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or
lodging if expenses have not been incurred, or a receipt of the cost of the
travel, meals, or lodging if the expenses have already been incurred;



         (b)   The name of the individual who received or is
requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense;



         (c)   The job title or office of the individual who
received or is requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and



         (d)   The date or dates and nature of the official
business for which the travel, meal, or lodging expense was or will be
expended.



      (2)   All documents and information submitted under this
section are public records subject to disclosure under the Freedom of
Information Act.



      (3)   The village hereby adopts as its official standardized
form for the submission of travel, meal, and lodging expenses the travel,
meal, and lodging expense report form found in Appendix B to this chapter.



   (G)   Entertainment expenses.  No employee or officer shall be
reimbursed for any entertainment expense, unless ancillary to the purpose of
the program, event or other official business.



   (H)   Exceptions.  Employees that utilize their personal vehicles
for day-to-day operations shall continue to utilize the village’s monthly
mileage report form, and shall be reimbursed upon approval of the Board of
Trustees. Other exceptions for good cause may be granted with Village Board
approval.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00; Am. Ord. 2017-004, passed 4-19-17)



§ 35.052  PERFORMANCE REVIEW.



   (A)   Each regular employee shall undergo a review of his/her
performance at least twice a year. The review shall be based upon the
employee's general work performance and specific job duties. The general work
performance form shall be rated on job knowledge, quality of work, quantity
of work, adaptability, interest initiative, human relations, attentiveness,
personal characteristics, housekeeping/ equipment use, attendance, cost
control, and overall rating.



   (B)   The review of an employee's specific job duties shall be based
upon the employee's job description. The job description should list general
responsibilities of the employee's position, as well as the approximate
percentage of time spent on each activity, where applicable. This description
should be reviewed and updated by the employee and his supervisor annually.



   (C)   Scoring will be done by the employee's supervisor. Scoring
will be done on a scale of one to five, with five being "Superior", and one
being "Poor". The supervisor should then confer with each employee and review
his/her performance and scoring. The supervisor and employee should then
write down what goals and improvements the employee will attempt to achieve
within the one-year period. The employee should also document any comments
he/she desires. The form shall then be sent to the Village Administrator for
his review and signature.



   (D)   Performance reviews are a process that should be taken
seriously by all. They play an important role in deciding on promotions and
pay raises, and in helping the employee grow to his/her potential with the
village.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



PAYROLL SYSTEM



§ 35.060  SALARY SCHEDULE ESTABLISHED.



   The Corporate Authorities shall, from time to time, approve a salary
schedule for all employees of the village.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.061  PAYMENT OF REGULAR SALARIES.



   Payment of regular salaries listed on the salary schedule is hereby
approved, and the Village Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to
cause the regular payment of said salaries in accordance with such guidelines
as may be established from time to time by the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.062  OVERTIME; ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION.



   No additional compensation shall be paid for overtime, except as
authorized by the department head, subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.063  WRITTEN REPORT OF ALL SALARY PAYMENTS.



   Following the completion of each payroll period, the Village
Administrator shall furnish the Corporate Authorities with a written report
of all salary payments, including overtime.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



EMPLOYEE BENEFITS



§ 35.065  HOLIDAYS.



   (A)   The village recognizes the following as legal holidays:



      (1)   New Year's Day;



      (2)   Memorial Day;



      (3)   Independence Day;



      (4)   Labor Day;



      (5)   Thanksgiving;



      (6)   Day after Thanksgiving;



      (7)   Christmas Eve;



      (8)   Christmas Day; and



      (9)   Two floating holidays as approved by the department head
and the Village Administrator.



   (B)   If the above holiday falls on a Sunday, the following day
shall be observed. However, if the holiday falls on Saturday, the village
will recognize the preceding Friday as a holiday for those employees not
scheduled to work on Saturday. In either case, payment for such holiday shall
be that employee's regular daily pay. Any employee shall forfeit his/her
right to payment for any holiday if he/she has an unexcused absence on the
last regular work day preceding such holiday or on the next regular work day
following such holiday.



   (C)   All regular full-time employees shall receive their normal
compensation for official holidays. If a regular hourly employee is required
to work on a holiday, he/she shall be paid 1½ times the normal hourly rate
of pay in addition to their normal compensation for official holiday.



   (D)   All part-time employees do not receive any holiday except if
they are required to work. If a part- time employee must work on a holiday,
he/she shall be paid 1½ times the normal hourly rate of pay.



   (E)   If an employee is eligible for both overtime compensation and
extra compensation described in divisions (C) and (D) above, in the same work
period, he will only receive the larger of the two. (For example, a full-time
public works employee who works 50 hours during the Christmas week work
period, including eight hours on Christmas, receives 48 hours pay at the
regular rate, and ten hours pay at time- and-a-half. If he works 45 hours
during the week, including eight hours on the holiday, he receives 45 hours
pay at the regular rate and eight hours pay at the time-and-a-half rate.)



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.066  VACATION PAY.



   (A)   Each regular hourly full-time employee shall receive vacation
pay based upon his/her current weekly salary, excluding overtime wages.



   (B)   Vacation leave will be based on the number of years of
uninterrupted service, as follows:



      (1)   Less than one year:  One day per two months after
second full month of employment.



      (2)   One - five years:  Twelve days per year or one day per
month.



      (3)   Five -ten years:  Sixteen days per year or 1 days per
month.



      (4)   After ten years:  Twenty-one days per year or 1¾ days
per month.



   (C)   Vacation pay shall be based upon employee's current pay for
the average number of hours that he/she works in a week, excluding overtime.



   (D)   Vacation requests must be approved by the employee's
department head and approved by the Village Administrator in accordance with
the operating requirements of the employee's department.



      (1)   Vacation days may be taken in ¼-day increments of not
less than two hours.



      (2)   Employees must use the vacation request form. (See
Appendix C following this chapter).



      (3)   Vacation days may be accumulated up to 200 hours. An
employee may be paid for unused vacation days at the rate of pay in effect
when the vacation time is earned.



   (E)   Department heads have the right to ask an employee to
reschedule their vacation requests if the department head feels enough notice
has not been given, or the department's or village's functions will be unduly
hampered.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00; Am. Ord. 2016-002, passed 3-16-16)



§ 35.067  SICK DAYS.



   All full-time employees of the village shall receive pay during
unavoidable absences from work due to sickness, doctor's appointments or
accidents during any anniversary year on the following basis:



   (A)   Full-time employees shall earn ½-day after every month, or
six after each year.



   (B)   Department heads, exempt, supervisory and confidential
employees shall earn ¾-day per month.



   (C)   Employees may accumulate unlimited sick days.



   (D)   An employee's use of sick leave shall be approved by the
employee's immediate supervisor; except that after being absent from his/her
job for more than two successive work days, the employee must provide a
physician's statement indicating the nature of the illness and incapacity for
duty.



   (E)   The employee shall receive his/her normal compensation for
each day of his illness or injury for which sick leave has been approved.
Sick days may be taken in ¼-day increments of not less than two hours.



   (F)   Sick leave shall not be used as a substitute for vacation days
or any other similar purpose, except as elsewhere provided.



   (G)   Employees must complete the sick leave form. (See Appendix D
following this chapter).



   (H)   There shall be no compensation for accumulated sick leave at
time of separation.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.068  COURT LEAVE.



   A full-time employee will be given time off with pay if selected to
serve on a jury when requested. The jury pay, excluding expense
reimbursement, will be subtracted from the employee's regular pay to
determine the amount the village will pay. Leave with pay for serving on a
jury or attending court as a subpoenaed witness for or on behalf of the
village may be granted, except in cases involving a criminal act by the
employee, or any civil or personal case initiated by or against the employee.
A paid leave of absence form must be completed to receive pay for this leave.
(See Appendix E following this chapter).



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.069  BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.



   Full-time employees of the village shall receive a maximum of three
days leave with pay in order to attend a funeral or other services in
connection with the death of a member of the employee's immediate family. An
employee's IMMEDIATE FAMILY means his/her spouse, child, mother, father,
stepparents, stepchildren, brother, sister, grandparents, grandchildren,
mother- in-law, or father-in-law. If the employee wants additional time off,
he may use accumulated sick leave, vacation leave, or take an unpaid leave of
absence, with the permission of their supervisor. If an employee wishes to be
absent from work due to a death outside the employee's immediate family, he
may use accumulated sick leave, vacation leave, or take an unpaid leave of
absence with the permission of their immediate supervisor. A paid leave of
absence form must be completed to receive pay for this leave. (See Appendix E
following this chapter).



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.070  MILITARY RESERVE LEAVE.



   (A)   All regular full-time employees who are active members of any
recognized state or federal military reserve organization shall be granted
time off to accomplish periodic field training, encampment duty, disaster, or
civil disturbance duty required by law or regulation. This special leave
shall not exceed 15 working days in an anniversary year. A paid leave of
absence form must be completed to receive pay for this leave. (See Appendix E
following this chapter).



   (B)   This leave will only be allowed if an employee is required to
perform such duty in order to maintain his/her status in the state or federal
military organization. The employee will be paid the difference between
his/her military pay received for the duty and the normal salary he/she would
have received during that time from the village. The employee must present an
official order from an official at his/her post, showing the time spent on
duty and the total salary received for the duty. A copy of the check stub
showing the total military pay must be presented to the village within 60
days of the end of the duty. An employee called for active duty for an
emergency longer than 15 days will be granted an unpaid leave of absence, as
outlined under the extended leave of absence provision in § 35.071.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.071  EXTENDED LEAVE OF ABSENCE.



   (A)   Leave of absence without pay.  Leave of absence without pay
may be granted for the following reasons:



      Extended illness or injury



      Military leave



      Maternity leave



      Other leave



Employees must complete the unpaid leave of absence form (See Appendix F
following this chapter). The employee will continue to receive all benefits
during the first 30 days of the leave, including receiving health insurance,
holiday pay, and including accumulating sick and vacation pay. After 30 days,
the employee may continue his/her enrollment in the village insurance plan by
arranging to pay the premiums. However, the employee shall not receive any
additional vacation days, sick days, holiday pay, or other benefits after 30
days. The period of the absence will not be counted towards accumulated
service time.



   (B)   Extended illness or injury.



      (1)   Any leave request due to extended illness or injury must
include a statement from the employee's physician, stating that the employee
is, and/or will become temporarily disabled and unable to work for a
specified period of time. The report should also include a statement from the
physician on the employee's availability or lack of availability for less
strenuous duties. He/she must also submit a written request to his/her
department head and the Village Administrator stating the reason for the
leave, the date the leave is to begin, and the anticipated date of return.



      (2)   An employee who has sick or vacation leave accumulated
may use this leave instead of taking an unpaid leave.



      (3)   Upon return from an approved leave of absence, every
attempt will be made to return the employee to his original position or one
of comparable skill and salary.



      (4)   An unpaid leave of absence for an extended illness or
injury will be granted for a maximum of six months. Extensions may be granted
for additional months to a maximum of one year. To receive an extension, the
employee must submit a medical progress report and any other information that
would show the need for additional time off.



      (5)   Upon the employee's return to work, he/she must submit a
medical certification confirming the employee's ability to perform his/her
duties. Employees who fail to return to work within two days after the
approved leave of absence ends shall be terminated.



   (C)   Maternity leaves.  Any employee anticipating maternity shall
be entitled to an unpaid leave of absence according to the following
guidelines:



      (1)   All employees requesting such leave shall notify their
department head at least three months prior to the anticipated date of
delivery. A maternity leave request must include a statement from the
employee's physician, stating that the employee will become temporarily
disabled for a specified period of time. The request should also include a
statement from the physician on the employee's availability or lack of
availability for less strenuous duties.



      (2)   An employee who has paid sick or vacation leave
accumulated may use this leave instead of taking unpaid leave.



      (3)   Upon return from an approved leave of absence, every
attempt will be made to return the employee to his original position or one
of comparable skill and salary.



      (4)   Employees granted such leave shall present a physician's
statement within 30 days of date of delivery as to recovery from the
pregnancy. Return to service will not exceed 60 days from the date of
delivery, unless cause can be shown. An extension may be approved by the
department head and Village Administrator. Any employee who does not report
back to work within 60 days of delivery, or who does not receive an approved
extension, or who accepts other employment while on leave from the village,
will be considered to have terminated her employment with the village.



      (5)   A male employee may apply in writing to his department
head for an unpaid leave of absence due to the birth of his child according
to procedures outlined in division (E) of this section.



   (D)   Military leave.  An employee who enters active military
service of the United States shall have such re- employment rights as may be
provided under applicable federal law in effect at that time. The employee
must notify their department head and the Village Administrator in writing of
his/her entry into active military service. The employee must report to work
within 60 days of discharge from the service.



   (E)   Other leaves of absence.  A leave of absence without pay may
be granted for other reasons, including:



      (1)   The employee desires to obtain educational credits which
will contribute to their municipal service.



      (2)   A male employee is required to or desires to be absent
due to spouse's pregnancy, childbirth or adoption of a child.



      (3)   An employee desires to run for local, state or national
elected office.



      (4)   An unpaid leave of absence may also be granted for an
emergency or personal crisis. Examples include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Severe illness of close relative or friend.



         (b)   Severe emotional crisis of employee or close
friend.



         (c)   Major damage to residence from fire, theft or
other disaster.



         (d)   Any other emergency deemed serious enough by the
department head and Village Administrator to warrant a leave of absence.



      (5)   Other circumstances which are deemed reasonable by the
department head and Village Administrator.



      (6)   Any of these leaves of absence may be granted to a
maximum of six months. Extensions may be granted for additional months, to a
maximum of one year. For the original leave of absence, the employee shall
write a letter to the department head and the Village Administrator,
explaining the need for time off. The employee shall also give written notice
for any and every extension he/she may need. An employee who fails to return
to work within two days after the approved leave terminates shall be
terminated.



      (7)   An employee may choose to use vacation leave in lieu of
an unpaid leave for any of the reasons of this section.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.072  HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.



   (A)   All regular full-time employees of the village are eligible
for participation in the village health insurance and life insurance plan.



   (B)   The premium contribution for each full-time employee of the
village or coverage under the insurance plan shall be paid by the village
and/or employee in an amount to be determined from time to time by the
village. At the election of the employee, his/her dependents may be added to
the employee's certificate of insurance or insurance policy as additional
insureds.



   (C)   An employee interested in enrolling himself/herself and/or
his/her dependents should do so within the first month of employment. The
insurance will not become effective until an employee has been in full- time
status for at least 30 days.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.073  WORKER'S COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Worker's compensation is for a disability or death which is
the result of an injury or illness suffered on the job. The cost of this
coverage is paid by the village.



   (B)   An employee must report all injuries to his/her supervisor
immediately, to insure his/her eligibility for benefits.



   (C)   An employee shall continue to accrue all benefits during a
temporary disability leave resulting from a job-related accident. The village
will pay the employee one-third of his/her normal salary. Worker's
compensation will pay the rest of the salary. The manner in which payment
will be made shall be determined by the Village Administrator.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.074  EMPLOYEE EDUCATION AND TRAINING.



   (A)   It is the village's policy to cover costs for job-related
seminars, training programs, and academic courses which have been approved by
the department head and the Village Administrator. The employee will also be
paid his/her normal salary during the time he/she spends at approved seminars
or training programs.



   (B)   For approved academic courses, an employee will be reimbursed
for tuition and fees at the conclusion of the course, but only if he/she has
received a grade of C or better. The employee will not be compensated for his
/her time, or for books and materials purchased for the class. No employee
may receive in excess of $500 per calendar year in tuition and fees
reimbursement.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.075  UNIFORMS.



   The village may provide for uniform and special clothing needs of its
employees. This will be done through either yearly uniform allowances or
lease of appropriate uniforms and clothing as determined by the village. The
employee will be responsible for proper care and use of clothing and
uniforms. All uniforms must be turned in to the village at the time of
employment separation.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.076  PENSION PROGRAM.



   The village will make contributions to the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund or other pension program as may be required by contract, law
or ordinance. In the event that an employee is not eligible to participate in
such a pension program, the village may elect to establish a comparable
benefit.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



EMPLOYEE CONDUCT



§ 35.085  EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE RECORDS.



   Supervisors should keep a record of superior and inferior actions by
employees, as well as letters from citizens commending or criticizing an
employee's action. A written summary of the action should be given to the
Village Administrator and Village Board members and placed in the employee's
personnel files.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.086  GIFTS.



   No gift, gratuity or reward shall be accepted by an employee from an
individual or business having connections with village business, to the
extent that the acceptance would violate state statute or village ordinance.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.087  EQUIPMENT USAGE.



   Village equipment and/or facilities may not be used for personal use,
except with permission of the supervisor in charge of the equipment and/or
facilities. If any employee removes equipment for personal use, it must be
logged out on an appropriate form. Employees will be responsible for damaged
equipment. Only authorized personnel, as determined by the supervisor in
charge of the vehicle or equipment, are allowed in vehicles or equipment
owned by the village.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.088  POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   Village employees are encouraged to vote in elections. Employees may
take an active role in any local, state and national political campaigns, so
long as it is confined to non-working hours.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.089  DISCIPLINARY ACTION PROCEDURES.



   The following regulations cover all regular employees except full-time
sworn law enforcement personnel. Official disciplinary action is designed to
correct unacceptable behavior. Each disciplinary action should increase in
severity for repeated offenses. The following steps should be taken, though
any of the steps can be taken at any time, depending upon the severity of the
offense:



   (A)   Oral warning.  An oral warning may be given for an offense.
The employee's supervisor or another higher authority may issue the warning.
The verbal reprimand shall include a warning that if the actions continue, a
written reprimand will follow.



   (B)   Written warning.  The warning should include filling out an
employee warning report. The employee, the supervisor and the Village
Administrator shall each receive a copy. (See Appendix G following this
chapter). All of the above mentioned people should sign and date the original
copy, which shall be placed in the employee's personnel file.



   (C)   Suspension.  The department head, with approval of the
Village Administrator, may suspend an employee for up to 30 days, depending
on the nature of the offense.



   (D)   Discharge.



      (1)   An employee who ignores previous verbal and/or written
warnings, or who commits any offense described in § 35.090, may be
discharged.



      (2)   No employee shall be discharged by the village except at
the direction of the Village Administrator, with the advice and consent of a
majority vote of the Board of Trustees then holding office. Prior to
discharging any employee, the Village Administrator shall give notice to the
employee, and provide the employee with a reasonable opportunity to be heard
in his or her defense before the Board of Trustees.



      (3)   The Village Administrator shall report to the Board of
Trustees, in writing, the reasons for the employee's discharge not less than
seven days after the discharge.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00; Am. Ord. 2006-010, passed 4-5-06)



§ 35.090  POSSIBLE CAUSES FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION.



   The following are examples of possible causes for disciplinary action.
The list is not inclusive, and is meant as a general guide to avoid
misunderstandings:



   (A)   Release of confidential information.



   (B)   Insubordination, or failure to perform an assigned task.



   (C)   Discourtesy or use of abusive language.



   (D)   Conviction of a felony.



   (E)   Falsification of organization records or reports.



   (F)   Willingly making a false statement to a supervisory official,
the public, or to any village board or commission.



   (G)   Theft or unauthorized use of village tools, machinery or
reports.



   (H)   Immoral conduct or indecent behavior on village premises.



   (I)   Violation of village ordinances, administrative regulations,
or department rules.



   (J)   Violation of, or disregard for an established safety practice.



   (K)   Recklessness, carelessness or negligence in the handling or
control of monies, property, village vehicles, or equipment.



   (L)   Repeated convictions of misdemeanors and/or traffic charges
during employment.



   (M)   Being tardy and/or absent without proper authorization.



   (N)   Misuse of sick leave and/or other benefits.



   (O)   Provoking, instigating or participating in an activity
intended to disrupt the established work routine.



   (P)   Gambling on the premises.



   (Q)   Ingestion, introduction, possession or use of intoxicating
liquors or drugs on village property, or reporting for or being at work while
being under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance.



   (R)   Failure to properly report accidents or a personal injury.



   (S)   Physical or mental unfitness for the performance of duties.



   (T)   Refusal or neglect to pay just debts due the village.



   (U)   Inability to work amicably with other village employees.



   (V)   Engagement in outside business activities or part-time
employment on village time.



   (W)   Incompetency or inefficiency in the performance of duties.



   (X)   Brutality or cruelty to a person in custody, provided the act
committed was not necessary or lawfully done in self-defense, or to protect
the lives of others, or to prevent the escape of persons lawfully in custody.



   (Y)   Conduct unbecoming an employee of the village, whether on-duty
or off-duty.



   (Z)   Conviction of a misdemeanor involving immoral behavior.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.091  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   A grievance is a disagreement relating to working conditions,
personnel rules, regulations, and transactions, or relationships between an
employee and his superior or other employees.



   (B)   It is the policy of the village to allow all employees a fair
chance to appeal a disciplinary action or any other grievance he/she feels is
important enough to appeal. It is hoped that this will be used as a last
resort, and that most problems can be solved though information discussion.



   (C)   All sworn law enforcement personnel shall be covered by rules
and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.



   (D)   When an employee feels formal proceedings are necessary,
he/she shall first present a grievance to his/her department head in writing,
stating the grievance and the remedy sought. An employee who has a grievance
shall first present his grievance to his immediate supervisor within five
days of the action or incident in question. The department head should reply
in writing within 15 working days of receipt of the grievance. If the
employee does not feel satisfied with the department head's decision, he/she
may appeal to the Village Administrator, asking him to examine the grievance.
The Village Administrator's decision shall be final.



   (E)   An employee may also appeal a suspension or discharge in a
similar way, except as noted in division (F) below. The employee must remain
on suspension in either instance until a decision is rendered.



   (F)   The appeal of the discharge of the Village Administrator,
Chief of Police, Building Commissioner, Executive Secretary, or
Administrative Director of Public Works shall be appealed according to
contractual arrangements between the employee and the village if a written
contract exists.



   (G)   No reprisals are to be taken against any employee using this
procedure.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.092  SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT.



   All regular full-time employees must get approval from their department
heads and the Village Administrator for any secondary employment. Approval
will be granted only if the employment does not impair the performance of an
employee's duties and is not detrimental to the village service. All
employees who are normally available for around-the-clock emergency calls
must continue to be available for such duties.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.093  RESIGNATIONS.



   All regular employees should give two weeks written notice of his/her
intentions to resign.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.094  PERSONNEL RECORDS.



   (A)   All personnel records shall be maintained in the Village
Administrator's offices, except for the Police Department. All appointments,
transfers, promotions, demotions, terminations, sick leaves, vacation leaves,
and other pertinent records shall be maintained in the file.



   (B)   All reviews of personnel files will be done in the presence of
the employee's supervisor. An employee shall be allowed to review his
personnel file twice a calendar year, or more frequently, if approved by his
supervisor. Personnel records shall be kept confidential.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.095  POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT.



   (A)   Prohibition on sexual harassment. It is unlawful to harass a
person because of that person's sex. The courts have determined that sexual
harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII of the U.S. Civil
Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in
an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable
misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations.
It is a policy of the village to prohibit harassment of any person by any
municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee or municipal agency
or office on the basis of sex or gender. All municipal officials, municipal
agents, municipal employees and municipal agencies or offices are prohibited
from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship
or lack thereof.



   (B)   Definition of sexual harassment.



      (1)   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment
as stated in the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual
harassment as:  any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors
or any conduct of a sexual nature when:



         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment,



         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such
individual, or



         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of
substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating
an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.



      (2)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:



         (a)   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments,
insults, humor, and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits,
sexual propositions, threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements
about other employees, even outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.



         (b)   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds
(whistling), leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures,
"catcalls", "smacking" or "kissing" noises.



         (c)   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a
sexual nature, viewing pornographic material or websites.



         (d)   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing,
pinching, brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.



         (e)   Textual/electronic: "sexting" (electronically
sending messages with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use
of sexually explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all
forms of electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages,
intranet/on-line postings, blogs, instant messages and social network
websites like Facebook and Twitter).



      (3)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are
easier to determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment
is more subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of
what would offend a "reasonable person."



   (C)   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment.



      (1)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or
believes herself or himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal
with the incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly
communicating her or his position to the offending employee, and her or his
immediate supervisor. It is not necessary for sexual harassment to be
directed at the person making the report.



      (2)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be
sexual harassment, including the following:



         (a)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is
sexual harassing behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should
directly and clearly express her or his objection that the conduct is
unwelcome and request that the offending behavior stop. The initial message
may be verbal. If subsequent messages are needed, they should be put in
writing in a note or a memo.



         (b)   Contact with supervisory personnel.



            1.   At the same time direct communication is
undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by
the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the immediate
supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a director of
human resources, an ethics officer, the City Manager or Administrator, or the
chief executive officer of the municipality.



            2.   The employee experiencing what he or she
believes to be sexual harassment must not assume that the employer is aware
of the conduct. If there are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a
supervisor or other responsible officer, the municipality will not be
presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.



         (c)   Resolution outside municipality. The purpose of
this policy is to establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for
responding to every report and incident so that problems can be identified
and remedied by the municipality. However, all municipal employees have the
right to contact the Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a
formal complaint with those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within
180 days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A
complaint with the EEOC must be filed within 300 days.



      (3)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any
report (what was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including,
but not limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and
telephone messages.



      (4)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be
accepted and investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention
of the municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual
harassment charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation
and the questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation
is a vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.



   (D)   Prohibition  on  retaliation  for  reporting  sexual
harassment allegations.



      (1)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal
employee or municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action
against any municipal employee due to a municipal employee's:



         (a)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any
violation of this policy,



         (b)   The provision of information related to or
testimony before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or
inquiry into any violation of this policy, or



         (c)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to
enforce the provisions of this policy.



      (2)   For the purposes of this policy, RETALIATORY ACTION
means the reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or
transfer, or change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal
employee that is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee's involvement
in protected activity pursuant to this policy.



      (3)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against
even if a report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any
witness will be protected from retaliation.



      (4)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained
herein, the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §
15-10) provides whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or
transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who does any of the
following:



         (a)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor
or to a public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member,
state agency, or other state employee that the state employee reasonably
believes is in violation of a law, rule, or regulation,



         (b)   Provides information to or testifies before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any
violation of a law, rule, or regulation by any officer, member, state agency
or other state employee, or



         (c)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce
the provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.



      (5)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (ILCS Ch. 740, Act
174, § 15(a)), an employer may not retaliate against an employee who
discloses information in a court, an administrative hearing, or before a
legislative commission or committee, or in any other proceeding, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an
employer may not retaliate against an employee for disclosing information to
a government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable
cause to believe that the information discloses a violation of a state or
federal law, rule, or regulation. (ILCS Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15(b)).



      (6)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (ILCS Ch.
775, Act 5, § 6-101), it is a civil rights violation for a person, or for
two or more people to conspire, to retaliate against a person because he/she
has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in good faith believes to be
sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a
complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation,
proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.



      (7)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower
paying job or passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR
or EEOC, may file a retaliation charge - due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300
days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation.



   (E)   Consequences  of  a  violation  of  the  prohibition 
on sexual harassment. In addition to any and all other discipline that may be
applicable pursuant to municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures,
employee handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who
violates this policy or the prohibition on sexual harassment contained in
ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per
offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the municipality and any
applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, state
law or federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the municipality shall be separate and distinct from
any penalty imposed by an ethics commission and any fines or penalties
imposed by a court of law or a state or federal agency.



   (F)   Consequences for knowingly making a false report.



      (1)   A FALSE REPORT is a report of sexual harassment made by
an accuser using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other
than stopping sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual
harassment. A false report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be
proven. Given the seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or
frivolous report is a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary
action. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this policy shall be subject to discipline or
discharge pursuant to applicable municipal policies, employment agreements,
procedures, employee handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreements.



      (2)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false
report alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State
Police, a State's Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law
enforcement official is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission
may levy an administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who
intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.



(Ord. 2017-016, passed 12-20-17)



§ 35.096  C.O.B.R.A. (FEDERAL CONSOLIDATED OMNIBUS RECONCILIATION ACT).



   (A)   All village employees receiving health insurance coverage are
entitled to continued health insurance coverage under the Federal
Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act (COBRA). The employee (or employee's
designee) must comply with certain time periods to accept COBRA conditions
(60 calendar days after the employee has been notified by the Insurance Plan
Administrator). If accepted, the employee is required to pay the village 102%
of what the employee's chosen insurance coverage would cost the village (100%
of the cost of the coverage plus 2% for administrative costs). In the event
of a 36-month qualifying event (see below), charges in the amount of 150% of
the monthly premium will be assessed for the months 19 through 36.



   (B)   If the employee fails to pay the premium within the allotted
time given to do so, if new benefits have been attained through remarriage or
employment, or the group plan is dropped by the village, the employee may
lose these insurance benefits.



   (C)   The following illustrates present COBRA conditions:



 

Qualifying Event
 
Eligible Beneficiaries
 
Period of Time Coverage May Continue


Voluntary termination
 
Former employee and his/her spouse and dependent children
 
Up to 18 months


Involuntary termination, except when resulting from gross misconduct
 
Former employee and his/her spouse and dependent children
 
Up to 18 months


Death of an insured employee
 
Surviving spouse and dependent children
 
Up to 3 years


Divorce and legal separation of insured employee
 
Former spouse and dependent children
 
Up to 3 years


Dependent child whose status or dependency ceases due to reaching the age of
19 or 25, if a full-time student at an accredited college or trade school.
Student status must be verifiable
 
Employee's dependent children
 
Up to 3 years


Attainment of Medicare eligibility by insured employee
 
Medicare-eligible employee's spouse and dependent children
 
Up to 3 years



 



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.097  DRUG AND ALCOHOL-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   It is the policy of the village that the public has the
right to expect all persons employed by the village to be free from drug use
and alcohol abuse. All facilities owned or leased to the village and all
sites where the village is performing work on its own behalf are subject to
this policy.



      (2)   Employees are expected and required to report to work on
time and in an appropriate mental and physical state for work. It is the
village's intent and obligation to provide and maintain a drug and alcohol-
free, healthful, safe and secure work environment.



      (3)   The village recognizes drug and alcohol dependency as
serious health problems. The employee in need of help in dealing with such
problems is encouraged to use the village's employee assistance program
and/or health insurance plan, as appropriate. Conscientious efforts to seek
such help will not jeopardize an employee's job, and will not be recorded in
any village personnel file.



      (4)   All employees of the village and those contractors and
subcontractors who are engaged in the performance of a contract subsidized in
full or in part by a federal or state grant shall be given a copy of this
policy. This policy shall also be posted outside the Village Clerk's Office
at Village Hall. With the receipt of a copy of this policy, each employee
agrees that, as a condition of employment with the village, the employee will
abide by the terms of this policy.



      (5)   The following divisions are the village's rules and
regulations with respect to the use of alcohol and controlled substances.



   (B)   Employee rules and regulations.  Employees shall be subject
to the following rules and regulations:



      (1)   An employee shall not buy, manufacture, sell, transport,
purchase, possess or use controlled substances and/or alcohol during work
hours on village premises or while conducting village business off- premises.



      (2)   An employee shall not report to work when under the
influence of alcohol or controlled substances not prescribed for medical or
medicinal purposes.



      (3)   An employee shall not use alcohol and/or drugs while in
village buildings, vehicles, on village property, nor while in village
uniform.



      (4)   An employee shall not use any alcoholic beverages or
possess any open containers of alcoholic beverages on any street, sidewalk or
public place within the village while on duty, except where required in the
course of the employee's duties. This shall not prohibit the consumption of
alcohol at village-related social or civic events. For the purposes of this
section, "within the village" shall include but not be limited to streets,
sidewalks, village buildings, village vehicles and village property.



      (5)   An employee shall be required to immediately submit to
appropriate tests for the detection of alcohol and/or controlled substances
when the employee's supervisor, department head or the Village Administrator
has reasonable suspicion to believe that such employee is under the influence
of drugs and/or alcohol.



      (6)   Prior to the start of a work day, an employee who is
taking any medications or drugs, whether or not it is prescription or
non-prescription, shall notify his/her supervisor, department head or the
Village Administrator if such medication or drug may interfere with the safe
and effective performance of duties or operation of village equipment.



      (7)   Upon request, an employee shall provide a current, valid
prescription in the employee's name for any drug or medication identified in
a positive test for controlled substances within 24 hours of such request.



      (8)   Violation of a criminal drug statute:



         (a)   An employee shall notify the city if he/she has
been arrested and convicted of any criminal drug statute occurring in the
workplace, or performing any job-related duty while not on village-owned
property, no later than five days after such conviction. For the purposes of
this policy, the following definitions shall apply:



            1.   CONVICTION shall mean a finding of guilt,
including a plea of nolo contendere, or imposition of sentence, or both, by
any judicial body charged with the responsibility to determine violations of
federal or state criminal drug statutes; and



            2.   CRIMINAL DRUG STATUTE shall mean a criminal
statute involving manufacture, distribution, dispensation, use or possession
of any controlled substances.



         (b)   Within 30 days after receiving notice from an
employee of a conviction, the village shall:



            1.   Impose an appropriate sanction;



            2.   Take appropriate personnel action against
such employee, up to and including termination; and/or



            3.   Require such employee to satisfactorily
participate in a drug abuse assistance or rehabilitation program approved for
such purpose by a federal, state, local health, law enforcement or other
appropriate agency.



      (9)   Any employee who uses, distributes or manufactures
illegal substances during his/her workday, including lunch hour or breaks,
will be separated from village employment and prosecuted to the extent
possible under the law.



   (C)   Supervisor/department head responsibilities. The
supervisor/department head shall be responsible for enforcing this policy at
all times, and is required to perform the following duties in conjunction
with this policy:



      (1)   Enforce this policy at all times. Any
supervisor/department head who knowingly permits a violation of this policy
by any employee under his/her direct supervision shall be subject to
disciplinary action.



      (2)   Receive at least 60 minutes of training on alcohol
misuse, and receive an additional 60 minutes of training on controlled
substance misuse. Training must include the physical, behavioral, speech and
performance indicators of probable misuse and use of controlled substances.



      (3)   Request that an employee submit to a drug and/or alcohol
test when reasonable suspicion exists that such employee is under the
influence of drugs and/or alcohol. Reasonable suspicion exists when the
supervisor/department head observes specific, contemporaneous, articulable
observations concerning the following:



         (a)   Slurred speech;



         (b)   Alcohol on breath and/or body odor;



         (c)   Inability to walk a straight line;



         (d)   An accident;



         (e)   Possession of alcohol or drugs;



         (f)   Erratic operation of equipment;



         (g)   Observation of an employee using alcohol or drugs,
or distributing such on village-owned property. (An employee suspected of
having drugs or alcohol on village premises is subject to having his/her work
area searched by the department head, Village Administrator, or other village
officials);



         (h)   Overall appearance and/or behavior;



         (i)   Indication of chronic and withdrawal effects of
controlled substances.



      (4)   Any supervisor/department head who determines that
reasonable suspicion exists for an employee to submit to a drug and/or
alcohol test must immediately notify the department head and the Village
Administrator or his designee. Should the department head and/or the Village
Administrator conclude that reasonable suspicion exists that an employee is
impaired, testing procedures shall commence immediately. If the supervisor is
unable to contact the department head and the Village Administrator within
four hours, the supervisor may order the employee to submit to a drug and/or
alcohol test, but the results of the test will be held by the laboratory
until its release is approved by the Village Administrator.



   (D)   Conditions under which mandatory testing shall be conducted. 
Testing for alcohol and/or controlled substances shall be conducted under the
following conditions:



      (1)   Police officers who have been certified by the state of
Illinois or the Village Police Department or any employee of the village who
has been certified as a Breath Alcohol Technician ("BAT") may conduct the
alcohol testing of an employee at the Village Police Facility. A BAT
qualified supervisor, department head or police officer who makes the
determination that reasonable suspicion exists for testing an employee may
not conduct the alcohol test for that employee, unless no other BAT is
available to perform the test in a timely manner.



      (2)   Drug testing shall be conducted in a clinical laboratory
or hospital facility that is licensed pursuant to the Illinois Clinical
Laboratory Act and that has or is capable of being accredited by the National
Institute of Drug Abuse ("NIDA"). The employee's supervisor, department head
or the Village Administrator shall accompany the employee to the designated
testing facility.



      (3)   The laboratory or facility selected to conduct the
test(s) must conform to NIDA standards.



      (4)   Chain of custody procedures shall be established for
both the sample collection and testing that will ensure the integrity of the
identity of each sample and test result. No employee shall be permitted at
any time to have control or sole custody of any sample.



      (5)   A sufficient sample of the same bodily fluid or material
shall be collected from an employee to allow for initial screening, a
conformity test, and a sufficient amount to be set aside and reserved for
later testing, if requested by the employee.



      (6)   Samples are to be collected in such a manner as to
preserve the individual employee's right to privacy and to also ensure a high
degree of security for the sample and its freedom from adulteration.



      (7)   Any sample that tests positive in the initial screening
for drugs shall be confirmed by testing the second portion of the same sample
by gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS), or an equivalent
scientifically accurate and accepted method that provides quantitative data
about the detected drug or drug metabolites. Samples are tested for the
following:



         (a)   Marijuana metabolite;



         (b)   Cocaine;



         (c)   Opiates, which includes morphine and codeine;



         (d)   Phencyclidine;



         (e)    Amphetamines.



      (8)   The employee whose test results are positive shall be
provided with an opportunity to have the additional reserved sample tested by
a clinical laboratory or hospital facility of the employee's own choosing,
and at the employee's own expense, in accordance with federal procedures,
provided the employee notifies the Village Administrator within 24 hours of
receiving the test results, and provided that the clinical laboratory or
hospital facility selected to perform the testing meets the criteria set
forth above.



      (9)   In regard to alcohol testing, an employee who has a
confirmed test result showing an alcohol concentration level of 0.04 or
greater shall be considered to have tested positive for alcohol. This
standard does not preclude the village from removing an employee who has a
confirmed alcohol concentration level of 0.02 or greater from his/her job-
related duties, including the operation of village-owned equipment.



   (E)   Effect of positive tests for alcohol and/or controlled
substances.  An employee who tests positive for alcohol and/or controlled
substances shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   An employee who has a confirmation test alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater shall be immediately removed from his/her
job-related duties for 24 hours.



      (2)   An employee who has a confirmation test alcohol
concentration of 0.04 or greater shall be immediately removed from his/her
job related duties until such time as he/she tests negative for alcohol.



      (3)   An employee who tests positive for controlled substances
shall be immediately removed from his/her job-related duties until such time
as he/she tests negative in a mandatory return-to-work controlled substances
test.



      (4)   If an employee has a confirmed positive test for alcohol
and/or controlled substances, the Village Administrator will:



         (a)   Immediately institute disciplinary proceedings,
including termination; or



         (b)   Allow the employee at his/her expense to
voluntarily enter an appropriate treatment program.



      (5)   If the employee agrees to voluntarily enter an
appropriate treatment program under division (E)(4)(b), above, the employee
must agree to participate and complete the treatment program as determined by
the attending physician or substance abuse professional ("SAP").



         (a)   At the Village Administrator's discretion, the
employee may be given a leave of absence, without pay, to complete the
treatment program.



         (b)   Upon completion of the treatment program, the
employee may return to such duties as are assigned by the department head.



         (c)   Such employee shall not be allowed to return to
work unless:



            1.   The employee has discontinued his/her use of
illegal drugs;



            2.   The attending physician or SAP certifies that
the employee has completed the treatment program and is drug-free;



            3.   The employee agrees to continue in any
physician or SAP after care program; and



            4.   The employee agrees to submit to random
testing during work hours for a period of 12 months.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.098  FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT.



   (A)   Purpose.  Child rearing, family illness and employee medical
leave are available to employees as specified below or as may be provided
under other forms of leave as set forth in this Code or existing collective
bargaining agreements. The intent of this policy is to comply with the
federal Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"). Should the provisions of this
policy conflict in any way with the provisions of the FMLA, then the
provisions of the FMLA shall control.



   (B)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply.



      (1)   CHILD.  A biological, adopted or foster child,
stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person



standing in loco parentis who is under 18 years of age; or if 18 years or
older, incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability.



      (2)   CHRONIC SEROUS HEALTH CONDITION is one which:



         (a)   Requires periodic visits for treatment by a health
care provider, or by a nurse or physician's assistant under direct
supervision of a health care provider;



         (b)   Continues over an extended period of time
(including recurring episodes of a single underlying condition); and



         (c)   May cause episodic rather than a continuing period
of incapacity (e.g., asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, and the like).



      (3)   ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE.  An employee who has been employed
by the village for at least 12 months and has worked for at least 1,250 hours
during the preceding 52 weeks on the date FMLA leave is to commence.



      (4)   HEALTH CARE PROVIDER means:



         (a)   A doctor of medicine or osteopathy who is
authorized to practice medicine or surgery by the state in which the doctor
practices; or



         (b)   A podiatrist, dentist, clinical psychologist,
optometrist, or chiropractor (limited to treatment consisting of manual
manipulation of the spine to correct a subluxation as demonstrated by x-ray
to exist) authorized to practice in Illinois and performing within the scope
of his/her practice as defined under the Illinois law; and



         (c)   A nurse practitioner, nurse-midwife or clinical
social worker who is authorized to practice under Illinois laws who is
performing within the scope of his/her practice as defined under Illinois
law; and



         (d)   A Christian Science practitioner listed with the
First Church of Christ Scientists in Boston, Massachusetts. Where an employee
or family member is receiving treatment from a Christian Science
practitioner, the employee may not be subject to any requirement from the
village that the employee or family member submit to examination (not
treatment) to obtain a second or third certification from a health care
provider other than a Christian Science practitioner.



         (e)   A health care provider as defined in (B)(4)(1),
(2) or (3) who practices in a country other than the United States, and who
is licensed to practice in accordance with the laws and regulations of that
country.



      (5)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER.  An eligible employee's child,
spouse, parent, brother, sister, mother-in-law or father-in-law.



      (6)   IN LOCO PARENTIS.  An eligible employee or individual
with day-to-day responsibilities to care and financially support a child that
has no biological or legal relationship to the employee or individual.



      (7)   INCAPACITY.  The inability to work, attend school or
perform other regular daily activities, due to a serious health condition,
treatment therefor, or recovery therefrom.



      (8)   INTERMITTENT LEAVE.  Leave taken in separate blocks of
time due to a single illness or injury, rather than for one continuous period
of time, and may include leave of periods from one hour or more to several
weeks.



      (9)   KEY EMPLOYEE.  A salaried employee who is among the
highest paid 10% of all the employees. The determination of whether a
salaried employee is a "key employee" shall be made at the time of the
request for FMLA leave.



      (10)   PARENT.  The biological parent of an eligible employee
or an individual who stands or stood in loco parentis to an eligible employee
when the employee was a child, and includes parent "in-law".



      (11)   REDUCED LEAVE SCHEDULE.  A leave schedule that reduces
the usual number of hours per workweek, or hours per workday, of an employee.



      (12)   SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION. 



         (a)   An illness, injury, impairment, or physical or
mental condition that involves:



            1.   Inpatient care (i.e., over-night stay) in a
hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility, including any period
of incapacity or any subsequent treatment in connection with such inpatient
care; or



            2.   Continuing treatment by a health care
provider that includes any one or more of the following:



               a.   Period of incapacity of more than three
consecutive calendar days, including any subsequent treatment or period of
incapacity relating to the same condition, that also involves:



                  i.   Two or more treatments by a
health care provider, by a nurse or physician's assistant under the direct
supervision of a health care provider, or by a provider of health care
services (e.g. physical therapist) under order of, or on referral by, a
health care provider; or



                  ii.   At least one treatment by a
health care provider which results in a regimen of continuing treatment under
the supervision of the health care provider.



               b.   Any period of incapacity due to
pregnancy, or for prenatal care.



               c.   Any period of incapacity or treatment
for such incapacity due to a chronic serious health condition.



               d.   A period of incapacity which is
permanent or long-term due to a condition for which treatment may not be
effective (e.g. Alzheimer's, a severe stroke, or the terminal stages of a
disease). The employee or immediate family member must be under the
continuing supervision of, but need not be receiving active treatment by, a
health care provider.



               e.   Any period of absence to receive
multiple treatments (including any period of recovery) by a health care
provider, or a provider of health care services under orders of, or on
referral by a health care provider, either for restorative surgery after an
accident or other injury, or for a condition that would likely result in a
period of incapacity of more than three consecutive calendar days in the
absence of medical intervention or treatment, such as cancer (chemotherapy,
radiation, and the like), severe arthritis (physical therapy), or kidney
disease (dialysis).



         (b)   SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION does not include:



            common cold



            stress



            flu



            allergies



            routine dental problems



            nausea



            earaches



            minor ulcers



            cosmetic problems (acne, plastic surgery)



            headaches (other than a migraine)



      (13)   SPOUSE.  A husband or wife as defined or recognized
under state law.



      (14)   TREATMENT.  Does not include routine physical
examinations, eye examinations, dental examinations, or conditions for which
cosmetic treatments are administered unless inpatient hospital care is
required, or unless complications develop.



   (C)   General requirements.



      (1)   Eligibility:  Employees who have been employed by the
village for one year and who have worked at least 1,250 hours during the
preceding 52 weeks are eligible to take FMLA leave.



      (2)   Upon request, an eligible employee may take up to 12
weeks for any one leave or combination of leaves for birth, adoption or
foster care placement, immediate family member illness; or employee illness.
The 12-week FMLA leave period shall be measured from the date the employee
takes his/her first day of FMLA leave.



      (3)   If the requested leave qualifies as a village-provided
leave, as set forth in the Personnel Manual or existing collective bargaining
agreements and FMLA, the leave will run concurrently. For example, temporary
disability or sick leave used for the birth of a child also qualifies as
employee medical leave under the FMLA, and, as such, will also be deducted
from the employee's leave entitlement under the FMLA.



      (4)   The 12 workweeks may be taken:



         (a)   In one continuous 12-week period;



         (b)   In several leave periods; and/ or



         (c)   Intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule, but
only for a serious health condition when medically necessary. The Village
Administrator, in his discretion, may approve intermittent leave or a reduced
leave schedule for post birth or placement of a child for adoption or foster
care. (See division (G)(1), below).



   (D)   Leave entitlement.



      (1)   Birth/adoption leave. 



         (a)   Leave is available for the birth and care of an
employee's child or the placement of a child for adoption or foster care with
an employee. Birth/adoption leave entitlement expire 12 months from the date
of the birth or placement of the child.



         (b)   The child being adopted or placed in foster care
must be under the age of 18, or age 18 or older and "incapable of self-care"
because of a mental or physical disability.



      (2)   Family medical leave.  Leave is available for the care
of an employee's spouse, child or parent with a serious health condition.
Parent does not include parent "in-law".



      (3)   Personal medical leave.  Leave is available to an
eligible employee who is unable to perform the functions of his/her position
due to serious health condition. An employee is unable to perform the
functions of the position where the health care provider finds that the
employee is unable to work at all or is unable to perform any of the
essential functions of the employee's position within the meaning of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).



      (4)   Both spouses employed by the village. Where spouses are
both employed by the village, the aggregate number of workweeks of leave to
which both are entitled shall be limited to 12 workweeks during the 12-month
period, if FMLA leave is taken for the birth, placement of a child for
adoption or foster care, or to care for a parent with a serious health
condition. Where the husband and wife both use a portion of the total 12-week
FMLA leave entitlement for one of the above purposes, each shall be entitled
to the difference between the amount he or she has taken individually and 12
workweeks for FMLA leave for personal illness or to care for a sick child.



   (E)   Substitution of paid leave.



      (1)   Employees may substitute any unused accrued paid leave,
i.e., vacation, personal and sick leave, for FMLA leave, reducing the
remaining FMLA leave entitlement accordingly.



      (2)   Leave taken for a serious health condition pursuant to
IMRF temporary disability or other temporary disability plan, (i.e., police
pension plan shall be credited against an employee's FMLA leave entitlement.
Accrued paid leave will not be substituted while temporary disability
benefits are being received.



      (3)   Leave taken for a serious health condition which results
from injury to the employee pursuant to workers' compensation shall be
credited against an employee's FMLA leave entitlement. Accrued paid leave
will not be substituted while workers' compensation benefits are being
received. As of the date workers' compensation benefits cease, an employee is
required to substitute any unused accrued paid leave.



   (F)   Employee notice requirements.



      (1)   An employee shall give not less than 30 days written
notice to the Village Administrator prior to the commencement of foreseeable
leave. The written notice must set forth the reasons for the requested leave,
the anticipated duration of the leave and the anticipated start of the leave.



      (2)   In all cases where the necessity for leave is
foreseeable based on planned medical treatment, the employee shall:



         (a)   Schedule the treatment so as not to unduly disrupt
the operations of the village, subject to the approval of the health care
provider. This requirement may be met by providing the village with a
proposed schedule for the leave with reasonable promptness after the employee
learns of the probable necessity of the leave. Except in the event of an
emergency, the schedule must be of sufficient definiteness so that the
village can schedule replacement employees, if necessary.



         (b)   Provide the village with not less than 30 days
notice before the date the leave is to begin, or the employee's intention to
take leave for the purpose of planned medical treatment.



         (c)   Provide the required medical certification (See
division (H), below).



      (3)   If an employee does not give the required 30-days
written notice for foreseeable leave, with no reasonable excuse for not
complying with this requirement, FMLA leave will be denied until at least 30
days after the date the employee provides the required notice.



      (4)   Where leave is not foreseeable and the leave must begin
in less than 30 days, the employee must provide written notice within two
working days of learning of the need for the leave, except in extraordinary
circumstances where such notice is not feasible.



   (G)   Leave taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.



      (1)   An employee shall not take leave for the birth or
placement of a child for adoption or foster care intermittently or on a
reduced leave schedule, unless such leave is approved by the Village
Administrator. If such leave is approved by the Village Administrator, the
employee shall:



         (a)   Be allowed to take leave intermittently or on a
reduced leave schedule for only the first six weeks of the 12-week FMLA
entitlement. Absence from work must be in increments of not less than one
hour.



         (b)   Schedule the intermittent or reduced leave
schedule so it does not unduly disrupt the village's operations.



         (c)   Provide the village, in writing, with the
employee's proposed schedule of intermittent or reduced leave no less than 30
days before the schedule is to commence. The schedule must be of sufficient
definiteness so that the village is able to schedule replacement employees,
if necessary, to cover the absences.



         (d)   Intermittent leave or leave on a reduced schedule
must commence within 16 weeks following the birth, adoption, or replacement
of a child. The remaining six-week period must be taken in a single block.



      (2)   An employee may take leave to care for his/her spouse,
child or parent with a serious health condition or for the employee's own
serious health condition intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when
medically necessary. Medical necessity shall be determined and certified by a
health care provider as provided in division (H), below.



         (a)   Intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave
schedule may be taken in increments of no less than one hour.



         (b)   An employee is to schedule intermittent leave or
leave on a reduced leave schedule so that it does not unduly disrupt the
village's operation.



         (c)   An employee must provide the village, in writing,
a proposed schedule for intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave
schedule with reasonable promptness after the employee learns of the probable
necessity for the leave. The schedule must be of sufficient definiteness so
that the village may schedule replacement employees, if necessary.



      (3)   If an employee requests intermittent leave or leave on a
reduced leave schedule that is foreseeable based on planned medical
treatment, the village may require such employee to:



         (a)   Transfer temporarily to an available alternative
position for which the employee is qualified and that:



            1.   Has equivalent pay and benefits; and



            2.   Better accommodates recurring periods of
leave than the employee's regular position; or



         (b)   Transfer the employee to a part- time job with the
same hourly rate of pay and benefits; provided, however, the employee will
not be required to take more leave than is medically necessary.



      (4)   When the employee is able to return to full-time work,
he/she will be placed in the same or equivalent position as the position
he/she left when FMLA leave commenced.



   (H)   Medical certification requirements.



      (1)   Medical certification is required for FMLA leave
requested to care for a spouse, child, or parent with a serious health
condition, or for the eligible employee's own serious health condition. The
medical certification must be provided by the health care provider of the
eligible employee, spouse, child or parent, as appropriate. Employees may
obtain medical certification forms from the Village Administrator.
Certification must include:



         (a)   A certification as to which part of the definition
of "serious health condition" applies to the patient's condition and the
medical facts that support the certification;



         (b)   The approximate commencement and probable duration
of the condition;



         (c)   A statement that the eligible employee is needed
to care for his/her spouse, child or parent, or a statement that the employee
is unable to perform the functions of his/her position;



         (d)   In the case of certification for intermittent
leave, or leave on a reduced leave schedule, for planned medical treatment,
the dates on which such treatment is expected to be given and the duration of
such treatment;



         (e)   In the case of certification for intermittent
leave, or leave on a reduced leave schedule for a serious health condition
that makes the eligible employee unable to perform the functions of his/her
position, a statement of the medical necessity for the intermittent leave or
leave on a reduced leave schedule, and the expected duration of the
intermittent leave or reduced leave schedule; and



         (f)   In the case of certification for intermittent
leave, or leave on a reduced leave schedule to care for an eligible
employee's spouse, child or parent, a statement that the employee's
intermittent leave or a reduced leave schedule is necessary for the care of a
spouse, child or parent, or will assist in their recovery, and the expected
duration and schedule of the intermittent leave or reduced leave schedule.



      (2)   The village may require, at the village's own expense,
that the eligible employee obtain the opinion of a second health care
provider designated or approved by the village concerning any information
certified as provided above.



      (3)   If the second opinion differs from the opinion of the
original certification, the village may require, at the village's own
expense, that the eligible employee obtain the opinion of a third health care
provider designated or approved jointly by the village and the employee. The
opinion of the third health care provider concerning the information
certified above shall be binding on the village and the employee.



      (4)   The employee must submit the required medical
certification within 15 days of requesting FMLA leave if FMLA leave is
foreseeable. If the leave is foreseeable, FMLA leave will be denied until
certification is provided.



      (5)   If FMLA leave is not foreseeable, the employee must
provide the medical certification within a reasonable time. If the medical
certification is not provided within a reasonable time, continuation of the
leave will be delayed.



      (6)   If an employee never provides the required medical
certification, the leave will not be designated as FMLA, and the employee
will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action. In this case, the
employee will not be subject to the protections of the FMLA.



   (I)   Medical recertification requirements.



      (1)   A medical recertification is required once every 30 days
when the employee is on FMLA leave longer than 30 days.



      (2)   A medical recertification will be required prior to the
30-day limitation if:



         (a)   An employee requests an extension of the leave;



         (b)   Circumstances described by the original medical
certification have changed significantly; or



         (c)   The village receives information that casts doubt
on the continuing validity of the medical certification.



      (3)   If the minimum duration of the period of incapacity
specified on the medical certification is more than 30 days, recertification
will not be required until the minimum duration has passed, unless one of the
above conditions set forth in division (I)(2), above, has been met.



      (4)   The employee must provide the requested recertification
within 15 days after the village's request, unless extenuating circumstances
exist.



      (5)   Upon request from the village, the employee must provide
a certification from his/her health care provider if the employee claims that
he/she cannot return to work after FMLA entitlement has been exhausted or has
expired. Such certification must be provided within 30 days from the date of
the village's request for the certification.



      (6)   Recertification shall be provided at the employee's own
expense.



   (J)   Insurance and benefits.



      (1)   The village shall maintain, during the FMLA leave
period, group health and dental insurance coverage at the same level and
under the same conditions that applied before the employee's FMLA leave
commenced.



         (a)   If, prior to leave, the employees are required to
contribute to the premium payments, an employee on FMLA leave shall be
required to continue his/her share of the premiums.



         (b)   The village's obligation to maintain health and
dental benefits will cease if and when an employee informs the village of an
intent not to return to work at the end of the leave period, if the employee
fails to return to work when the leave entitlement is exhausted, or if the
employee fails to make any required payments while on leave.



      (2)   An employee has 30 days to pay his/her share of any
premiums for group health and/or dental insurance coverage during FMLA leave.
If the employee fails to pay, coverage will be dropped. The employee will
receive written notice at least 15 days in advance of the date coverage is to
cease, advising that coverage will be dropped on a specified date, at least
15 days after the date of the written notice, unless payment is received by
that date.



      (3)   The village shall recover the premiums that the village
paid for maintaining group health and dental insurance coverage for the
employee during any period of unpaid FMLA leave under the following
conditions:



         (a)   The employee fails to return from leave after FMLA
entitlement has been exhausted or has expired; and



         (b)   The employee fails to return to work for a reason
other than:



            1.   The continuation, recurrence, or onset of a
serious health condition that entitles the employee to leave; or



            2.   Other circumstances beyond the control of the
employee; or



         (c)   The employee does not provide the requested
medical certification from his/her health care provider if the employee does
not return to work within 30 days after the village makes such a request; or



         (d)   The reason stated in the medical certification for
not returning to work does not meet the criteria set forth in division
(J)(3)(b), above.



      (4)   The employee will continue to earn accrued benefits
during paid FMLA leave.



      (5)   The employee shall not be entitled to accrue any
benefits or seniority during unpaid FMLA leave.



      (6)   Employees shall not forfeit benefits or seniority
accrued prior to their taking FMLA leave.



      (7)   With respect to pension and other retirement plans, any
period of FMLA leave shall be treated as continued service for purposes of
vesting and eligibility to participate in such plans.



   (K)   Return from FMLA leave.



      (1)   An employee returning from FMLA personal medical leave
may be required to obtain a "fitness-for-duty" medical certification from
his/her health care provider.



      (2)   An employee, upon returning from FMLA leave, shall be
entitled to be restored to the same position held when leave commenced. If
the position is no longer vacant, the employee shall be offered an equivalent
position with equivalent employment benefits, pay and other terms and
conditions of employment.



      (3)   An employee may return to work prior to scheduled end of
his/her leave. The employee shall be returned to his/her old position or an
equivalent position within a reasonable time after the request to return to
work early is made.



      (4)   Reinstatement may be denied to an employee if:



         (a)   The employee would not otherwise have been
employed at the time reinstatement is requested (i.e., lay-offs, shift
elimination); or



         (b)   The employee was hired for a specified term, or
only to perform work on a discrete project, and the employment term or
project is over.



      (5)   The right of reinstatement to the same or equivalent
position is contingent upon the employee's continued ability to perform all
of the essential functions of the position. If the employee is unable to
perform an essential function, he/she has no right to restoration to his/her
original position or another position. The employee's FMLA rights end with
the expiration of the FMLA period. However, in certain circumstances, the
employee may be entitled to protection under the ADA.



      (6)   A "key employee" may be denied reinstatement if the
denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to
the operations of the village.



   (L)   Other employee rights.



      (1)   Executive, administrative and professional employees. 
All employees are covered under this policy, regardless of exempt/non-exempt
status. Note, however, executive, administrative and professional employees
may come under the "key employee" exception (See division (J)(6), above).



      (2)   Interference with rights.  The village may not
discriminate in employment against any eligible employee exercising his/her
rights under the FMLA.



      (3)   Holiday pay. For purposes of determining the amount of
leave used by an employee, the fact that a holiday may occur within the week
taken as FMLA leave has no effect; the week is counted as a week of FMLA
leave.



   (M)   Procedures and forms.



      (1)   When an employee requests FMLA leave, he/she will be
provided with the following:



         (a)   Copy of this Policy;



         (b)   Employee written request form;



         (c)   A notification of rights setting form the
employee's obligations and the village's expectations while the employee is
on leave; and



         (d)   Medical certification form.



      (2)   Employees who have questions in regard to this Policy or
their rights under the FMLA should contact the Village Administrator or
his/her designee.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.099  WORKPLACE VIOLENCE POLICY.



   It is the objective of the village to ensure the safety and well being
of its workforce and the persons with whom the village does business.
Therefore, the village has established a zero tolerance for any violent acts
or threats directed by or towards any village employee.



   (A)   Definition.



      (1)   VIOLENCE IN THE WORKPLACE includes, but is not limited
to:



         (a)   Any physical behavior involving aggressive
physical contact with any other person, including pushing, hitting, fighting,
throwing objects, or otherwise intentionally injuring another person or
attempting to injure another person;



         (b)   Any physical behavior which places a reasonable
person in fear of receiving imminent physical injury or other aggressive
physical contact of the sort described above;



         (c)   Verbal behavior which involves threatening
physical harm, either directly or implicitly, against any person; and,



         (d)   Any act of vandalism or other intentional damage
or destruction of village property or personal belongings on village property.



      (2)   Workplace violence also includes instances where these
sorts of acts or threats are made against an employee by a non-employee.



      (3)   Workplace violence does not include activities covered
by the Police Department regulations concerning the use of force by members
in the performance of their law enforcement duties, which are treated
separately under that Department's policies and procedures.



   (B)   Reporting workplace violence.



      (1)   Employees who become aware of any threat of violence in
the workplace, whether by an employee or non-employee, are obligated to
immediately report in writing such action to the employee's supervisor. In
the supervisor's absence, or in cases involving the supervisor, the employee
may bypass the supervisor and make a complaint directly to the department
head or, in the department head's absence, to the Village Administrator.
Employees should not confront the person against whom their complaint is
lodged.



      (2)   If the supervisor receives a complaint, it shall be
his/her responsibility to notify the department head as soon as is reasonably
possible to determine validity. If it is a valid complaint, the department
head shall notify the Village Administrator as soon as possible.



      (3)   The Village Administrator shall review all complaints
and investigations. All complaints will be given a high priority and
investigated as quickly as possible by the supervisor or other person as
determined by the Village Administrator.



   (C)   Discipline for violations.  Violations may result in
discipline up to and including immediate discharge in accordance with village
procedures. Employees should also understand that such behavior may be
criminal and could result in criminal prosecution.



   (D)   Retaliation.  Where an employee reasonably and in good faith
opposes or reports any workplace violence or testifies, assists or
participates in an investigation of or hearing concerning allegations or
threats of violence, no person or group of persons may retaliate against the
employee. Retaliation includes any act of harassment, verbal abuse, verbal
threats, or any other or additional act of workplace violence.



Retaliation will also be considered a violation of this policy and may result
in discipline up to and including discharge in accordance with village
procedures.



   (E)   Guidelines for responding to risk situations.



      (1)   Report threat/violence to the supervisor, or in his/her
absence, to the department head.



      (2)   Initiate investigation by department head or supervisor,
if requested by department head:



         (a)   Interview personnel who made the report.



         (b)   Document the information.



         (c)   Review with department head, Village Attorney
and/or Police Department representatives as appropriate.



         (d)    Report to Village Administrator.



      (3)   Village Administrator assesses need for additional
information and determines immediate course of action:



         (a)   What immediate support can be provided to the
employee?



         (b)   Is temporary discipline necessary, i.e., leave of
absence?



      (4)   Meet with outside advisor (counselor) to develop plan
for disciplining/assisting the employees involved.



      (5)   Meet with those who initially reported incident and
victim, if any, to re-evaluate their current state of mind.



      (6)   Meet with employee to get response to charges.



      (7)   Document two preceding steps for review by response team
(Village Administrator, counselor, department head, Village Attorney, police)
and determine final course of action.



      (8)   Implement action.



   (F)   Suggestions for implementation/planning stages.



      (1)   Have employee safety committee address security concerns
found in their workplace.



      (2)   Train employees to recognize and respond to violent or
potentially violence incidents, i.e., emergency procedures, conflict
resolution and non- violent response.



      (3)   Work site analysis by Police Department:



         (a)   Identify physical risk factors;



         (b)   Review current security measures.



   (G)   Post-incident review.  Suggestions for dealing with employees
after the occurrence of violent actions in the workplace:



      (1)   Debriefing by management for all village employees
within 24-72 hours after the incident.



      (2)   Debriefing by management for immediate co-workers, prior
to victim's return to work (i.e., address how workers should respond toward
co- worker).



      (3)   Both debriefing sessions may be aided by a counselor.



      (4)   Assess what went wrong, and what could be improved.



   (H)   Counseling.  At any point in this process, counseling is
available to employees.



(Ord. 2000-02, passed 5-17-00)



§ 35.100  PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The general purpose of this policy is to establish the
process for application for health insurance benefits pursuant to the Public
Safety Employee Benefits Act ("PSEBA") (ILCS Ch. 820, Act 320, §§ 1 et
seq.). This policy is established in recognition of the Village of Orland
Hills' ("village") obligations under state law to provide health insurance
benefits to its public safety employees who qualify for, and are determined
to be eligible to receive, certain health insurance benefits from the village.



      (2)   Any full time police officer who after November 14, 1997
suffers a catastrophic injury or the eligible family members of a police
officer who is killed in the line of duty may apply for health insurance
benefits under PSEBA by sending a letter of request for benefits to the
village as provided in division (B)(2) below.



   (B)   Administrative process.  The following procedure is
established to determine eligibility for PSEBA benefits:



      (1)   Application form.  The applicant shall submit an
application on a form provided by the village.



      (2)   Time period for submission of application.  The
application for PSEBA benefits must be submitted by personal delivery or
certified mail to the village, within one year after the date on which the
police officer allegedly suffered a catastrophic injury or was killed in the
line of duty. The Administrator will review the application when all of the
required documentation has been received by the village.



      (3)   Matters pending before the Village Police Pension
Board.  In the event that a timely application for pension benefits has been
filed with the Police Pension Board, the following rules shall govern the
submission of a PSEBA application:



         (a)   The submission deadline for the PSEBA application
form shall be extended to the date that is 60 days after the date of any
final ruling by Police Pension Board concerning any duty related disability.



         (b)   The applicant shall be responsible for submitting
all transcripts and exhibits from the Police Pension Board hearing that
resulted in the award of a duty related disability pension.



      (4)   Processing of application by Village Administrator. 
Upon receipt of a timely, complete and executed application form, the
Administrator shall review the application and engage in such additional fact
finding as the Administrator deems necessary to evaluate the application.



         (a)   If fact finding is determined to be necessary or
appropriate, the applicant shall fully cooperate in such fact finding
activity.



         (b)   If the applicant refuses or otherwise fails to
fully cooperate, then a reminder notice shall be sent to the applicant
explaining the duty of full cooperation in the fact finding process.



         (c)   The applicant fails to cooperate as requested
within 21 days after receipt of such notice, then the application for
benefits shall be deemed withdrawn and waived.



      (5)   Determination of eligibility.  The determination shall
be based on the application and evidence provided by the applicant to the
Administrator as well as such additional fact finding undertaken by the
Administrator.



      (6)   Village Administrator's determination.  Within 60 days
following receipt of the PSEBA application and all related evidence, the
Administrator shall advise the applicant, in writing, of one of the following
final determinations:



         (a)   The village approves the application and awards
health insurance benefits; or



         (b)   The village denies the application and refuses to
provide health insurance benefits.



      (7)   Reconsideration of Village Administrator's
determination.  In the event the Administrator denies a PSEBA application,
the applicant will be afforded an opportunity to present any additional
arguments, evidence or testimony to Administrator within 30 days of the
Administrator's initial determination.



   (C)   Health insurance benefits.  If an applicant is awarded health
insurance benefits, the following provisions apply:



      (1)   Village insurance plan.  If the village approves the
application and awards health insurance benefits, the village's basic health
insurance plan will be the only plan offered. If the applicant chooses to
enroll in any other plan offered by the village, the applicant must pay the
difference in insurance premiums.



      (2)   Other health insurance benefits.



         (a)   According to state law, health insurance benefits
payable by any other source will reduce the benefits payable from the
village. Each applicant will be required to sign an affidavit attesting to
the fact that they are not eligible for insurance benefits from any other
source.



         (b)   It is the responsibility of the applicant and/or
benefit recipient to notify the village within 30 days of any changes to
other sources of health insurance benefits. Receipt of benefits in violation
of this provision will require reimbursement to the village of any benefits
received. The village reserves the right on an annual basis to have the
applicant and/or any benefit recipient provide another affidavit affirming
whether other health insurance is available or payable to the applicant
and/or any benefit recipient.



(Ord. 2011-013, passed 12-7-11)



APPENDIX A:  ORGANIZATIONAL CHART







 



(Ord. 89-09, passed 4-12-89)



APPENDIX B



   TRAVEL, MEAL, AND LODGING EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT FORM



 




Name of Official or Employee:


 
 
 


Title/Position of Official or Employee:

 
 
 


Name and Date of the Activity/Event:

 
 
 


Check Number:

(if applicable)
 
 


Credit Card Receipt Number:

(if applicable)
 
 


Description of the purpose of the expense:

 
 
 


   Reimbursement Expense

   (estimated costs or actual costs with receipts, if applicable)


Mileage:

 
 
 


Meals:

 
 
 


Parking:

 
 
 


Hotel/Lodging:

 
 
 


Car:

 
 
 


Airfare:

 
 
 


Other Transportation:

(bus, train, taxi, shuttle, etc.)
 
 


Employee’s/Officer’s Signature and Date:

 
 
 


Village Authorization and Date:

 
 
 




 



(Ord. 89-09, passed 4-12-89; Am. Ord. 2017-004, passed 4-19-17)



APPENDIX C



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILLS VACATION REQUEST FORM



Date:   



Employee:   



Department:



Dates Requested   



Total Number of Vacation Days Available   



Total Number of Vacation Days Requested   



Total Number of Vacation Days Remaining   



Employee Signature   



Supervisor Approval:    



Supervisor Denial:   



Copies:   Finance



      Department



      Employee



(Ord. 89-09, passed 4-12-89)



APPENDIX D



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND BILLS SICK LEAVE FORM



Date:   



Employee:   



Department:   



Sick Leave Dates Used:   



Reason for Sick Leaves:*   



Total Number of Sick Days Available:   



Total Number of Sick Days Used:   



Total Number of Sick Days Remaining:   



Employee Signature:   



Supervisor Approval:   



Supervisor Denial:   



*  Employee absent from work for more than three (3) consecutive work days
must provide a physician's statement indicating the nature of the illness and
incapacity for duty.



Copies:   Finance



      Department



      Employee



(Ord. 89-09, passed 4-12-89)



APPENDIX E



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILLS PAID LEAVE OF ABSENCE FORM



Date:   



Employee:   



Department:   



Type of Leave (check one)                         Court
Leave



                           
            Bereavement Leave



                           
            Military Reserve Leave



                           
            Other            



Total Number of Days Taken (or to be taken):                   
     



Employee Signature:   



Supervisor Approval:   



Supervisor Denial:   



Copies:   Finance



      Department



      Employee



(Ord. 89-09, passed 4-12-89)



APPENDIX F



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILLS UNPAID LEAVE OF ABSENCE FORM



Date:   



Employee:   



Department:   



Type of Leave: (check one)                    
      Extended Illness



                                       
   Maternity Leave



                                       
   Emergency Leave



                                       
   Military Leave



                                       
   Other



Number of Days Expected to be taken:   (Maximum 6 months)           
     



Expected Return Date:   



Will you continue Health Insurance Enrollment for yourself?    



                                   family
   



         (employee must pay all premiums during leave)



Employee Signature:   



Supervisor Approval   



Supervisor Denial   



Extension Request:



   *Number of Days Expected to be taken: (Maximum 6 month



      Employee Signature:    



      Supervisor Approval:   



      Supervisor Denial:   



*Please submit medical certificates and all other documents that may be
required by ordinance or by your Supervisor.



Copies:   Finance



      Department



      Employee



(Ord. 89-09, passed 4-12-89)



APPENDIX G



   VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILLS WRITTEN WARNING REPORT



Date:    



Employee:    



Department:   



Nature of violation:    



         Supervisor Signature:   



Employee:                I concur with above statement



                      I disagree with above statement for
the following reasons



Employee Signature:   



Village Administrator Signature:   



Copies:   Personnel



      Village Administrator



      Department



      Employee



(Ord. 89-09, passed 4-12-89)



CHAPTER 36:  EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY



Section



   36.01   Creation; purpose



   36.02   Coordinator and members



   36.03   Duties



   36.04   Mobile support team



   36.05   Mutual aid agreements



   36.06   Disaster emergency declared by governor



   36.07   Compensation



   36.08   Reimbursement for expenses



   36.09   Purchases and contracts authorized



   36.10   Oath



   36.11   Office space



   36.12   Local disaster emergency



   36.13   Tax for emergency services and disaster operations



§ 36.01  CREATION; PURPOSE.



   There is hereby created the Village Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency, hereinafter designated as Village ESDA, to prevent, minimize, repair
and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy
attack, sabotage or other hostile action or from natural or man-made
disaster, in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency Act of 1975", as amended.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.02  COORDINATOR AND MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Village ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such
additional members as may be selected by the Village President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the
Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees
and shall serve until removed by same.



   (C)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the Village ESDA,
subject to the direction and control of the Village President, as provided by
statute.



   (D)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve as Coordinator, the Village President, or any person designated by
him, shall be and act as Temporary Coordinator, until a new appointment is
made as provided in this section.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.03  DUTIES.



   The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the village
as shall be prescribed in and by the State of Illinois ESDA plan and program
prepared by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside
the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality
entered into as provided in "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency Act of 1975," as amended.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.04  MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.



   (A)   All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the
State of Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, as provided by law.



   (B)   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by
the Coordinator of the Village ESDA organization.



   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee
or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State
Director, shall receive compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and
immunities incident to such employment or office.  Any such member who is
not a paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall
receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.05  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The Coordinator of the Village ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements
with other cities or political subdivisions of the State of Illinois, but no
such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village
President and Board of Trustees and by the State of Illinois Director of ESDA.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.06  DISASTER EMERGENCY DECLARED BY GOVERNOR.



   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other
hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, is shall be the duty of
the Village ESDA to cooperate duly with the State of Illinois ESDA, and with
the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers, as provided by law.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.07  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Village ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the
Village, if called for training by the State of Illinois Director of ESDA,
shall receive for the time spent in such training, the same rate of pay as is
attached to the position held; members who are not such village employees or
officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be
established by the Village president and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.08  REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES.



   The Village Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund,
any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to
training members of the Village ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of
ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support
team while serving outside the village in response to a call by the Governor
or State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement
made by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.09  PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees may on recommendation of the Village
Coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place
the village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from
the expansion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the
public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance
to victims in the case of such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the Village
Coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or
obligations, as authorized by "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency Act of 1975", as amended; provided, that if the Village President is
available at such time, he shall act subject to the direction and
restrictions imposed by said Village President.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.10  OATH.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:



      "I,         , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend and bear true faith, and al legiance to the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation
freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will
well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. 
And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have
I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village ESDA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party
or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States, or of this State by force or violence."



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.11  OFFICE SPACE.



   The Village President is authorized to designate space in a village
building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village President for
the Village, as its office.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.12  LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY.



   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Village
President as provided by "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
Act of 1975," as amended.  Said local disaster emergency shall continue only
as provided by said statute.  It shall be the duty of the Village ESDA to
cooperate fully with the Village President in the exercise of emergency
powers as provided by law during the time of a local disaster emergency.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



§ 36.13  TAX FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER OPERATIONS.



   The Board of Trustees of the village may make an appropriation for
Village ESDA emergency services and disaster operations and purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA emergency services
and disaster operations and purposes only, a tax not to exceed 0.05% of the
full, fair cash value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Local
Government Affairs, on all of the taxable property in the village, as
provided by "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency Act of
1975," as amended; provided, however, that the amount collectable under such
levy shall in no event exceed $0.25 per capita.



(Ord. 89-02, passed 1-11-89)



CHAPTER 37:  CODE OF ETHICS



Section



   37.01   Definitions



   37.02   Prohibited political activities



   37.03   Gift ban



   37.04   Ethics advisor



   37.99   Penalty



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:



   CAMPAIGN FOR EFFECTIVE OFFICE.  Any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of
any individual to any federal, state or local public office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or
Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to
the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative
action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise
in furtherance of the person's official duties.



   CANDIDATE.  A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code
(ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 1-3).



   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 315, §
3).



   COMPENSATED TIME.  With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.



   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF.   Authorized time off earned by or awarded to
an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.



   CONTRIBUTION.  Has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section
9-1.4 of the Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4).



   EMPLOYEE.  A person employed by the village, whether on a full-time or
part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.



   EMPLOYER.  The Village of Orland Hills.



   GIFT.  Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or
the official position of an officer or employee.



   LEAVE OF ABSENCE.  Any period during which an employee does not
receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension
benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.



   OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.



   POLITICAL ACTIVITY.  Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any
executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective
bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's
official duties.



   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION.  A party, committee, association, fund, or
other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk
under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3), but only
with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of
Elections or a County Clerk.



   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any
political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.



      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to
the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for
any political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.



      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing
any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.



      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public
opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf
of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.



      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or
actual voters in an election to determine probable voter outcome in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.



      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any
political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.



      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question
or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.



      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating,
reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.



      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for
elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for
elective office.



      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate
questionnaires.



      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing
campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.



      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against
any referendum question.



      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.



      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a
political party convention.



      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the
outcome of any election.



   PROHIBITED SOURCE.  Any person or entity who:



      (1)   Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by
an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;



      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the
officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee;



      (3)   Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii)
by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that
employee; or



      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or
employee.



(Ord. 2004-004, passed 4-21-04)



§ 37.02  PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein.
No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of
the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.



   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require
any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity
(i) as part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of
employment, or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays,
vacation or personal time off).



   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or
her participation in any prohibited political activity.



   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her
official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee
on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.



   (E)   No person either (i) in a position that is subject to
recognized merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the
salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is
subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel
Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or
deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an
officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political
organization or club.



(Ord. 2004-004, passed 4-21-04)  Penalty, see § 37.99



§ 37.03  GIFT BAN.



   (A)   Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or
employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer to make a gift that violates this
section.



   (B)   This section is not applicable to the following:



      (1)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available
on the same conditions as for the general public.



      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or
her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.



      (3)   Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the
Election Code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in
support of a political organization or candidate.



      (4)   Educational materials and missions.



      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.



      (6)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to
the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle,
aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in- law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half
brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or
fiancee.



      (7)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a
personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under
the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member
and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history
of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient
of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those
individuals; (ii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the
actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at
the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees
or their spouses or immediate family members.



      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in
value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are
(i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or
(ii) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.



      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other
benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the
official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.



      (10)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For
the purpose of this Act, "intra- governmental gift" means any gift given to
an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "inter-
governmental" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or
employee of another governmental entity.



      (11)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.



      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during
any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100



Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.



   (C)   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate
family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this
section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal
to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or
hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.



(Ord. 2004-004, passed 4-21-04)  Penalty, see § 37.99



§ 37.04  ETHICS ADVISOR.



   (A)   The Ethics Advisor shall be appointed by the President with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws.



(Ord. 2004-004, passed 4-21-04)



§ 37.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of § 37.02
may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than
a penitentiary or a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.



   (B)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of § 37.03
subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than
$5,000.



   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement
authorities, the State's Attorney or any other law enforcement official may
be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.



   (D)   A violation of § 37.02 shall be prosecuted as a criminal
offense by an attorney for the village by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall
be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall
require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.



   (E)   A violation of § 37.03 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney for the village.



   (F)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable,
whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates
any provision of § 37.02 or 37.03 is subject to discipline or discharge.



(Ord. 2004-004, passed 4-21-04)



CHAPTER 38:  EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN



Section



   38.01   Definitions



   38.02   Submittal of Emergency Energy Plan



   38.03   Review of plan



   38.04   Implementation of Emergency Energy Plan



   38.05   Violations; enforcement



   38.06   Construction



§ 38.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless
the context otherwise requires:



   CONTROL AREA.  An electrical system bounded by interconnection
(tie-line) metering and telemetry. It controls generation directly to
maintain its interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to
frequency regulation of the interconnection.



   CONTROL AREA EMERGENCY.  Means that Control Area is at risk of having
to shed firm load, having taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating
action short of shedding firm load and firm sales.



   CONTROLLED ROTATING INTERRUPTIONS OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE.   The
implementation of a plan to curtail electric service to firm load customers
for a short period of time, and rotating this curtailment of electric service
through different areas within the electric utility's service territory in a
situation where the demand has exceeded or is at significant risk of
exceeding the supply of electricity available to the electric utility. The
action of an electric utility to interrupt or curtail electric service to a
customer participating in or taking service under an interruptible or
curtailable rate is not included in this definition of a CONTROLLED ROTATING
INTERRUPTION OF ELECTRIC SERVICE.



   ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPANY OR ELECTRIC UTILITY.  Any person or entity
engaged in the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise
delivering electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption
within the village. This term shall not include any person or entity that
delivers electricity to fewer than 50 customers within the village.



   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.  The portions of the emergency load
conservation procedures, which immediately precede and include the controlled
rotating interruption of electrical service to firm load customers within the
village. The Emergency Energy Plan shall include the following steps:



      (1)   A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;



      (2)   A declaration of a control area emergency;



      (3)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity
use; and,



      (4)   Implementation of the plan for controlled rotating
interruptions of electrical service.



   EMERGENCY LOAD CONSERVATION PROCEDURES.  A planned course of action
developed by an electric utility company to be implemented in emergency
situations when the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at significant risk
of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility.



(Ord. 99-23, passed 9-15-99)



§ 38.02  SUBMITTAL OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.



   (A)   Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency
energy plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter,
or within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is
later. Every such electric utility company shall submit to the Village
Administrator an emergency energy plan adopted by the company no later than
30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 24 hours of the
time the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The electric utility company
shall be required to examine and update as needed its emergency energy plan
at least annually. The electric utility company shall notify the foregoing
public official(s) in writing of any material revisions to its plan and the
rationale for said revisions within five business days of the time the
revisions are made.



   (B)   The emergency energy plan shall include, at a minimum,
information detailing:



      (1)   Circumstances that would require the implementation of
the emergency energy plan;



      (2)   Stages of the emergency energy plan;



      (3)   The approximate geographic limits of each outage area
provided for in the emergency energy plan;



      (4)   The approximate number of customers within each outage
area provided for in the emergency energy plan;



      (5)   The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing
homes, schools, day care centers, senior citizen centers, community health
centers, dialysis centers, community mental health centers, correctional
facilities, storm water and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and
water-pumping stations that have been identified by the village, and persons
on life-support systems that are known to the company, and that could be
affected by controlled rotating interruptions of electric service under the
emergency energy plan; and



      (6)   The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional
interruptions of electric service to each outage area under the emergency
energy plan.



(Ord. 99-23, passed 9-15-99)



§ 38.03  REVIEW OF PLAN.



   (A)   Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the village,
the village shall review the emergency energy plan in order to determine if
the emergency energy plan is complete, and to assure appropriate coordination
with public health and safety agencies. The village may reject the emergency
energy plan if it does not contain all the information required under §
38.02(B), in which case the village shall notify the electric utility company
in writing of said rejection and the reasons therefor. The electric utility
company shall thereafter submit a complete emergency energy plan to the
village no later than 30 days after such notice is sent by the village.



   (B)   The village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively
to:



      (1)   Identify customers and facilities for which controlled
rotating interruption of electric service would require heightened response
by village public health and safety agencies;



      (2)   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public
health and safety; and



      (3)   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties
of the village's public health and safety agencies.



(Ord. 99-23, passed 9-15-99)



§ 38.04  IMPLEMENTATION OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.



   (A)   Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be
necessary to implement a controlled rotating interruption of electrical
service due to the demand for electricity exceeding, or being at significant
risk of exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric
utility company, the electric utility company shall do the following:



      (1)   Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing
a controlled rotating interruption of electric service, and notify the
appropriate electric utility company personnel; and



      (2)   Notify the Village Administrator that the electric
utility company will be implementing its emergency energy plan. The
notification shall be made pursuant to a notification procedure approved by
the Village Administrator after consultation with the Village Administrator.
The Village Administrator may waive the notice requirement to accommodate
exigent circumstances.



   (B)   Subsequent to providing the notice as required above, an
electric utility company shall reasonably and separately advise the
designated village officials when it implements each of the steps of the
emergency energy plan. Such steps shall include the following:



      (1)   A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;



      (2)   A declaration of a control area emergency;



      (3)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity
use.



   (C)   The electric utility company shall give a separate notice to
the Village Administrator, immediately upon the determination that there will
be a controlled rotating interruption of electric service pursuant to the
emergency energy plan. The notification shall include the areas to be
interrupted; the sequence and estimated duration of the service outage for
each area; and the affected feeders and number of affected customers in each
area. Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at lest two hours
prior to the time of the outages, and in no case shall notification be made
less than 30 minutes prior to the outages, if the company is aware that
controlled rotating interruptions may be required.



   (D)   Notification required by this section shall be in addition to
any notification requirements set forth in any applicable franchise agreement
or franchise ordinance, or as may be required by applicable federal or state
law or regulation.



(Ord. 99-23, passed 9-15-99)



§ 38.05  VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any electric utility company that knowingly violates this
chapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $2,500 and not more than $10,000 for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   The village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for an injunction or order to compel the other party to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 99-23, passed 9-15-99)



§ 38.06  CONSTRUCTION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude or interfere
with the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary
to assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally
safe service, as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act, (ILCS Ch.
220, Act  5, § 1-101 et seq.). Nothing set forth in this section shall be
deemed to modify the terms of any existing franchise agreement or franchise
ordinance otherwise applicable to any electric utility company, or to excuse
any performance required by such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any
authority that may be exercised pursuant to such agreement or ordinance, or
to limit any remedy that may be available under such agreement of ordinance.



(Ord. 99-23, passed 9-15-99)



CHAPTER 39:  CITY POLICIES



Section



Investment Policy



   39.01   Policy



   39.02   Scope



   39.03   Prudence



   39.04   Objective



   39.05   Delegation of authority



   39.06   Ethics and conflicts of interest



   39.07   Authorized financial dealers and institutions



   39.08   Authorized and suitable investments



   39.09   Collateralization



   39.10   Safekeeping and custody



   39.11   Diversification



   39.12   Maximum maturities



   39.13   Internal control



   39.14   Performance standards



   39.15   Reporting



   39.16   Marking to market



   39.17   Investment policy adoption



   39.18   Multiple signature requirement



Hearing Proceedings and Enforcement of Building, Housing and Zoning Ordinance
Violations



   39.30   Adoption



   39.31   Definitions



   39.32   Code Hearing Department established



   39.33   Code hearing procedure



   39.34   Subpoenas



   39.35   Default



   39.36   Continuances and representation at code hearings



   39.37   Evidence at hearing



   39.38   Retaliatory action against occupants prohibited



   39.39   Defenses to code violations



   39.40   Qualifications of hearing officers



   39.41   Findings, decision and order



   39.42   Fines and sanctions



   39.43   Administrative Review Law to apply



   39.44   Disposition of violations



   39.45   Sanctions, findings and orders to run with the property



Identity Theft Prevention Policy



   39.55   Policy adopted



   39.56   Definitions



   39.57   Identification of red flags



   39.58   Detecting red flags



   39.59   Preventing and mitigating identity theft



   39.60   Protecting customer identifying information



   39.61   Program updates



   39.62   Policy administration



Other Policies



   39.70   Paid sick leave; minimum wage—employers



   Appendix A:  Treasurer’s investment procedures



   Appendix B:  Pledge depository agreement



Cross-reference:



   Identity theft as offense, see § 135.03



   Sexual harassment policy, see § 35.095



INVESTMENT POLICY



§ 39.01  POLICY.



   It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner
which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security,
while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the village, and conforming to
all state and local statutes governing the investment of public funds.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.02  SCOPE.



   This policy includes all funds governed by the Board of Trustees of the
village.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.03  PRUDENCE.



   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the
probable income to be derived.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.04  OBJECTIVE.



   (A)   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:



      (1)   Legality.  Conformance with federal, state and other
legal requirements.



      (2)   Safety.  Preservation of capital and protection of
investment principal.



      (3)   Liquidity.  Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet
operating requirements.



      (4)   Yield.  Attainment of market rates of return.



   (B)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its
effectiveness in meeting the village's needs for legality, safety, liquidity,
rate of return, diversification and its general performance.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.05  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program
is hereby delegated to the Treasurer or his or her designee (collectively the
“Treasurer”) who, under the delegation of the Board of Trustees, shall
establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.06  ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain
from personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution
and management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability
to make impartial decisions.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.07  AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.



   (A)   The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services.



   (B)   In addition, a list will also be maintained of approved
security brokers/dealers selected by credit worthiness.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99; Am. Res. 2009-1010, passed 3-4-09)



§ 39.08  AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.



   (A)   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in
Illinois statutes regarding the investment of public funds.



   (B)   Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of
the fund type being invested.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.09  COLLATERALIZATION.



   Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit, and the
like) in excess of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral,
witnessed by a written agreement and held at an independent third party
institution in the name of the village.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99; Am. Res. 2009-1010, passed 3-4-09)



§ 39.10  SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.



   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase
agreements, entered into by the village, shall be conducted on a
delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an
independent third party custodian designated by the Treasurer and evidenced
by safekeeping receipts and a written custodial agreement.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.11  DIVERSIFICATION.



   The village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability
based on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.12  MAXIMUM MATURITIES.



   To the extent possible, the village shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the village will not directly invest in securities
maturing more than two years from the date of purchase.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.13  INTERNAL CONTROL.



   The Finance Director (Treasurer) is responsible for establishing and
maintaining an internal control structure designed to insure that the assets
of the entity are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control
structure shall be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these
objectives are met. The internal controls shall address the following points:



   (A)   Control of collusion



   (B)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting



   (C)   Custodial safekeeping



   (D)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments
and wire transfers.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.14  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   This investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the
parameters specified within this policy, The portfolio should obtain a
comparable rate of return during a market/economic environment of stable
interest rates. Portfolio performance should be compared to benchmarks with
similar maturity, liquidity and credit quality as the portfolio as shall be
determined by the Treasurer from time to time.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.15  REPORTING.



   The Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The
report should be provided to the Board of Trustees and available on request.
The report should be in a format suitable for review by the general public.
An annual report should also be provided to the Board.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99; Am. Res. 2009-1010, passed 3-4-09)



§ 39.16  MARKING TO MARKET.



   A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the
Board of Trustees quarterly.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.17  INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION.



   The investment policy shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees. The
policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the Treasurer and any
modifications made thereto must be approved by the Board of Trustees.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



§ 39.18  MULTIPLE SIGNATURE REQUIREMENT.



   All checks or drafts from village accounts in excess of $5,000 (Board
approved limit) shall require two signatures, of those persons so authorized
to sign on behalf of the village. Interfund and intrafund transfers shall
continue the practice of utilization of security codes and confirmations, as
has been customary for written and/or on-line transactions.



(Res. 2009-1010, passed 3-4-09)



HEARING PROCEEDINGS AND ENFORCEMENT OF BUILDING, HOUSING AND ZONING ORDINANCE
VIOLATIONS



§ 39.30  ADOPTION.



   The village hereby adopts ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1-1 et seq. in
its current form and as it may be amended from time to time and as allowed by
state law.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BUILDING INSPECTOR. Any municipal employee whose duties include the
inspection or examination of structures or property in the village to
determine if zoning or other code violation exist.



   CODE.  Any municipal ordinance, law, housing, building code or zoning
ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are
applicable to structures in a municipality.



   HEARING OFFICER.  A municipal employee or an officer or agent of the
village, other than a property inspector or law enforcement officer, whose
duty it is to:



      (1)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine
whether or not a code violation exists;



      (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested
parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;



      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and



      (4)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order
stating whether a code violation exists.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The legal or beneficial owner of a structure.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.32  CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Code Hearing Department.  The
function is to expedite the presentation and correction of code violations in
the manner set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1-1 et seq., and this
subchapter.



   (B)   The adoption of this subchapter does not preclude the village
from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of its code.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



Cross-reference:



   Code Hearing Department, see also §§ 32.120 et seq.



§ 39.33  CODE HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   When a Building Inspector finds a code violation while
inspecting a property, he or she shall note the violation on a "violation
notice and report" form, indicating the name and address of the property
owner, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time the violation
was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and the address of the
property where the violation is observed.



   (B)   The violation notice and report form shall be forwarded by the
Building Inspector to the Code Hearing Department where a docket number shall
be stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank
spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be
less than 30 days nor more than 63 days after the violation is reported by
the Building Inspector.



   (C)   One copy of the violation notice and report form shall be
maintained in the files of the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of
the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the
Building Inspector so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy
of the violation notice and report form shall be served by first class mail
on the property owner along with a summons commanding the property owner to
appear at the hearing. If the village has an ordinance requiring property
owners to register with the village, service may be made on the property
owner by mailing the report and summons to the property owner's address
registered with the village.  If the name of the property owner of the
structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the property owner cannot be
made by mail, service may be made on the property owner by posting or
affixing a copy of the violation notice and report form on the front door
(main entrance) of the structure where the violation is found, however, not
less than 15 days before the hearing is scheduled.



   (D)   This subchapter does not preclude the village from using other
methods to enforce the provisions of its code.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.34  SUBPOENAS.



   At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to
hear the case may, at the request of either party, issue subpoenas directing
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.35  DEFAULT.



   If on the date set for the hearing the property owner or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the property owner in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to
the existence of a code violation.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.36  CONTINUANCES AND REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS.



   (A)   No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this subchapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the property owner.



   (B)   Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.
Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this subchapter shall
not exceed 39 days. The case for the village may be presented by an attorney
designated by the village or by any other municipal employee, except that the
case for the village shall not be presented by any employee of the Code
Hearing Department. The case for the property owner may be presented by the
property owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative of
the property owner.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.37  EVIDENCE AT HEARING.



   At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony,
and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of a
code violation, relating to the violation notice and report, which is before
such hearing officer. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.38  RETALIATORY ACTION AGAINST OCCUPANTS PROHIBITED.



   No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and
detainer or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted
against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to
testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.39  DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be a defense to a code violation charge under this subchapter
if the property owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that the code
violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the
hearing the violation has been remedied or removed.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.40  QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS.



   Prior to conducting proceedings under this subchapter, hearing officers
shall successfully complete a training program that includes the following:



   (A)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they
will conduct;



   (B)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that
they will administer;



   (C)   Observation of administrative hearings; and



   (D)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on
evidence and issuing final orders.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.41  FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER.



   (A)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as
to whether or not a code violation exists.



   (B)   If a code violation is proved, the order may also impose the
sanctions that are provided in the code for the violation proved.



   (C)   Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine
money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the code, unless the
corporate authorities adopting this subchapter provide otherwise.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.42  FINES AND SANCTIONS.



   The village adopts by reference all current and future local
ordinances, and those provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1-1 et
seq., governing property or zoning codes applicable to structures or
properties relative to construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation and other health and safety standards in the village,
for its enforcement and adjudication within the geographical boundaries of
the village.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.43  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW TO APPLY.



   The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be
subject to review in the Circuit Court of Cook County, in which the village
is located. The provisions of the Administrative Review Law (ILCS Ch. 735,
Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.), and all amendments and modifications thereto, and
the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern
every action for the judicial review of the final findings, decision and
order of a hearing officer under this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.44  DISPOSITION OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative
Review Law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.



   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review
under the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination
of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the Circuit
Court of Cook County, in which the village is located, for purpose of
obtaining a judgement of findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings,
decisions, and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order
was issued in accordance with this subchapter, the applicable municipal
ordinances and applicable state law.



   (C)   If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and
order was entered in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter and
the applicable municipal ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity
for a hearing under this subchapter and for judicial review as provided in
this subchapter:



      (1)   The court shall render judgement in favor of the village
and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision,
and order, plus costs. The judgement shall have the same effect and may be
enforced in the same manner as other judgements for the recovery of money; or



      (2)   The court may also issue any other orders and
injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the
hearing officer to correct a code violation.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



§ 39.45  SANCTIONS, FINDINGS AND ORDERS TO RUN WITH THE PROPERTY.



   The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the
village as the result of a finding of a code violation under this subchapter
shall attach to the property, as well as to the property owner, so that a
finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying
or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or
owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a
hearing officer under this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-029, passed 11-15-06)



IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION POLICY



§ 39.55  POLICY ADOPTED.



   The village adopts this identity theft prevention policy, identified
herein, in order to prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and
detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a
manner that will prevent such identity theft.



(Res. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



§ 39.56  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COVERED ACCOUNT.



      (1)   An account the village offers or maintains primarily for
personal, family or household purposes that involves multiple payments or
transactions; and



      (2)   Any other account the village offers or maintains for
which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety
and soundness of the village from identity theft.



   IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. Any name or number that may be used alone or
in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including but not limited to: name, address, telephone number, social
security number, date of birth, government issued driver’s license,
employer or taxpayer identification number, credit card account information,
debit card information, and bank account information.



   IDENTITY THEFT. Fraud committed using identifying information of
another person.



   POLICY. The identity theft prevention policy, identified herein.



   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Orland Hills.



(Res. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



§ 39.57  IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS.



   In order to identify relevant red flags, the village considers the
types of covered accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it
provides to open such covered accounts, the methods it provides to access
such covered accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft. The
village identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories:



   (A)   Notifications and warnings from credit report agencies.



      (1)   Report of fraud accompanying a credit report;



      (2)   Notice or report from a credit agency of a credit freeze
on a customer or applicant;



      (3)   Notice or report from a credit agency of an active duty
alert for an applicant; and



      (4)   Indication from a credit report of activity that is
inconsistent with a customer’s usual pattern or activity.



   (B)   Suspicious documents.



      (1)   Identification document or card that appears to be
forged, altered or inauthentic;



      (2)   Identification document or card on which a person’s
photograph or physical description is not consistent with the person
presenting the document;



      (3)   Other document with information that is not consistent
with existing customer information (such as if a person’s signature on a
check appears forged); and



      (4)   Application for service that appears to have been
altered or forged.



   (C)   Suspicious personal identifying information.



      (1)   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent
with other information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth
dates);



      (2)   Identifying information presented that is inconsistent
with other sources of information (for instance, an address not matching an
address on a credit report);



      (3)   Identifying information presented that is the same as
information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent;



      (4)   Identifying information presented that is consistent
with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious
billing address);



      (5)   Social security number presented that is the same as one
given by another customer;



      (6)   An address or phone number presented that is the same as
that of another person;



      (7)   A person fails to provide complete personal identifying
information on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law social
security numbers must not be required); and



      (8)   A person’s identifying information is not consistent
with the information that is on file for the customer.



   (D)   Suspicious account activity or unusual use of covered accounts.



      (1)   Change of address for a covered account followed by a
request to change the covered account holder’s name;



      (2)   Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date
covered account;



      (3)   Covered account used in a way that is not consistent
with prior use (example: very high activity);



      (4)   Mail sent to the covered account holder is repeatedly
returned as undeliverable;



      (5)   Notice to the village that a customer is not receiving
mail sent by the village;



      (6)   Notice to the village that a covered account has
unauthorized activity;



      (7)   Breach in the village’s computer system security; and



      (8)   Unauthorized access to or use of identifying information,



   (E)   Alerts from others. Notice to the village from a customer,
identity theft victim, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or
is maintaining a fraudulent covered account for a person engaged in identity
theft.



(Res. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



§ 39.58  DETECTING RED FLAGS.



   (A)   New covered accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags
identified in § 39.58 associated with the opening of a new covered account,
village personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the
identity of the person opening the account:



      (1)   Require certain identifying information such as name,
date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business
for an entity, driver’s license or other identification;



      (2)   Verify the customer’s identity (for instance, review a
driver’s license or other identification card);



      (3)    Review documentation showing the existence of a
business entity; and



      (4)   Independently contact the customer.



   (B)   Existing covered accounts. In order to detect any of the red
flags identified in § 39.58 for an existing covered account, village
personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an
account:



      (1)   Verify the identification of customers if they request
information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email);



      (2)   Verify the validity of requests to change billing
addresses; and



      (3)   Verify changes in banking information given for billing
and payment purposes.



(Res. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



§ 39.59  PREVENTING AND MITIGATING IDENTITY THEFT.



   In the event village personnel detect any identified red flags, such
personnel shall take one or more of the following steps, depending on the
degree of risk posed by the red flag:



   (A)   Continue to monitor a covered account for evidence of identity
theft;



   (B)   Contact the customer;



   (C)   Change any passwords or other security devices that permit
access to covered accounts;



   (D)   Not open a new covered account;



   (E)   Close an existing covered account;



   (F)   Reopen a covered account with a new number;



   (G)   Notify the Village Administrator for determination of the
appropriate step(s) to take;



   (H)   Notify law enforcement; or



   (I)   Determine that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.



(Ord. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



§ 39.60  PROTECTING CUSTOMER IDENTIFYING INFORMATION.



   In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft from
occurring with respect to village covered accounts, the village will take the
following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect
customer identifying information:



   (A)   Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that
the website is not secure;



   (B)   Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and
computer files containing customer information;



   (C)   Ensure that office computers are password protected and that
computer screens lock after a set period of time;



   (D)   Ensure storage rooms, cabinets, drawers, and other storage
space containing identifying information will be locked when not in use;



   (E)   Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;



   (F)   Request only the last four digits of social security numbers
(if any);



   (G)   Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and



   (H)   Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that
are necessary for utility purposes.



(Res. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



§ 39.61  PROGRAM UPDATES.



   The Village Administrator will periodically review and update this
policy to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the
village from identity theft. In doing so, the Village Administrator will
consider the village’s experiences with identity theft situations, changes
in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention
methods, and changes in the village’s business arrangements with other
entities. After considering these factors, the Village Administrator will
determine whether changes to the policy, including the listing of red flags,
are warranted. If warranted, the Village Administrator will present his or
her recommended changes to the President and Board of Trustees, which will
make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to
the policy.



(Res. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



§ 39.62  POLICY ADMINISTRATION.



   Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this policy
lies with the Village Administrator, subject to approval by the President and
Board of Trustees. The Village Administrator will be responsible for the
policy administration, for ensuring appropriate training of village staff on
the policy, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red
flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining
which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular
circumstances and considering periodic changes to the policy.



   (A)   Staff training and reports. Village personnel responsible for
implementing the policy shall be trained either by or under the direction of
the Village Administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive
steps to be taken when a red flag is detected.



   (B)   Service provider arrangements. In the event the village
engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or
more accounts, the village will take the following steps to ensure the
service provider performs its activity in accordance with the policy set
forth herein:



      (1)   Require, by contract, that service providers have such
policies and procedures in place; and



      (2)   Require, by contract, that service providers review the
village’s policy and report any red flags to the Village Administrator.



(Res. 2008-1031, passed 11-5-08)



OTHER POLICIES



§ 39.70  PAID SICK LEAVE; MINIMUM WAGE—EMPLOYERS.



   (A)   (1)   For the purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYEE
means an individual permitted and/or hired to work by an employer regardless
of the number of persons the employer employs or the number of hours worked
and the term EMPLOYER means any person, firm or corporation employing one or
more employees or seeking to employ one or more employees, if the employer
has its principal place of business within the village or does business
within the village.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYER does
not mean:



         (a)   The government of the United States or a
corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;



         (b)   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by
an Indian tribe;



         (c)   The government of the state or any agency or
department thereof; or



         (d)   The government of any municipality.



   (B)   (1)   Employers located with the village shall comply with
all federal and state employment laws and guidelines with regard to paid sick
leave and the payment of minimum wages. Employee eligibility for paid sick
leave and payment of minimum wages shall be pursuant to all federal and state
employment laws and guidelines.



      (2)   No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave
or payment of minimum wages, including, without limitation, any additional
obligations adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply
to employers located within the village and the village opts out of any such
regulations or requirements, except those required by federal and state law
or village.



(Ord. 2017-007, passed 5-17-17)



APPENDIX A:  TREASURER'S INVESTMENT PROCEDURES



   (A)   Authorized Financial Institutions



      St. Paul Federal Bank (Bank 1)



      Heritage Community Bank



      The Illinois Funds



      Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund



      LaSalle Bank



      Nationwide Retirement Solutions (PEBSCO)



      Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund



      Linsco Financial



      Prudential Securities



   (B)   Collateralization shall be supported by the execution of a
"Pledge Depository Agreement"; as shown in Appendix B.



   (C)   Required multiple signatures on checks exceeding the Board
Approved Limit, interfund and intrafund transfer security code and
confirmations shall continue to be practiced.



   (D)   A monthly "Bank Balance Report" shall continue to be prepared
and distributed.



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



APPENDIX B:  PLEDGE DEPOSITORY AGREEMENT



This agreement is made and entered into this _______________ Day of 
____________________ by Commerce Bank, N.A. (The Depository),
_______________________________________________________________________________
____



(the "Pledgor") and
_______________________________________________________________________________
_(the "Pledgee") in order to set forth the terms and conditions which shall
be applicable to all securities pledged by the Pledgor and deposited with the



Depository as hereinafter set forth.



1.    The Depository will hold for the account of the Pledgee and subject
to its order and direction such securities which the Pledgor shall deposit
with the Depository accompanied by written instructions from the Pledgor to
the Depository that such securities are pledged to the Pledgee as
contemplated by this Agreement. Any securities so deposited by the Pledgor
shall be payable to bearer or registered in a form acceptable by the
Depository. Securities registered in the name of the Pledgor shall be
endorsed in blank thereon or on a power attached thereto by the Pledgor, with
the signature guaranteed by a bank or trust company or a member firm of a
national security exchange. Securities with missing endorsements will not be
acceptable for pledging until properly endorsed. These securities will then
be re-registered in the nominee name of the depository or converted to book
entry when eligible.



2.   The securities may not be held by the Depository in the same form as
received by the Depository. The Depository will issue to the Pledgee,
non-negotiable receipts evidencing the receipt of the securities deposited
hereunder and the Depository will, at reasonable intervals, preferably
monthly, issue to the Pledgee and Pledgor a statement of the securities held
hereunder as of the statement date. No securities shall be released by the
Depository to the Pledgor and no securities shall be accepted in substitution
or securities pledged hereunder except upon the instructions of the Pledgee.
The Pledgor shall be entitled to receive principal, interest and other
amounts as they from time to time are paid. In the event that the Pledgor
defaults on its obligations to the Pledgee, and written notice of any such
default is delivered to the Pledgee to the Depository, the Depository will
transfer and deliver the securities to or upon the order of the Pledgee and
the right of the Pledgor to receive payments as provided for hereunder shall
immediately terminate. The Pledgor agrees that the Depository shall be fully
protected in delivering securities solely upon the instructions of the
Pledgee and shall be released from any liability to the Pledgor with respect
to securities so delivered.



3.   The Depository's duties and responsibility shall be limited to those
expressly set forth in this Agreement and this Agreement may not be modified
or amended without the prior written agreement of the Depository. The
Depository shall be fully protected in acting upon written or at the
Depository's option, recorded telephonic instructions which it in good faith
believes to be genuine and from a properly authorized person, whether or not
that is in fact the case. The Depository shall have no responsibility for the
value, validity, regularity and genuineness of any of the securities, any
endorsement thereon or the effectiveness of any pledge of the securities by
the Pledgor to the Pledgee or to notify the Pledgee of any payments made with
respect to any securities. The Depository shall be entitled to rely on the
advice of counsel (including counsel who are employees of the Depository)
concerning all matters pertaining to the duties of the Depository hereunder
or relating hereto. Neither the Depository nor any of its directors,
officers, employees or agents shall be liable for any action or omission to
be taken hereunder at the request or with the approval of the Pledgee or
believed by it in good faith to be within the powers conferred on it
hereunder. If any securities held by the depository are at any time attached,
garnished or become subject to similar processes or any order or decree
issued by the court, the Depository may in its sole discretion rely upon and
comply with such process, order or decree which it is advised by legal
counsel is binding upon it and the Depository shall not be liable to either
the Pledgor or Pledgee by reason of such compliance even though such process
order or decree may be subsequently reversed, modified, annulled or vacated.
Also, in the event of conflicting demands upon the Depository, the Depository
is authorized to withhold performance until such time as such conflicting
demands shall have been withdrawn or the rights of the parties shall have
been settled by court adjudication or otherwise. The Pledgor shall from time
to time certify to the Depository the names and signatures of the officials
or other persons authorized to give instructions with respect to the
securities and the Depository may conclusively rely thereon. All written
communications to the Depository to the Pledgor or Pledgee as the case may
be, shall be deemed to have been given when delivered personally or mailed to
the Pledgor or Pledgee at their address then shown in the Depository's
records or at such address as the Pledgor or the Pledgee may designate in
writing to the Depository.



4.   The Depository shall be entitled to receive fees in accordance with
its schedule or compensation as in effect from time to time (provided that no
increase in such fees shall become effective until 30 days after the
Depository shall have mailed to the Pledgor notice of such increase) and
shall be entitled to be reimbursed for all costs and expenses (including
reasonable attorney's fees and court costs) incurred in connection with any
transactions hereunder or any legal proceedings to which the Depository may
be subject by reason of it acting as Depository hereunder. The Depository
shall have a prior lien on all securities deposited hereunder for the
reimbursement of all such fees, charges and other expenses. The Pledgor
agrees to pay and reimburse the Depository for all such fees, costs and
expenses and the Depository is authorized at any time and without notice to
charge any account of the Pledgor for the same.



5.   The depository may resign hereunder at any time upon delivery of five
days prior written notice to the Pledgor and Pledgee and upon such
resignation becoming effective, the Depository is irrevocably authorized to
deliver all the securities then held by it hereunder to or upon the order of
the Pledgee and upon such delivery, this Agreement shall terminate as to the
Depository and the Depository shall be fully discharged from all liability to
the Pledgor and Pledgee.



6.   While it is contemplated that the Pledgor and Pledgee may enter into
separate pledge agreements respecting the securities held hereunder,
nevertheless, by the execution hereof the Pledgor agrees that the Pledgee
shall have a security interest under the Illinois Uniform Commercial Code in
all securities held by the Depository for the account of the Pledgee as
herein contemplated as security for the payment of all deposit liabilities of
Pledgor to Pledgee. This security interest shall be supplementary to, and not
exclusive of, any other security interest, rights or remedies which the
Pledgee may now or hereafter have whether by operation of law, by agreement
or otherwise, with respect to such securities, provided that the Depository
shall have no responsibility to ascertain or to comply with any of the same.



__________________________________________________   _______________________
___________________________



Pledgor                                 Pledge
e



__________________________________________________   _______________________
___________________________



By _______________________________________________   By
_______________________________________________



Its _______________________________________________   Its
_______________________________________________



Address __________________________________________   Address
___________________________________________



__________________________________________________   _______________________
___________________________



Tax Identification Number___________________________   Tax Identification
Number __________________________



Safekeeping Account Number _______________________   Safekeeping Account
Number _________________________



Demand Deposit Account Number ___________________   Demand Deposit Account
Number______________________



This certifies that this pledge agreement has been approved by the Pledgor's
Board of Directors or its Loan Committee and has been documented in the
minutes of the above indicated meeting held on the ___________day of
______________, ________ .



By _______________________________________________



Its _______________________________________________



Accepted by



__________________________________________________



Bank



__________________________________________________



By



__________________________________________________



Its



__________________________________________________



Address



__________________________________________________



(Res. 99-29, passed 11-17-99)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE



      51.   SEWERS



      52.   WATER



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Contracting with private scavenger; structures and premises
not covered by contract



   50.03   Operation of waste disposal firm or scavenger-for-hire;
license required



   50.04   Vehicles used for waste disposal; compliance with traffic
regulations



   50.05   Disposal, storage of refuse within village limits



Collection Regulations, Procedures



   50.20   Receptacles required; specifications



   50.21   Storage of receptacles



   50.22   Time and placement for collection



   50.23   Separate containers for nondomestic garbage; removal of
garbage at owner's expense



   50.24   Containers for hotels, restaurants, and the like; removal of
garbage at owner's expense



   50.25   Receptacles for apartments of four or more units; use of own
private scavenger by owner



   50.26   Fees for collection and disposal of refuse; delinquent
account



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Garbage and trash enclosures, see § 152.03(Q)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.   All organic household or kitchen waste, such as rejected or
unused food and food residues and paper necessarily used for wrapping and
food containers (tin, glass, paper, plastic, and the  like).



   MISCELLANEOUS HEAVY RUBBISH.   Such items as discarded furniture and
appliances for which any household in the village no longer has any use.



   MISCELLANEOUS LIGHT RUBBISH.   Combustible material such as waste
paper, boxes, brush, leaves, grass cuttings, and tree trimmings.



   RUBBISH.   All inorganic refuse such as paper and similar items.



   WASTE.   Domestic garbage, refuse, ashes, tin cans, bottles, cartons,
books, newspapers, boxes, and other household trash including discarded
household furniture, furnishings, fixtures and appliances of all kinds, dead
animals or parts thereof, trees, tree branches, tree roots, tree trunks,
brush, shrubs, grass clippings, plant stalks, and leaves.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84)



§ 50.02  CONTRACTING WITH PRIVATE SCAVENGER; STRUCTURES AND PREMISES NOT
COVERED BY CONTRACT.



   (A)   The Village will contract with a private scavenger for the
collection of garbage, ashes, and rubbish, for all owners of residential
household units not exceeding three dwelling units per single building. 
(Condominiums are considered private dwellings and are included in this
division.)



   (B)   Stores, service stations, industrial buildings, offices,
churches, schools, and apartments (having more than three family units),
under the terms of this chapter, shall not be regarded as household units and
shall not be covered by any contract entered into by the village for the
collection of garbage, ashes, and rubbish.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84)



§ 50.03  OPERATION OF WASTE DISPOSAL FIRM OR SCAVENGER-FOR-HIRE; LICENSE
REQUIRED.



   No person may operate as a waste disposal firm or scavenger-for-hire or
otherwise shall remove waste from any premises in the village, or transport
waste through the streets, alleys, or public ways of the village, or dump,
incinerate, or in any other manner dispose of waste originating in the limits
of the village, or contract for, or permit himself to be employed or engaged
for any such removal, transportation, or disposal without first having
secured a license for performing such waste disposal service or scavenger
service from the Village Clerk, evidencing the payment to the village of the
license fee provided for same.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84)  Penalty, see § 50.99



Cross-reference:



   Private scavengers, see Chapter 117



§ 50.04  VEHICLES USED FOR WASTE DISPOSAL; COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All vehicles used for waste disposal or scavenging must be
kept in a sanitary condition.  The wagon box must be waterproof, and each
vehicle must be equipped with tight covers.



   (B)   All persons doing business as scavengers or catch basin
cleaners in the village must fully comply with all ordinances relating to
traffic or to the movement of vehicles on the streets.  Care must be taken
when removing any garbage or offal that no waste material is permitted to
fall or remain on any premises.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  DISPOSAL, STORAGE OF REFUSE WITHIN VILLAGE LIMITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any
refuse in any place within the village limits or within one mile therefrom,
excepting with the permission of the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 66-0-001, passed 1-19-66) Penalty, see § 50.99



COLLECTION REGULATIONS, PROCEDURES



§ 50.20  RECEPTACLES REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The owner or occupant of any household unit in the village,
upon which shall accumulate any garbage, ashes, or household rubbish, shall
provide or cause to provide and maintain clean and in good repair, separate 
receptacles  for the following materials, construction, and capacity:



      (1)   Garbage receptacles shall be of galvanized metal, or
durable plastic with a capacity of not less than ten gallons, or more than 35
gallons, and shall have close fitting, water-tight covers.



      (2)   Ash receptacles shall be of metal only, with a capacity
of not less than ten gallons or more than 35 gallons, and shall have close
fitting, water-tight covers.



      (3)   Rubbish and miscellaneous light rubbish receptacles
shall be of metal, plastic container, or plastic bags with a capacity of not
less than ten gallons or more than 35 gallons.  Metal and plastic containers
are to have close fitting, water-tight covers.  Plastic bags shall have open
end closed with string or tape or fasteners to avoid spillage and shall be
strong enough material to hold contents therein.



      (4)   No receptacle will be required to hold such items as
household appliances and furniture.



      (5)   As to refuse.  Division (A)(3) and (4) shall be
applicable.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of every occupant, whether owner or
renter, to cause all garbage and nothing but garbage to be deposited in the
receptacle provided for garbage; ashes and nothing but ashes to be deposited
in the receptacle provided for ashes; and nothing but household rubbish to be
deposited in the receptacle provided for household rubbish.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.21  STORAGE OF RECEPTACLES.



   All receptacles for garbage, ashes, and household rubbish shall be
stored outside the residence or other building in an accessible place and at
ground level on the owner's private property.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.22  TIME AND PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   Garbage and trash receptacles shall be placed at the edge of
the alley or on the parkway between the hours of 6:00 p.m. on the day
preceding collection until 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection.  Placement of
same shall not impede normal car traffic on public thoroughfares.



   (B)   No container used for the storage, collection, and removal of
garbage or other refuse shall be placed so as to constitute a nuisance or
health hazard to adjacent property or the occupants thereof.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.23  SEPARATE CONTAINERS FOR NONDOMESTIC GARBAGE; REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AT
OWNER'S EXPENSE.



   Every person occupying, operating, or controlling any building or
portion thereof, where persons do not reside, board, or lodge, shall provide
a separate container for garbage which shall be plainly marked in a
conspicuous place "Not for Domestic Use."  Such person shall have the
contents of the container removed from the premises at his own expense at
such time and in such manner as the Health Officer may direct.  In the
building described herein, garbage containers of the kind in domestic use are
prohibited.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.24  CONTAINERS FOR HOTELS, RESTAURANTS, AND THE LIKE; REMOVAL OF
GARBAGE AT OWNER'S EXPENSE.



   Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, cafe, or
other premises where more than 20 guests or boarders are fed daily, shall
cause all garbage to be placed in a proper metallic container which shall be
practically airtight and water-tight and shall cause all substances deposited
in such containers to be removed from his premises as frequently as the
Health Officer shall direct.  The removal and disposition of such substances
shall be done by such person at his own expense.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.25  RECEPTACLES FOR APARTMENTS OF FOUR OR MORE UNITS; USE OF OWN
PRIVATE SCAVENGER BY OWNER.



   In apartments of four units or more, the owner shall have his own
private scavenger.  Receptacles for apartments of four flats or more:



   (A)   Where space permits, one or more Leach containers or
equivalent of adequate capacity shall be provided by the apartment owner. 
Size of such container to be recommended by the private scavenger to suit his
pick up equipment.



   (B)   When space does not permit a Leach container or equivalent,
the apartment owner shall provided adequate metal or durable plastic
receptacles not to exceed 55 gallons and shall have close fitting,
water-tight covers.



   (C)   No containers used for the storage, collection , and removal
of garbage or other refuse shall be placed so as to constitute a nuisance or
health hazard to adjacent property or the occupants thereof, but shall be
placed near the buildings for which they serve in multi- unit apartments.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84) Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.26  FEES FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE; DELINQUENT ACCOUNT.



   (A)   The fees for collection and disposal of refuse shall be
prescribed by the Village President and Board of Trustees from time to
time.  Said fees shall be assessed in a manner designed to reasonably divide
the total cost of collection proportionately among all household units
subject to this chapter; however, in no event shall the President and Board
of Trustees be required to reassess the fees more than once in any year.



   (B)   All fees chargeable under this section not paid within 30
working days from the date of the invoice shall be considered delinquent.



   (C)   All delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of service
without notice.  Service shall be resumed thereafter only upon payment of
the accumulated fees plus $10.



   (D)   The corporate authorities may direct the issuance of a
citation for any delinquent account punishable under the terms prescribed in
§ 50.99.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone found violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.  Each day that
said violation continues shall be deemed a separate and punishable offense.



(Ord. 84-02, passed - -84)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Prohibiting waste on public or private property



   51.02   Discharge of polluted waters into natural outlets or storm
sewers



   51.03   Private sewer systems prohibited



   51.04   Privy vaults



   51.05   Use of plumber's name



   51.06   Notice of violation



   51.07   Liability for loss or damage



Connections



   51.20   Connection to public sewer required



   51.21   Unauthorized connections



   51.22   Opening in streets; barricades



Sewer Construction Requirements



   51.35   Footing drains, drainage tile



 



   52.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  PROHIBITING WASTE ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the village, or any
area within the jurisdiction of said village, any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  DISCHARGE OF POLLUTED WATERS INTO NATURAL OUTLETS OR STORM SEWERS.



   No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the village or
any area under the jurisdiction of said village, or into any storm sewer, any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.



   No person having his residence or place of business within the
territorial limits of the village sewerage system shall be permitted to
dispose of sewage of such residence or place of business located in said
village, otherwise than through the sewer mains of the village, whenever the
sewer mains of the sewerage system of said village are adjacent to, or within
100 feet of any subdivided lot, or parcel of real estate.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.04  PRIVY VAULTS.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain any privy vault not connected with the
public sewer system in or on any premises abutting on a street or portion
thereof which is served by the sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.05  USE OF PLUMBER'S NAME.



   No plumber shall allow his name to be used by any other person or party
directly or indirectly for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any
works under his license.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.06  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction
thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66)



§ 51.07  LIABILITY FOR LOSS OR DAMAGE.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the village
by reason of such violation.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66)



CONNECTIONS



§ 51.20  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.



   In all cases where a public sewer main is now installed, or hereafter
may be installed in any street, alley, public way, or easement in the
village, all inhabitants or users located on any lots or parcel of real
estate fronting, abutting on, or within a distance of 100 feet from said
public sewer to the nearest property line of any such subdivided lot, or
parcel of real estate on any such street, alley, public way, or easement,
shall at their expense make, or cause to be made connection to such public
sewer main within three months after the installation of such public sewer
main, if the same be not now installed.  All users shall discontinue, within
the same period of time, any connection which they theretofore may have had
with any other private line, privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.21  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS.



   No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof, without first having obtained a written permit from the office of
the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.22  OPENING IN STREETS; BARRICADES.



   All openings made in streets and sidewalks shall be protected at all
times by sufficient barriers on which signal lights or flares shall be placed
and maintained after dark, together with such other provisions contained in
an ordinance pertaining to street openings.



(Ord. 66-0-005, passed 9-7-66) Penalty, see § 51.99



SEWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.35  FOOTING DRAINS, DRAINAGE TILE.



   In any new buildings hereafter constructed footing drains shall be
connected to sump pumps, and discharge shall be made into storm sewers or
drainage ditches.  No footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to
the sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 71-2, passed  - -71) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone violating any of the provisions of § 51.35 shall forfeit, upon
conviction, to the village not less than $10 or more than $200 for each
violation, plus the costs of the action.  Each day that such violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.



(Ord. 71-2, passed  - -71)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section



   52.01   Restriction on lawn sprinkling and other water uses



 



   52.99   Penalty



§ 52.01  RESTRICTION ON LAWN SPRINKLING AND OTHER WATER USES.



   (A)   So as to comply with the Illinois Department of
Transportations's "Rules and Regulations for allocation of Water from Lake
Michigan", it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use
water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens on any day of the
week, between the dates of May 15 and September 15 of any year, except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Provided, however, that in the event of a drought, as to be determined and
declared by the Village of Oak Lawn and communicated to this village, it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation with an even numbered
address to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens on
any day of the week, except on even numbered calendar days between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., and it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation with an odd numbered address to
use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens on any day of
the week, except on odd numbered calendar days between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.



   (B)   The Village reserves the right to further limit or suspended
entirety the use of water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and
gardens or for any other special purpose(s) whenever the President and Board
of Trustees shall determine that the police existences require such action.
If public existences so require, the President may unilaterally take such
action prior to the earliest opportunity available for constitution with the
Board of Trustees.



   (C)   Whenever the President/President and Board of Trustees limit
or suspend the use of water for the sprinkling  or irrigation of lawns and
gardens or for any other special purpose(s), it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of
lawns and gardens or for any other special purpose(s) designated, other than
during the times allowed for such use(s) of water, provided that said person,
firm or corporation has been given notice of said limitation on, or the
suspension of, the use of water, from the village, by telephone, U.S. mail or
personal service or other notification.



(Ord. 89-11, passed 4-26-89)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 52.01
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 89-11, passed 4-26-89)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING



      72.   TRAFFIC RULES



      73.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      74.   BICYCLES



      75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      76.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Illinois Motor Vehicle Code adopted by reference



   70.02   Enforcement procedure



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   For provisions concerning automated traffic law enforcement systems,
see §§ 72.35 through 72.47



§ 70.01  ILLINOIS MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The village incorporates herein as though fully set forth herein the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5 § 1-100 et seq.) as part of
the motor vehicle code of the village.



(Ord. 84-01, passed 1-11-84; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93) Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.02  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The officer on observing and stopping a vehicle that is in
violation of an offense listed in § 70.99 may, in lieu of an arrest, issue a
“P” ticket for such offense.



   (B)   A “P” ticket to be issued is to be filled out by the
officer issuing the citation, and the hard copy (envelope for mailing of the
fine) is given to the offender and an explanation sheet attached.



   (C)   The offender has ten days to appear at the police station,
show proof of compliance and pay the $20 administration fee.  If the driver
does not pay the fine stated on the envelope ticket within ten days, then the
final notice is given, which is mailed to the offender stating the date such
final notice is given.



   (D)   If the person does not pay the fine within the date of the
final notice, then the “P” ticket (which is the white complaint) is filed
in the court and the yellow copy, being a notice to appear, is mailed or
served on the offender.  The court date is inserted in this notice.



   (E)   In court if the offender does not appear or has not paid his
or her fine within the three working days provided on the ticket before the
court day, then a summons is prepared and issued by the court to bring the
offender or violator into court.  As issued, a judgement may be taken for
the amount of the claim and this is processed like any other debt claim.



(Ord. 84-01, passed 1-11-84)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   No person shall violate the following Illinois Motor Vehicle
Code sections:



      (1)   Section 11-1406 (obstruction to driver’s view or
control).



      (2)   Section 11-1407 (improper opening of door into traffic).



      (3)   Section 1-1410 (coasting on downgrade).



      (4)   Section 11-1411 (following fire apparatus).



      (5)   Section 11-1419.01 (motor fuel tax I.D. Card).



      (6)   Section 12-101 (driving vehicle which is in unsafe
condition or improperly equipped).



      (7)   Section 12-201 (a) (daytime lights on motorcycles).



      (8)   Section 12-201 (b), (c) (improper lighting).



      (9)   Section 12-202 (clearance, identification, and side
marker lamps).



      (10)   Section 12-204 (lamp or flag on projecting load).



      (11)   Section 12-205 (failure to display the safety lights
required).



      (12)   Section 12-301 (defective or no brakes).



      (13)   Section 12-401 (restrictions as to tire equipment).



      (14)   Section 12-405 (c) (use of unsafe tires).



      (15)   Section 12-502 (mirrors).



      (16)   Section 12-503 (windshields must be unobstructed and
equipped with wipers).



      (17)   Section 12-601 (horns and warning devices).



      (18)   Section 12-602 (mufflers, prevention of noise or smoke).



      (19)   Section 12-603 (seat safety belts).



      (20)   Section 12-606 (tow trucks I.D.).



      (21)   Section 12-702 (certain vehicles to carry flares or
other warning devices).



      (22)   Section 12-704-704.1 (improper or no placards, for
example explosives, radioactive, and the like).



      (23)   Section 12-710 (splash guards and replacements).



      (24)   Section 15-104 (name and address on second division
vehicles).



      (25)   Display of village vehicle license.



   (B)   Any person accused of violating any of the provisions of
division (A) above may settle and compromise the claim by paying the village
the sum of $50 and showing proof of correction of the violation then ten days
from the time such alleged offense was committed or by paying to the
municipality the sum of $100 and showing proof of the correction of the
violation subsequent to the said ten-day period.



(Ord. 84-01, passed 1-11-84; Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



CHAPTER 71:  MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING



Section



   71.01   Vehicle license required



   71.02   Application for vehicle license



   71.03   Issuance of vehicle license



   71.04   Vehicle licensing fee schedule



   71.05   Expiration of vehicle license



   71.06   Affixing of vehicle license



   71.07   Removal of vehicle license



   71.08   Transfer of ownership



   71.09   Loss or destruction of vehicle license



   71.10   Impoundment of motor vehicles used in connection with
illegal activities



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Vehicles which are owned by a village resident or local business
primarily operated from a house, facility, business, or other structure
within the village, are required to purchase and display a vehicle license as
herein provided.  All licenses must be displayed within 30 days of purchase
of the vehicle or 30 days after the resident or business has lived or
operated in the village.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90)



§ 71.02  APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE LICENSE.



   Any person desiring a license for any vehicle shall file with the
Village Clerk, upon a form provided by him, an application setting for the
name and address of the applicant, a description of the vehicle for which the
license is desired, and such other information as may be required.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90)



§ 71.03  ISSUANCE OF VEHICLE LICENSE.



   The Village Clerk, upon the completion of such application and payment
of the license fee, hereinafter provided, shall issue a license authorizing
the use of such vehicle within the village until the expiration of the
license.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90)



§ 71.04  VEHICLE LICENSING FEE SCHEDULE.



   The license fee to be paid annually to the Village Clerk for the
various classes of vehicles, shall be described below.



   (A)   Vehicles which are designed and used for the carrying of not
more than nine passengers, or motorcycles, or motorbikes shall be $15.



   (B)   Vehicles which are designed and used for pulling, for carrying
freight and also vehicles which are designed and used for carrying more than
nine passengers, classified according to gross weight, including the weight
of the vehicle and the weight of the maximum load, shall be as follows:



      (1)   Class B:  Gross weight, not more than 8000 pounds, will
be $25.



      (2)   Class D, F, H, J, K, L, and N:  Gross weight, more than
8000 pounds, but not more than 40,000 pounds, will be $34.



      (3)   Class P, Q, R, S, T, V, X, and Z: Gross weight more than
40,000 pounds, will be $52.



      (4)   Recreation vehicles:  Vehicles which are used primarily
for recreational purposes and are not used commercially nor for hire shall be
$15 regardless of passenger capacity.



      (5)   Vehicles displaying mileage tax registration will be
classified in accordance with the weight designation contained in ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.



      (6)   The license fee for the above Classes (1) - (5) will be
double the amount listed above after the time application is made after
August 15 except when the license application meets the criteria set forth in
division (E) or (F).



   (C)   The fee for any vehicle licensed pursuant to division (A)
shall be $0.99 and the fee for any vehicle licensed pursuant to division
(B)(1) shall be $10.99 provided:



      (1)   One of the registered owners has attained, or will
attain during the licensing period, the age of 65 years; and



      (2)   No other vehicle with this discount is registered at the
address of the applicant.



   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation that is engaged in the
business of leasing Class “A” motor vehicles from a facility in the
village is eligible to apply for a Bulk Rate License for all vehicles that
are leased and subject to the tax imposed pursuant to § 71.04(A) of the Code
of Ordinances.



      (1)   The annual fee for a Bulk Rate License shall be set by
the Village Authorities.



      (2)   Bulk Rate Licenses shall expire on July 15 of each year.



      (3)   Any renewal application for a Bulk Rate License filed
after July 15 shall be subject to a late charge of $1,500.



      (4)   All vehicles subject to a Bulk Rate License shall be
exempt from the requirements of § 71.06(A) of the Code of Ordinances.



      (5)   Applications for Bulk Rate Licenses shall be in a form
to be prescribed by the village.



   (E)   The license fee for a motor vehicle acquired on or after
January 15, shall be sum equal to one-half of the license fee set forth
herein.



   (F)   Except as provided in division (E) or where the vehicle
license is being transferred from one vehicle to another; or is replacing a
lost or destroyed license;  or the vehicle has been purchased  within  90
days of license application; or the license applicant has lived or operated
in the village for less than 90 days from the date of the license
application, the following late fees, in addition to the regular fee rounded
up to the next whole dollar, shall apply to license applications filed after
July 1 of each year:



      (1)   by July 21 - 20%



      (2)   by July 28 - 40%



      (3)   by August 4 - 60%



      (4)   by August 14 - 80%



      (5)   after August 14 - 100%



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90; Am. Ord. 91-30, passed 10-23-91; Am. Ord. 93-01,
passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 94-31, passed 10-19-94; Am. Ord. 98-08, passed
6-3-98; Am. Ord. 98-12, passed 6-17-98; Am. Ord. 99-15, passed 5-26-99)



§ 71.05  EXPIRATION OF VEHICLE LICENSE.



   (A)   All passenger vehicle and motorcycle licenses shall expire on
July 15, following the date of issue.



   (B)   All truck and bus licenses shall expire on July 15, following
the date of issue.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90; Am. Ord. 94-31, passed 10-19-94)



§ 71.06  AFFIXING OF VEHICLE LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon the issuance of any license for any motor vehicle, the
Village Clerk shall deliver to the licensee a sticker license emblem for the
current license year, and the licensee shall fix the same in the lower right
hand corner on the inside of the glass part of the windshield of such motor
vehicle, approximately one inch from the right and lower sections of the
frame of the windshield.  The sticker license for previous year's licenses
or licenses for other municipalities must be removed within six months after
the expiration of said license.



   (B)   Upon the issuance of a license for a motorcycle or motorbike,
the Clerk shall deliver to the licensee, a license emblem (in such style and
form as prepared by the Village Clerk) for the current license year, and the
licensee shall affix the same on the state license plate or plate frame.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90; Am. Ord. 91-30, passed 10-23-91)



§ 71.07  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE LICENSE.



   Immediately upon the sale of any vehicle licensed under this chapter,
when such sale is made prior to the date of expiration of such license, the
licensee shall remove the license emblem from the vehicle so sold and within
three days of the date of such sale shall give to the Village Clerk written
notification of such sale, showing the date thereof, the license number of
the vehicle so sold, and the name and address of the purchaser; thereupon,
such license shall cease to apply to the vehicle so sold.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90)



§ 71.08  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Whenever the owner of any vehicle licensed under this chapter
before the expiration of such license, sells or otherwise disposes of such
vehicle and acquires another vehicle, and desires to transfer the original
license to the newly acquired vehicle, and notified the Village Clerk of the
sale, as herein provided, such owner shall make application to the Village
Clerk for such transfer.  The application shall state the name and address
of the licensee and a description of the newly acquired vehicle and such
other information as the Village Clerk may require, and upon payment of the
appropriate fee, the Village Clerk shall transfer such license to apply to
the newly acquired vehicle.



   (B)   The transfer fee shall be $1 provided that if the newly
acquired vehicle is in a class requiring a higher license fee than was paid
for the original license, the transfer fee shall be the amount of the
difference between the fee paid for the original license and the license fee
fixed for the newly acquired vehicle, plus the sum of $1.



   (C)   The transfer license must be displayed within 30 days of
purchase of the new vehicle.  If the transfer fee is not paid within 90 days
of purchase of the new vehicle, the fees in § 71.04 shall apply.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90)



§ 71.09  LOSS OR DESTRUCTION OF VEHICLE LICENSE.



   In case of loss or destruction, total or partial, of any license emblem
issued by the Village Clerk and covering any vehicle, the owner of such
vehicle within three working days after learning thereof, shall give the
Village Clerk written notification of such loss or destruction.  Upon filing
with the Village Clerk satisfactory proof of loss and payment of a fee of $1,
the Village Clerk shall issue to said owner a new license emblem.  If the
fee is not paid within ten days of the loss or destruction of the license,
the normal fee schedule in § 71.04 will apply.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90)



§ 71.10  IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN CONNECTION WITH ILLEGAL
ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   (1)   Violations authorizing impoundment.  A motor
vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of
record, that is used in connection with the following violations, shall be
subject to tow and impoundment by the village, and the owner of record of
said vehicle shall be liable to the village for an administrative penalty in
addition to any towing and storage fees, as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Offenses.



         (a)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission or attempted commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle
may be seized and forfeited pursuant to ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 36-1 et
seq., which, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, shall subject
the owner of the motor vehicle to an administrative penalty of $750; and



         (b)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection
with the commission or attempted commission of an act in violation of any
federal or state criminal law or Title VII of this code of ordinances and
which, in addition to any other penalty provided by law,  shall subject the
owner of the motor vehicle to an administrative penalty of $750.



   (B)   General regulations.



      (1)   This section shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any
existing state or federal laws, and the owner shall be subject to these
penalties in addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court for
any criminal charges.



      (2)   This section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the
violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered.



      (3)   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this
section shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all tow companies
authorized to tow for the Police Department.



   (C)   Notice.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to
believe that a vehicle is subject to tow and impoundment pursuant to this
section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a
facility authorized by the village. Before or at the time the vehicle is
towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the
owner of the vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of the
vehicle at the time for the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure,
and of the vehicle and of the owner’s right to request a preliminary
vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted under division (D) of this
section. Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the
hearings provided for in division (D) of this section, unless the owner of
the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of $750 and pays
the accrued towing and storage charges.



   (D)   Preliminary hearing.  If the owner of record of a vehicle
seized pursuant to this section desires to appeal the seizure, said owner
must make a request for hearing within 24 hours of the seizure. Said request
shall be in writing and filed with the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, who shall conduct such preliminary hearing within 24 hours after
receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or village holidays.
All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at
the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence
will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only
if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs. If after the hearing, the Chief of Police, or his
or her designee, determines there is probable cause to believe that the
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, he or
she shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this
section, unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond
in the amount of $750 and pays the tower any applicable towing and storage
fees. If the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, determines that there
is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or
other fees.



   (E)   Hearing.



      (1)   Within ten days after a vehicle is seized and impounded
pursuant to this section, the village shall notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner of record of the date, time, and location of a
plea hearing that will be conducted, pursuant to this section. The owner will
appear at a plea hearing and enter a plea of guilty or not guilty. If a plea
of guilty is entered, the cause will be disposed of at that time. If the
owner pleads not guilty, a hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless
continued by a hearing officer, designated by the Village Administrator, no
later than 45 days after the vehicle was seized. All interested persons shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time
prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either
party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The
formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.



      (2)   If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by
a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with a
violation set forth in this section, the hearing officer shall enter an order
finding the owner of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for
an administrative penalty in the amount of $750, and requiring the vehicle to
continue to be impounded until the owner pays the administrative penalty to
the village, plus fees to the tower for the towing and storage of the
vehicle. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village. If the hearing
officer finds no such violation occurred, the hearing officer shall order the
immediate return of the owner’s vehicle or cash bond without fees.



   (F)   Administrative penalty.  If an administrative penalty is
imposed pursuant to this section, such penalty shall constitute a debt due
and owing the village. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to this
section the bond shall be applied to the penalty. If a vehicle has been
impounded when such a penalty is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a
judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicles as
provided by law. Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle
shall continue to be impounded until the penalty is paid to the village and
any applicable towing fees are paid to the tower, in which case possession of
the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess
the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a
judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law. If the administrative penalty
and applicable fees are not paid within 30 days after an administrative
penalty is imposed against an owner of record who defaults by failing to
appear at the hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed
vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative penalty and applicable
fee are not paid within 30 days after the expiration of time at which
administrative review of the hearing officer’s determination may be sought,
or within 30 days after an action seeking administrative review has been
resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall
be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provide by law for
the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (G)   Vehicle possession.



      (1)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no
owner, lien holder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a vehicle impounded under this section until the administrative
penalty and fees applicable under this section have been paid. However,
whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has
commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given
to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund the village the
amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required
to pay all lien holders of record, not to exceed the administrative penalty,
plus the applicable fees.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, the “owner of record”
of a vehicle is the record title holder as registered with the Secretary of
State of the State of Illinois.



   (H)   Administrative review.  Any owner, lien holder or other
person with a legal interest in the vehicle, who is not satisfied with the
decision of the hearing officer, shall have the right to appeal the decision
to the Circuit Court, pursuant to the Administrative Review Act, as set forth
fully in ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.



(Ord. 2000-21, passed 11-1-00; Am. Ord. 2006-023, passed 9-20-06; Am. Ord.
2006-027, passed 10-18-06; Am. Ord. 2008-004, passed 3-5-08; Am. Ord.
2015-003, passed 3-18-15)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.  Everyday that
any such violation shall occur, such offense shall constitute a separate
violation.



(Ord. 90-14, passed 3-14-90; Am. Ord. 91-30, passed 10-23-91; Am. Ord.
2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



CHAPTER 72:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



Load Limits



   72.01   Operating vehicle on streets where weight of load is limited



   72.02   Temporary load restrictions



   72.03   Special permits for excessive size and weight



Alcohol and Drugs



   72.15   Unlawful diversion of resources



   72.16   Illegal transportation of alcohol



Moving Violations



   72.20   Moving violations



   72.21   Speeding



   72.22   Disobeying traffic control device



   72.23   Operating an unsafe motor vehicle



   72.24   Negligent driving



   72.25   Use of mobile telephones while operating a motor vehicle



Automated Traffic Law Enforcement Systems



   72.35   Definitions



   72.36   Locations



   72.37   Authority to enter into agreements



   72.38   Office of Administrator established



   72.39   Violation notice



   72.40   Determination of violation by technician



   72.41   Hearing



   72.42   Final determination of liability



   72.43   Determination notice



   72.44   Petition to set aside a final determination



   72.45   Suspension notice



   72.46   Challenging the accuracy of a certified report



   72.47   Contest of violation notices by non-residents



 



   72.99   Penalty



LOAD LIMITS



§ 72.01  OPERATING VEHICLE ON STREETS WHERE WEIGHT OF LOAD IS LIMITED.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle whose
maximum gross weight including the load exceeds 10,000 pounds on any
residential streets in the village.  The Building Commissioner shall post
signs giving notice of the limited load streets on the appropriate streets as
directed by the Public Works Committee.



      (2)   Vehicles in excess of said weight limits may travel on
said streets when such vehicle is making a local delivery, and then such
vehicle shall enter said street at the intersection nearest the destination
and proceeding thereon no further than the nearest intersection thereafter.



   (B)   (1)   Streets and/or highways designated as Class II
designated streets by the State can be of such weight as provided in ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 15-111.



      (2)   Class II designated streets:



         (a)   159th Street; and



         (b)   LaGrange Road.



(Ord. 79-12, passed - -79; Am. Ord. 2009-003, passed 4-1-09) Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.02  TEMPORARY LOAD RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Any streets or public right-of-way under the control of the
Public Works Committee may be closed or restricted, as the case may be, at
the direction of said Committee upon their determination, recommendation, and
approval by the Board of Trustees that excess damage will take place unless
travel and load limits are restricted on said thoroughfares for temporary
periods; that the temporary restriction of the rights of access on public
thoroughfares shall not exceed a period of 90 days; and that the Building
Commissioner shall post signs giving notice that said right of access has
been restricted on said rights-of-way and said Public Works Committee may
limit the right of access to vehicles with a gross tonnage not to exceed five
tons.



   (B)   The closing or restricting, as the case may be, of the public
rights-of-way and thoroughfares within the jurisdiction of the village shall
not be applicable to emergency vehicles and shall not be applicable to
abutting property owners and to residents on said public rights-of-way except
that said abutting owners and residents shall be obligated to travel by means
of the shortest possible distance to obtain egress and ingress.



(Ord. 79-12, passed - -79)



§ 72.02  SPECIAL PERMITS FOR EXCESSIVE SIZE AND WEIGHT.



   (A)   The Public Works Chairperson after application has been made,
in writing, shall issue a special permit in writing, after approval of the
Village Board of Trustees, authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size and weight of vehicle or load
exceeding the maximum specified herein, or otherwise not in conformity with
the provisions of state law, upon any street within the village.  Where a
permit is sought for overweight the application shall show that the load to
be moved by such vehicle or combination of vehicles cannot reasonably be
dismantled or disassembled.



   (B)   The application for any such permit shall specifically
describe the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved and the
particular streets for which a permit to operate is requested.



   (C)   The Public Works Chairperson is authorized to issue or
withhold such permit upon direction of the Village Board or, if such permit
is issued to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other
time limitations within which the vehicles described may be operated on the
streets indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions or operation
of such vehicles, when necessary to assure against undue damage to the road
foundations, surfaces, or structures, and may require such undertaking or
other security as may be deemed necessary to compensate for any injury to any
roadway or road structure.



   (D)   Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by
any police officer or authorized  agent  of  the  Board  of 
Trustees,  and no person shall violate any of the terms and conditions of
such special permit.



(Ord. 79-12, passed - -79) Penalty, see § 72.99



ALCOHOL AND DRUGS



§ 72.15  UNLAWFUL DIVERSION OF RESOURCES.



   It shall be unlawful for a motorist to be stopped and arrested for
driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs and causing the matter to
be subsequently investigated, thereby diverting limited resources from the
enforcement of village ordinances and state law.



(Ord. 96-11, passed 2-7-96)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.16  ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION OF ALCOHOL.



   Any person who transports, carries, possesses, or has any alcoholic
liquor within the passenger area of any motor vehicle upon a highway within
the corporate limits of the village, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-502(a), and incorporated fully herein by reference, commits the offense of
illegal transportation of alcohol and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-020, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 72.99



MOVING VIOLATIONS



§ 72.20  MOVING VIOLATIONS.



   No person shall violate the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code sections as set
forth in this subchapter.



(Ord. 2006-020, passed 8-16-06)



§ 72.21  SPEEDING.



   Any person who violates the general speed restrictions, as defined in
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601, and incorporated fully herein by reference,
commits the offense of speeding and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-020, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.22  DISOBEYING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device, including a school crossing guard, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305,
and incorporated fully herein by reference. Violation of this provision of
the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code shall constitute a violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-020, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.23  OPERATING AN UNSAFE MOTOR VEHICLE.



   Any person who drives, moves, or if the owner causes or knowingly
permits to be moved any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such
unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, as defined in ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101, and incorporated fully herein by reference,
commits the offense of operating an unsafe motor vehicle and shall be in
violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-020, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.24  NEGLIGENT DRIVING.



   Any person who operates a motor vehicle in a reckless manner, either
driving erratically/squealing the tires, or driving in such a way as to alarm
others, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-505, and incorporated fully
herein by reference, commits the offense of negligent driving and shall be in
violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-020, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.25  USE OF MOBILE TELEPHONES WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following 
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      HANDS FREE DEVICE.  An external device that connects to a mobile
telephone that allows the user to engage in a telephone call without touching
the user’s mobile telephone.



      MOBILE TELEPHONE.  A cellular, analog, wireless or digital
telephone or other device capable of sending or receiving telephone message
without an access line for service.



      ON- BOARD COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  A communications system or
device that is hard-wired into the motor vehicle.



      USE.  Talking or listening to another person, text messaging,
sending, reading or listening to an electronic message or browsing the
internet.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) of this section,
no person shall operate a motor vehicle while using a mobile telephone.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any person using a mobile telephone or on-board
communications device for non-personal use in the course of ordinary business
in their employment with a city, state, or federal agency or authority;



      (2)   Any person using a hands free device for voice
communication, provided that such person does not touch the mobile telephone
connected to such hands free device while operating or using the vehicle;



      (3)   Any person using a mobile telephone to call 911 or other
emergency telephone numbers to contact public safety forces;



      (4)   Any person using a mobile telephone while maintaining a
motor vehicle in a stationary and parked position.



(Ord. 2014-002, passed 3-19-14)  Penalty, see § 72.99



AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS



§ 72.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.   The village's Traffic Control Administrator.



   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM.   A device with one or more
motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to
produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a
red light signal in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306 or a similar
provision of a village ordinance.



   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION.   A violation described in ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-208.6.



   CERTIFIED REPORT.   A report concerning five or more unpaid fines or
penalties for automated traffic law violations made by the village to the
secretary in accordance with ILCS 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5.



   CODE.   The Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et
seq.



   COMPANY.   SafeSpeed, LLC.



   DETERMINATION NOTICE.   A notice of final determination of automated
traffic law violation liability issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-208.3 and pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



   RECORDED IMAGES.   Images showing the time, date and location of an
automated traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law
enforcement system on:



      (1)   Two or more photographs;



      (2)   Two or more microphotographs;



      (3)   Two or more electronic images; or



      (4)   A video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at
least one image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the
registration plate number of the motor vehicle.



   SECRETARY.   The Illinois Secretary of State.



   SUSPENSION NOTICE.   A notice of impending driver's license suspension
issued pursuant to ILCS 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3 and pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.



   SYSTEM.   Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system
or, collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in
the village pursuant to this subchapter.



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Orland Hills, Illinois.



   VIOLATION NOTICE.   An automated traffic law violation notice issued
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 and pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.36  LOCATIONS.



   The village hereby establishes systems at the following intersections
located within the corporate limits of the village.



   (A)   Northbound 167th and La Grange.



   (B)   Westbound 171st and 94th.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.37  AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS.



   The village is authorized to enter into agreements, substantially in
the forms attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference (collectively the "Agreements"), with
company for the design and implementation of the system(s) and for services
related to the system(s). The Agreements shall be subject to final
modification by the attorneys for the village and the company. The President
is hereby authorized and directed to execute the agreements, once finalized,
thereby binding the village to their terms. The Village Clerk is authorized
and directed to attest to the President's signature, as necessary.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.38  OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATOR ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established the Office of Administrator, which shall be
filled by appointment by the Village President. The Administrator or his or
her designee shall be authorized to adopt, distribute and process violation
notices and other notices required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3,
collect money paid as fines and penalties for automated traffic law
violations and operate an administrative adjudication system for automated
traffic law violations.  The Administrator is also authorized to make a
certified report to the Secretary pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
6-306.5, and any such certified report shall contain the information required
under ILCS 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5(c).



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.39  VIOLATION NOTICE.



   A violation notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-208.3 and 11-208.6, as amended,
shall be served by mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle
cited for an automated traffic law violation as recorded with the Secretary
within 30 days after the Secretary notifies the village of the identity of
the owner of the vehicle, but in no event later than 90 days after the
violation. Service of a violation notice shall be deemed complete as of the
date of deposit in the United States mail. The original or a facsimile of a
violation notice or, in the case of a violation notice produced by a
computerized device, a printed record generated by the device showing the
facts entered on the violation notice, shall be retained by the
Administrator, and shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of business.
A violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance wit this
subchapter and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3, a copy of the violation
notice or the computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and
shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the
violation notice. The violation notice, copy or computer generated record
shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.40  DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION BY TECHNICIAN.



   Before a citation may be issued for any automated traffic law
violation, a determination must be made by a technician employed or
contracted by the village that, based on inspection of recorded images
generated by the system, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.6 or an ordinance of the village. If the
technician determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a
funeral procession or in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency
vehicle, a citation shall not be issued.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.41  HEARING.



   The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a violation notice shall
have the opportunity for a hearing in which the owner may contest the merits
of the alleged violation. The lessee of a vehicle cited in a violation notice
likewise shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing of the same kind
afforded the registered owner. The formal or technical rules of evidence
shall not apply at any such hearing. Such hearings shall be recorded, and the
person conducting the hearing on behalf of the Administrator shall be
empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers.
Persons appearing at such a hearing may be represented by counsel at their
own expense.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.42  FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   A final determination of automated traffic law violation
liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a
hearing officer's determination of violation liability.



   (B)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the
alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice,
the hearing officer's determination of violation liability shall become final:



      (1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination; or



      (2)   Upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition
without a filing having been made.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.43  DETERMINATION NOTICE.



   A determination notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3, as amended, shall be sent
following a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
and the conclusion of judicial review procedures takenunder ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-208.3. A determination notice shall be sent by first class United
States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the
cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
United States Post Office approved database or, under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-1306, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the
lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice to
that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office database. Service of the determination notice
shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.44  PETITION TO SET ASIDE A FINAL DETERMINATION.



   (A)   A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for automated traffic
law violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a final determination
of such liability within ten days after service by the village of a
determination notice. Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same,
together with any documentation in support thereof, to the administrator by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the
Administrator.



   (B)   The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to:



      (1)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued;



      (2)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for
the violation in question; and



      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for
a hearing.



   (C)   A hearing on such a petition shall be held within 30 days
after the filing of same. In the event that such a petition is granted upon a
showing of just cause, and the subject determination of automated traffic law
violation liability is thereby set aside, the registered owner shall be
provided with a hearing on the merits for that violation.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.45  SUSPENSION NOTICE.



   A suspension notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 6-306.5 and 11-208.3, as amended,
shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due
and owing on five or more unpaid automated traffic law violations. The
suspension notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
United States Post Office approved database. Service of a suspension notice
shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.46  CHALLENGING THE ACCURACY OF A CERTIFIED REPORT.



   (A)   If the Administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle
owner and subsequently makes a certified report to the Secretary, the subject
vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing.
To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a written
statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation,
establishing one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the
certified report:



      (1)   That the person was not the owner or lessee of the
subject vehicle or vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law
violations on the date or dates such violation notices were issued; or



      (2)   That the person already paid the fines or penalties for
the five or more automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified
report.



   (B)   Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to
the Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
hand-delivered to the Administrator within five days after the person
receives notice from the Secretary that the person's driver's license will be
suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the Secretary is
presented with a notice from the village certifying that the fines or
penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's
name on the certified report was in error.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.47  CONTEST OF VIOLATION NOTICES BY NON-RESIDENTS.



   Non-residents of the village who receive violation notices may contest
the merits of the alleged automated traffic law violation without attending a
hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any
supporting documentation, to the Administrator via certified mail, return
receipt requested, within ten days after service of the violation notice.
Such a statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability
should not be entered. The Administrator shall rule on such a statement
within ten days after receipt of same, and shall inform the non-resident of
his or her decision within ten days thereafter.



(Ord. 2010-009, passed 7-7-10)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of §§ 72.01, 72.02 and 72.03, the owner or driver of such
vehicle shall be prosecuted for such violation. Any person charged with a
violation of any of these provisions who pleads not guilty shall be present
in court for the trial on the charge. Any person, firm or corporation
convicted of any violation of §§ 72.01, 72.02 and 72.03, shall be fined
according to the following schedule, in addition to any court mandated fees:



 

WEIGHT IN EXCESS OF LEGAL WEIGHT (IN POUNDS)
 
AMOUNT OF FINE




1 - 2,000
 
$50


2,001 - 2,500
 
$135


2,501 - 3,000
 
$165


3,001 - 3,500
 
$260


3,501 - 4,000
 
$300


4,001 - 4,500
 
$425


4,501 - 5,000
 
$475


5,001 and over
 
$750 for the first 5,000 pounds overweight and $75 for each additional
increment of 500 pounds overweight or fraction thereof




 



(Ord. 79-12, passed - -79)



   (B)   Any person convicted of any violation of §§ 72.15 and 72.16
and §§ 72.20 through 72.24 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $750 or for total actual costs incurred plus 15%, whichever is
greater, for each violation.



   (C)   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an automated
traffic law violation received a uniform traffic citation from a police
officer at the time of the violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is
subject to a penalty of $100 per violation. In the event that such penalty is
not paid within 14 days after service of a violation notice, the penalty
shall increase to two hundred dollars $200.



   (D)    Any person who violates § 72.25(B) shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100, provided however, that if a violation occurs at
the time of traffic accident, the driver shall be subject to a fine of not
less  than $500.



(Ord. 96-11, passed 2-7-96; Am. Ord. 2006-020, passed 8-16-06; Am. Ord.
2009-002, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord. 2009-003, passed 4-1-09; Am. Ord. 2010-009,
passed 7-7-10; Am. Ord. 2014-002, passed 3-19-14)



CHAPTER 73:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   73.01   Parking prohibited in specified places



   73.02   Delivery or pick-up; posted load limit



   73.03   Parking prohibited during snow removal or street cleaning
operations



   73.04   Direction of parking



   73.05   Sale of motor vehicles on private property



Parking at Commercial Centers



   73.15   Definitions



   73.16   Submission of development layout plan for center parking area



   73.17   Fire lanes designated



   73.18   Parking areas to be properly marked



   73.19   Paint markings to be maintained



   73.20   Posting appropriate traffic signs



   73.21   Parking prohibited in specified places; handicapped parking
spaces



   73.22   Approval of development layout plans



   73.23   Conflicting provisions



Administrative Adjudication



   73.30   Purpose



   73.31   Administrative composition



   73.32   Procedure



   73.33   Administrative hearings



   73.34   Additional notices



   73.35   Final determination of liability



   73.36   Administrative review



   73.37   Non-resident procedures



   73.38   Schedule of fines/penalties



   73.39   Certified report and contesting certified report



   73.40   Immobilization/towing and impoundment



   73.41   Judicial review



   73.42   Debt to municipality



   73.43   Judgement



 



   73.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.01  PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   No parking is permitted:



   (A)   On the pavement while more than two feet away from the curb or
edge of the pavement;



   (B)   In the area between the curb and sidewalk, whether on a
driveway or not;



   (C)   Within 20 feet of any traffic-control sign or signal;



   (D)   Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk;



   (E)   Across the sidewalk so as to block the pedestrian traffic;



   (F)   Within three feet of the entrance to any driveway;



   (G)   Which will disrupt the normal flow of vehicle or pedestrian
traffic, or which will create a safety hazard;



   (H)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant; and



   (I)   On any unpaved residential property.  Suitable  paved 
sections  for parking  on residential property shall  be asphalt  or
concrete  as  specified in §§ 150.161  through 150.171 and Chapter 156,
Appendix C.



(Ord. 86-14, passed 11-12-86; Am. Ord. 87-01, passed 1-28-87; Am. Ord. 90-13,
passed 3-14-90; Am. 91-02, passed 2-13-91) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  DELIVERY OR PICK-UP; POSTED LOAD LIMIT.



   Except for purposes of direct delivery or pick-up, no vehicle which
exceeds the posted load limit may be parked in the village.



(Ord. 86-14, passed 11-12-86; Am. Ord. 90-13, passed 3-14-90; Am. 91-02,
passed 2-13-91) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  PARKING PROHIBITED DURING SNOW REMOVAL OR STREET CLEANING
OPERATIONS.



   Parking on any street is not permitted under the following conditions:



   (A)   When a snowfall has accumulated to a depth of one inch or
more, until snow removal operations are completed; or



   (B)   During street sweeping operations, provided that notice is
posted 24 hours prior to the commencement of such cleaning.



(Ord. 86-14, passed 11-12-86; Am. Ord. 90-13, passed 3-14-90; Am. 91-02,
passed 2-13-91) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  DIRECTION OF PARKING.



   Any vehicle parked must face as follows:



   (A)   A vehicle parked on the north side of a street must face west;



   (B)   A vehicle parked on the south side of a street must face east
except O'Brien Drive;



   (C)   A vehicle parked on the west side of a street must face south;
and



   (D)   A vehicle parked on the east side of a street must face north,
except O'Brien Drive.



(Ord. 86-14, passed 11-12-86; Am. Ord. 90-13, passed 3-14-90; Am. 91-02,
passed 2-13-91) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.05  SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be illegal to display a motor vehicle for sale on the
streets of the village, except in accordance with the provisions of this
section.



   (B)   Any motor vehicle parked on a public street and displaying any
type of sign advertising the motor vehicle for sale must be parked within 50
feet of the residence of the registered owner of the motor vehicle.



   (C)   No motor vehicle parked on a public street and offered for
sale by the registered owner or his agent may display any type of sign
advertising the motor vehicle for sale for more than seven consecutive days,
at the end of which all such advertising signs shall be removed from the
vehicle for seven consecutive days.



(Ord. 2000-03, passed 1-5-00)



PARKING AT COMMERCIAL CENTERS



§ 73.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL CENTER.  A building or group of buildings with retail,
religious, or office uses which share a common parking lot and having a total
roof area of in excess of 2500 square feet.



   FIRE LANE.  An emergency access lane not less than 12 feet wide and
available for use by emergency vehicles including, but not limited to, fire
trucks,  ambulances, police vehicles, and ESDA vehicles.



   PARKING AREA.  The area or areas of land near or contiguous to the
commercial center, including interior private roadways and drives used by the
public as the means of access to and egress from the business establishments
within the commercial center and that portion of the commercial center
designated for the parking of vehicles.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)



§ 73.16  SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT LAYOUT PLAN FOR CENTER PARKING AREA.



   The manager, managing agent or managing agency of every commercial
center, which has not previously done so, shall within 60 days of the
effective  date hereof, submit an “as is” development layout plan of the
parking area of said center showing the parking lot configuration, traffic
aisles, parking spaces, handicapped  parking spaces and fire lanes,
directions for traffic movement within the area, ingress and egress into and
out of the parking area and onto public streets, and location of any
handicapped parking signs, stop signs, yield signs, and no parking signs. 
The village shall have the right to obtain existing conditions stipulated
herein at the owners expense if no drawings are submitted to the village
within said time period.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)



§ 73.17  FIRE LANES DESIGNATED.



   Every commercial center shall maintain a designated fire lane, one side
of which shall not be farther than 20 feet from the front entrance door of
any retail, meeting, or office use located in the center.  The front
entrance door shall also mean the common entrance(s) to the interior of any
building where numerous retail and/or office uses are located.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)



§ 73.18  PARKING AREAS TO BE PROPERLY MARKED.



   All parking stalls shall be striped, handicapped parking spaces
properly marked, including signage, parking aisle access lanes marked with
pavement directional arrows at each end of the aisle, and “No Parking -
Fire Lane” signs for the emergency access lanes, and all two directional
roadways shall be marked with a center yellow stripe.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)



§ 73.19  PAINT MARKINGS TO BE MAINTAINED.



   All paint markings required by this subchapter in the parking areas
shall be maintained in such a manner as to apprise a reasonable driver of all
special control features under reasonable weather conditions.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)



§ 73.20  POSTING APPROPRIATE TRAFFIC SIGNS.



   All vehicular traffic exiting the parking areas or interior roadways
onto public streets shall be required to either yield or stop before entering
the public street. Appropriate indicating “yield” or “stop” signs
shall be posted and maintained by the commercial center at all applicable
locations.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.21  PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES; HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop,
stand, or park such vehicle in any of the following places which may exist in
the parking area except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer:



      (1)   Within an intersection;



      (2)   On a crosswalk;



      (3)   In a designated fire lane;



      (4)   In front of any doorway or truck dock;



      (5)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;



      (6)   Within 30 feet of a traffic signal or stop sign on the
approaching side;



      (7)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (8)   At any curb within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (9)   At any place where the standing of any vehicle will
block the use of a driveway;



      (10)   On any sidewalk;



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parking
at the edge or curb of the street;



      (13)   At any place where signs have been erected prohibiting
stopping, standing or parking.



      (14)   At the end of any row of marked parking spaces where
the vehicle extends beyond the last parking stall.



      (15)   Mailboxes.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in a designated
handicapped parking space unless the vehicle contains the identification
(registration plate, placard, or sticker) required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 3-609, 3-616, or 11-1301.2.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92; Am. Ord. 2000-22, passed 11-1-00)  Penalty, see
§ 73.99



§ 73.22  APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT LAYOUT PLANS.



   Development layout plans which do not specifically provide for all of
the regulations as set forth herein may be approved in writing by the Village
Administrator provided said plan is approved by the Village Board and the
Orland Fire Protection District.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)



§ 73.23  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   All ordinances or portions thereof, excluding the provisions of the
Building Code, in conflict with the provisions of this subchapter are hereby
repealed insofar as the conflict therewith.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92)



ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION



§ 73.30  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The stated purpose of this section is to provide a fair and
efficient enforcement of municipal vehicular standing, parking, and condition
of vehicle regulation violation(s) and other municipal regulation
violation(s) as may be allowed by law, through an administrative adjudication
of violation(s) of municipal ordinances regulating the standing, parking, and
condition of vehicles within the geographic boundaries of this municipality
and a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and authority and procedures
for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.



   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, “compliance violation”
means a violation of a municipal regulation governing the condition or use of
equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a municipal wheel tax
license.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.31  ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.



   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance, regulation violation(s) shall provide for a Traffic
Compliance Administrator, Hearing Officer, Computer Operator/System
Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel (Deputy), with the power, authority
and limitations as are hereinafter set forth:



   (A)   Traffic Compliance Administrator - shall be empowered and is
hereby authorized and directed to:



      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative
adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation
violation(s).



      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and
compliance violation notices and other notices as may be required under this
subchapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
subchapter.



      (3)   Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed
after a final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability.



      (4)   Conduct hearings, as a Hearing Officer with the same
power and authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the
appointed Hearing Officer.



      (5)   Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual
report(s) verifying that the final determination of standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability was issued in accordance with
this subchapter and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3.



      (6)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning
initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter, hereinafter set forth, and those of ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 6-306.5.



      (7)   Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of
notices of impending impoundment or validity of notice of impending drivers
license suspension, in an administrative review capacity in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter, hereinafter set forth.



      (8)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to
operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.



      (9)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints
in the Circuit Court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to
act on behalf of this municipality in filing complaints seeking judgments for
unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all post- judgment remedies
available by current law.



      (10)   To select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to
tow and impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   Hearing Officer - shall be empowered and is hereby authorized
and directed to:



      (1)   Preside over the administrative hearings, established
herein, as the adjudicator.



      (2)   Administer oaths.



      (3)   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses
and production of relevant papers or documentation.



      (4)   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) as are
established in § 73.38 hereof.



      (5)   Make final determination of:



         (a)   Vehicular standing, parking and compliance
regulation  violation(s) liability.



         (b)   Validity of notice of impending impoundment.



         (c)   Validity of notice of impending drivers license
suspension in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, hereinafter
set forth.



      (6)   Provide for the accurate recordation of the
administrative adjudication hearing(s).



   (C)   System Coordinator/Computer Operator - are hereby authorized
and directed to operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the
administrative adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis,
including but not limited to:



      (1)   Input of violation notice information.



      (2)   Hearing date(s) and notice dates.



      (3)   Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).



      (4)   Issue payment receipts.



      (5)   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final
determination of liability, notice of impending impoundment, and notice of
impending drivers license suspension, as directed by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.



      (6)   Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances
at administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and
paid.



   (D)   Hearing Room Personnel - are hereby authorized and directed to:



      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum.



      (2)   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom
deputies of the Circuit Court.



      (3)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be
required and as directed by the Hearing Officer or Traffic Compliance
Administrator.



      (4)   This position is limited to off-duty, full- time,
part-time or auxiliary police officers.



   (E)   Appointments - The President is hereby authorized to appoint
persons to hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and
fulfill the requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.



   (F)   Compensation to be paid for each of the above stated positions
shall be as determined by the President and approved by the Village Board.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.32  PROCEDURE.



   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in accordance with
the following procedures and final determination(s) of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice
of impending impoundment, validity of notice of impending drivers license
suspension, impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in
accordance with the provisions set forth below:



   (A)   Violation notice - vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation(s) notice(s) (“violation notice”(s)) shall be issued
by the person(s) authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be
served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set
forth.



   (B)   Authorization - All full-time, part-time, auxiliary police and
community service officers, as well as, other specifically appointed
individuals shall have the authority to issue violation(s) notices.



   (C)   Detection of violations - Any individual authorized hereby to
issue violation(s) notices and who detects a violation of any section of any
applicable municipal ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof and
shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.



   (D)   The vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation
“Violation Notice” shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:



      (1)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of
issuance).



      (2)   The particular vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violated.



      (3)   Vehicle make and state registration number.



      (4)   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late
payment. The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.



      (5)   A section entitled “Request for Hearing” which shall
clearly set forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the
initial administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation
notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the violation
notice by:



         (a)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and
clearly identified, “Request for Hearing.”



         (b)   Placing his/her name and current address in the
place provided.



         (c)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated
place.



         (d)   Filing the violation notice with the “Request
for Hearing” portion fully completed; with the Traffic Compliance 
Administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance.
The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator.



      (6)   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at
which the violation may be contested on its merits.



      (7)   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment
penalty shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.



      (8)   A section entitled, “Non-Resident Request for Hearing
- Non-Appearance,” which clearly sets forth that a non-resident registered
owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest
the validity of the violation notice without personally appearing by:



         (a)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and
clearly identified, “Non-Resident Request for Hearing - Non-appearance.”



         (b)   Placing his/her name and current address in the
place provided.



         (c)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated
place.



         (d)   Filing the violation notice with the
“Non-Resident Request for Hearing” portion fully completed, with the
Traffic Compliance  Administrator postmarked within ten days of the
violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by
the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



         (e)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying
the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the
Traffic Compliance  Administrator postmarked within ten days of the
violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed, if post marked
by the due dates herein specified.



      (f)   A clearly marked statement that execution of the
non-resident request for hearing is a waiver of the non-resident's right to a
personal appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the
notarized statement of facts submitted by the non-resident and the facts
contained in the violation(s) notice(s).



   (E)   Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the
person issuing such notice by:



      (1)   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, or



      (2)   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or
lessee of the vehicle, if present.



   (F)   The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) shall be certified
by the person issuing said notice by:



      (1)   Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of
service, or



      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device,
by signing a single certification, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while under his/her control.



   (G)   The original or a facsimile of the violation(s) notice(s)
shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a
record in the ordinary course of business.



   (H)   Prima facia evidence of correctness - Any violation(s)
notice(s) issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the
notice, shall be prima facia correct and shall be prima facia evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice.



   (I)   Admissibility - The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) shall
be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.33  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.



   An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits;



   (A)   Shall be granted to - the registered owner or operator of the
“cited vehicle,” pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3 or the
lessee of the “cited vehicle,” pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-1306, incorporated herein by reference.



   (B)   Hearing dates - shall be at the date, time and place as is set
forth in the violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices
issued in accordance with this subchapter. Violators shall be given no less
than three opportunities to appear and failure to appear by the third
scheduled hearing date will result in a “Final Determination of
Liability” as hereinafter set forth.



   (C)   Shall be tape recorded.



   (D)   Shall culminate in a determination of liability or
non-liability, made by the Hearing Officer, who shall consider testimony and
other evidence without the application of the formal or technical rules of
evidence. The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability,
assess fines and penalties in accordance with § 73.38 hereof.



   (E)   Representation by attorney - Persons appearing to contest the
alleged standing, parking, or compliance violation on its merits may be
represented by counsel at their own expense.



   (F)   Review - The final determination of any matter which may be
decided by the Hearing Officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.34  ADDITIONAL NOTICES.



   Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the “cited
vehicle” to appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), or upon
final determination of violation liability, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which:



   (A)   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the
“cited vehicle” at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State.



   (B)   Shall be sent to the lessee of the “cited vehicle” at the
address last known to the lessor of the “cited vehicle” at the time of
the lease.



   (C)   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.



   (D)   Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith
shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.



   (E)   The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in
the following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:



      (1)   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of
the “cited vehicle” to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s),
additional notice(s) shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain,
but not be limited to the following information:



         (a)   Date and location of violation cited in the
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s).



         (b)   Particular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violated.



         (c)   Vehicle make and state registration.



         (d)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late
payment.



         (e)   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their
current status, other than paid in full.



         (f)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing
at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.



         (g)   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any
applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the
date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination
of vehicle standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability
for the “cited” violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.



         (h)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s)
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine
or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the municipality.



      (2)   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be sent
following an appearance by the violator and a determination of liability, or
the failure to appear by the violator by the third and final hearing date
upon conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review, as is
hereinafter set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to,
the following information and warnings:



         (a)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty
assessed is a debt due and owing the municipality.



         (b)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any
penalty due and owing the municipality within  the time specified may result
in the municipality's filing a complaint in the Circuit Court to have the
unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgement in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-208.3 (f), incorporated herein by reference.



         (c)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and
located within the municipality may be impounded for failure to pay fines or
penalties for five or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violations.



         (d)   A warning that the person's drivers license may be
suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular
standing or parking violations under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5,
incorporated herein by reference.



      (3)   A notice of impending suspension of a person's drivers
license shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment
of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular
standing or parking regulation violation(s):



         (a)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the
fine or penalty owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in
the municipality's notifying the Secretary of State that the person is
eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 6-306.5 incorporated herein by reference.



         (b)   The notice of impending drivers license suspension
shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded
with the Secretary of State.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.35  FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.



   A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability shall:



   (A)   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or
penalty after the Hearing Officer's determination of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion
of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter
set forth, or



   (B)   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the
third and final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged
violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior
served or mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall
become final;



      (1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination, or



      (2)   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition
without a filing having been made.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.36  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) liability may be filed by a person
owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions
and grounds hereinafter set forth:



   (A)   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability
must be filed in the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator within,
but not later than, 14 days from the date the determination of liability is
made.



   (B)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall act upon the
petition(s) timely filed and render a decision thereon within 14 days of the
date filed.



   (C)   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability
shall be limited to the following:



      (1)   The person against whom the determination of liability
is made was not the owner or lessee of the “cited vehicle” on the date
the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s)
notice(s) were issued.



      (2)   The person's having paid the fine or penalty prior to
the determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.



      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for
a hearing.



   (D)   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall:



      (1)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may
be, that the determination of liability has been set aside.



      (2)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may
be, of a date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation
for which determination of liability has been set aside.



      (3)   Notice of setting aside of the determination  of
liability and the notice of the  hearing date shall be by first class mail,
postage prepaid to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the
determination of liability.



      (4)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the
notice(s) are deposited in the United States mail.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.37  NON-RESIDENT PROCEDURES.



   Non-residents of this municipality who have been served vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in
accordance with this chapter, may contest the alleged violation on its
merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally
appearing at an administrative hearing by:



   (A)   Completing, in full, the “Non-Resident Request for
Hearing” section of the violation notice, served upon him/her pursuant to
this subchapter.



   (B)   Signing the non-resident request for hearing in the space
specified in the violation notice, and acknowledging that his/her personal
appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the
notarized statement filed by him/her and the facts contained in the violation
notice.



   (C)   Filing the violation notice with the “Request for Hearing”
section fully completed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked
within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed
filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.



   (D)   Filing a notarized a statement of facts specifying the grounds
for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator postmarked within ten days of  the violation notice
issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator. The acceptance of a “Non-Resident Request For
Hearing” after the due date or with cause, at the discretion of the Traffic
Compliance Administrator, be accepted for hearing consideration and decision.



   (E)   The Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the
facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the non-resident
as is contained in the violation notice.



   (F)   Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer shall be
served upon the non-resident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the non-resident at the address set forth in the statement of facts
submitted.



   (G)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice
is placed in the United States mail.



   (H)   All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to
non-residents of this municipality.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.38  SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES.



   (A)   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the
violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) shall be as follows:



 


FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE



FINE SCHEDULE
 
GENERAL FINE AMOUNT
 
HANDICAPPED FINE AMOUNT
 
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE


Step 1   Upon service of a “Violation Notice” issued and paid within
ten days of the violation notice issuance, and no “Request for Hearing”
has been timely filed, the fine amount owed shall be:
 
$25.00
 
$100.00
 
$25.00


Step 2   Having failed to pay the fine amount by the deadline date (within
ten days of the violation notice issuance) as specified in Step 1 above, the
fine amount, if paid after the deadline date in Step 1 above but prior to the
first hearing date, will be:
 
$50.00
 
$150.00
 
$50.00


Step 3   Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 2 prior to
the commencement of the 1st Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid on the 1st
Hearing Date or prior to the 2nd Hearing Date, will be:
 
$100.00
 
$175.00
 
$100.00


Step 4   Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 3 prior to
the commencement of the 2nd Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid on the 2nd
Hearing Date or prior to the 3rd Hearing Date, will be:
 
$150.00
 
$200.00
 
$150.00


Step 5  Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 4 prior to
the commencement of the 3rd Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid on the 3rd
Hearing Date or upon the finding of Liability for the violation, after
failure to appear at the 3rd Hearing, will be:
 
$250.00
 
$250.00
 
$250.00



 



   (B)   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly
applied for each violation of any applicable municipal ordinance.



   (C)   The municipality adopts by reference all current and future
local standing, parking or condition of vehicle ordinances, and those
provisions of the Illinois Complied Statues governing the standing, parking,
or condition of vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the
geographical boundaries of the municipality and in those areas subject to
off-street parking agreements.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.39  CERTIFIED REPORT AND CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT.



   (A)   Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing
the village after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth
herein for ten or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall make a certified report to the Secretary of
State stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any
fine or penalty due  and  owing the village as a result of ten or more
violations of municipal vehicular standing or parking regulations and thereby
cause the suspension of that person's driver's license.



   (B)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall take no further
action unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the village are
paid or upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the
certified report was in error. At such time, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall submit to the Secretary of State a notification which
shall result in the halting of a driver's license suspension proceedings. The
person named therein shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon
request and at no charge.



   (C)   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the Office of the Traffic Compliance
Administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is
based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:



      (1)   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the
vehicle(s) receiving ten or more violation notices on the date or dates such
notices were issued; or



      (2)   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten
or more violations indicated on the certified report.



   (D)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall render a
determination within 14 business days of receipt of the objection form and
shall notify the objector of the determination.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.40  IMMOBILIZATION/TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined
to be liable for three or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s), for which the fines or penalties assessed remain
unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and impounded if:



      (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator has determined that
a person has been determined to be liable for three or more vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines or
penalties for which remain unpaid.



      (2)   The person determined to be liable for three or more
violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle.



      (3)   A pre-towing notice has been sent to the registered
owner of the motor vehicle which contains, but shall not be limited to the
following:



         (a)   That a final determination has been made on three
or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s),
the fines and penalties for which remain unpaid.



         (b)   A listing of the violation(s) for which the person
has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:



            1.   The vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation notice number.



            2.   Date of issuance.



            3.   Total amount of fine(s) and penalty(s)
assessed.



         (c)   That the motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and
located within the municipality is subject to immobilization and/or towing
and impoundment if the fines and penalties are not paid within 14 days of the
date of the notice.



         (d)   That the registered owner may contest the validity
of the notice by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion
of one notice and by filing the request for hearing with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator within, but not later than, 14 days of the date of
the notice. The request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator.



      (4)   The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom
notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as
specified in the notice and no timely request for hearing has been filed with
the Traffic Compliance Administrator to contest the validity of the notice.



      (5)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest
the validity of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment, the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall schedule an
administrative hearing to contest the validity of said notice, by disproving
liability for the unpaid final determinations of parking, standing, or
compliance violation liability listed on the notice, on the next available
hearing date, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 60
days after the request for hearing is filed.



         (a)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve
notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.



         (b)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.



         (c)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the
date it is placed in the United States mail.



   (B)   The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section, shall have the right to a prompt administrative
hearing without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties
for which final determination has been made.



      (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve a
post-towing notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or
towed and impounded under this section which notice shall contain, but not be
limited to the following information:



         (a)   Date of immobilization or towing and date of
impoundment.



         (b)   Location of vehicle.



         (c)   That the vehicle was immobilized under this
section of this subchapter for non-payment of fines or penalties assessed for
violation of three or more violation(s) of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation(s) for which the registered owner has been determined
liable, and notified of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.



         (d)   Date of notice of impending immobilization or
towing and impoundment.



         (e)   That the registered owner may contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the
request for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing
with the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not later than, 14 days
of the date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator.



   (C)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released
to the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of the fines and
penalties due and owing the municipality as specified in the notice sent in
accordance with division (A)(3) of this section and the payment of towing
charges and accrued daily impound charges or upon order of the hearing
officer following hearing contesting the validity of the impoundment.



   (D)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall appoint or retain
the services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles
in accordance herewith, provided:



      (1)   The individual, agency or company is fully licensed
according to local and state law.



      (2)   The individual, agency or company is fully insured.



      (3)   The individual, agency or company has available a
secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For
the purpose of this section a secured area shall mean an area bounded by a
fence, chain link or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates
so as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97; Am. Ord. 2011-007, passed 8-3-11; Am. Ord.
2012-007, passed 4-18-12)



§ 73.41  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Judicial Review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) and final administrative decisions
issued after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and
impoundment made under this section shall be subject to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Law as is set forth in ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 301, et
seq. incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.42  DEBT TO MUNICIPALITY.



   Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and remaining unpaid after
the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created
under this section and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall
be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be collected in 
accordance with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty
resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute
a final disposition of that violation.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.43  JUDGEMENT.



   (A)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall, following the
expiration of the period within which administrative or judicial review may
be sought for a final determination of violation, take all necessary
action(s), execute all required documents and appoint or retain any
individual or agency deemed appropriate to obtain a judgment against and
collect moneys from the person(s) who have been assessed fines or penalties
which remain unpaid and have become a debt due and owing the municipality in
accordance with the provisions of this section and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-208.3 by:



      (1)   Filing a complaint in the Circuit Court praying for the
entry of a judgment against the person for whom a final determination of
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been
made.



      (2)   The complaint filed by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator or individual or agency on behalf of the municipality seeking
entry of a judgment against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties
pursuant to a final determination of standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) shall have appended:



         (a)   A certified copy of the final determination of the
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s).



         (b)   A certification that recites facts sufficient to
show that the final determination of standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) was issued in accordance with this subchapter and
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3.



      (3)   Nothing shall prevent the municipality from
consolidating multiple final determinations of standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability in an action in the Circuit
Court against an individual.



      (4)   Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to
collect money judgments.



   (B)   Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served
upon the person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of 
this section by any method provided under ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 2-203,
incorporated by reference, or by certified mail, return  receipt requested,
provided the total amount of  fines and penalties for final determination of
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed
$2,500.



(Ord. 97-31, passed 7-2-97)



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter, except § 73.21(B), shall be fined not less than $100, nor more
than $750 per day. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 86-14, passed 11-12-86; Am. Ord. 90-13, passed 3-14-90; Am. 91-02,
passed 2-13-91; Am. Ord. 2000-03, passed 1-5-00)



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating § 73.21(B) shall be
fined not less than $350, nor more than $750 for each offense.



(Ord. 92-33, passed 9-9-92; Am. Ord. 2000-03, passed 1-5-00; Am. Ord.
2006-020, passed 8-16-06; Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09; Am. Ord.
2012-009, passed 4-18-12)



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES



Section



General Provisions



   74.01   Definition



   74.02   Application of traffic laws



   74.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   74.04   Riding on bicycles



   74.05   Speed



   74.06   Riding on right side of roadway



   74.07   Emerging from alley or driveway



   74.08   Clinging to vehicles



   74.09   Riding single file



   74.10   Riding on sidewalks



   74.11   Carrying articles



   74.12   Parking



   74.13   Lights, signaling devices, and brakes



   74.14   Racing on streets



   74.15   Parent's responsibility



 



   74.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 74.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Any device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two or more wheels any of which is more than 16 inches in
diameter.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73)



§ 74.02  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS.



   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of the traffic laws of this village applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, and except as to special regulations in this chapter and as to those
provisions of the traffic laws which by their nature can have no application.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73)



§ 74.03  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right, left, or "U" turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any such sign except where such person dismounts
from the bicycle to make such turn, in which event the person shall obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.04  RIDING ON BICYCLES.



   A person operating a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride
the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor carry any other person
upon the bicycle other than as herein authorized.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.05  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed grater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.06  RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY.



   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right hand side as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.07  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alley way, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.08  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to
any vehicle upon a roadway.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.09  RIDING SINGLE FILE.



   Persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall ride single file except
on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.10  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a
business district.



   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any
sidewalks or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any
persons, and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey same.



   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of- way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.11  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handle bars.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.12  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway, against the curb, or upon a sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle, or against a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.13  LIGHTS, SIGNALING DEVICES, AND BRAKES.



   (A)   Lights.    It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle on any
street or sidewalk during the period from ½ hour after sunset to sunrise,
which bicycle is not equipped with at least one lighted lamp firmly secured
to the front mudguard or handlebars of the bicycle showing a white light
visible at least 500 feet in the direction toward which the bicycle is
proceeding and at least one lighted lamp showing a red light in the opposite
direction.  In lieu of such rear lighted red lamp, a red reflector glass
button, not less than one and a half inches in diameter or not less than four
inches square of red reflecting tape may be mounted securely on the rear
mudguard, or lacking a mudguard, on the rear of the saddle.



   (B)   Signaling devices.  It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle
on any street, sidewalk, or other public place, which bicycle is not equipped
with a signaling device in good working order and audible at a distance of
not less than 25 feet when sounded, except that no bicycle may be equipped
with or make use of any gong, siren, or mechanical whistle.



   (C)   Brakes.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake
adequate to control the movement of and to stop such bicycle whenever
necessary.  The brake shall be maintained in good working order at all times.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.14  RACING ON STREETS.



   No person shall race bicycles upon any public street in the village.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.15  PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY.



   The parents of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate  any of  the
provisions of this chapter.  Any parent or guardian authorizing or knowingly
permitting such violation shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73) Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty of violating this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $75 for each
offense.  Each day such violation continues shall be dammed a separate
offense.



(Ord. 73-22, passed 12-18-73; Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Stop streets



   II.   Yield streets



   III.   Traffic-control streets



   IV.   Speed limits



   V.   One-way streets



   VI.   Prohibited turns



SCHEDULE I.  STOP STREETS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this schedule, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   STOP.  The complete cessation from movement.



   STOP SIGNS.  An octagon shaped sign, red in color or in such other
form or color as may be designated by the Illinois Department of
Transportation.



   (B)   The following intersections shall be controlled by stop signs
and all vehicles shall be required to stop as indicated at the following
locations:



 

INTERSECTION
 
DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE




Beacon Court and Leslie Drive
 
Westbound
 
97-38
 
9-3-97


Beacon Lane and 167th Street
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Beacon Lane and Leslie Drive
 
Eastbound
 
97-38
 
9-3-97


Boardwalk Terrace and Boardwalk Terrace
 
All directions
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Boardwalk Terrace and Haven Avenue
 
All directions
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Boardwalk Terrace and Meadowview Drive
 
Eastbound and Westbound
 
2005-006
 
3-16-05


Boardwalk Terrace and Meadowview Drive
 
Northbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Boardwalk Terrace and Pepperwood Drive
 
Southbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Boardwalk Terrace and Rachel Court
 
Northbound
Southbound
 
2000-16
 
8-16-00


Christopher Drive and 171st Street
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Christopher Lane and Westwood Drive
 
Northbound
 
99-29
 
10-20-99


Elm Place and Ridge Lane
 
Southbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


Fox Court and 162nd Street
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Haven Avenue and Meadowview Drive
 
Northbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Haven Avenue and 161st Street
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Haven Avenue and 161st Street
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Haven Avenue and 162nd Street
 
Northbound
 
96-26
 
8-21-96


Haven Avenue and 162nd Street
 
Southbound
 
96-26
 
8-21-96


Haven Avenue and 159th Street
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Haven Court and Haven Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Haven and Meadowview
 
Southbound
 
95-01
 
3-1-95


Haven and Meadowview
 
Eastbound
 
96-26
 
8-21-96


 
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


Haven and Meadowview
 
Westbound
 
96-26
 
8-21-96


 
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


Hawthorne Lane and Hunter Court
 
Eastbound and Westbound
 
99-29
 
10-20-99


Hawthorne Lane and 94th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Hawthorne Lane and playground
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Hickory Drive and 89th Avenue
 
Westbound, southbound and northbound
 
86-05;
2006-019
 
5-14-86;
8-2-06


Hickory Drive and 88th Court
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Hunter Drive and 94th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Kelly Court and Morgan Lane
 
Eastbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Leslie Drive and 88th Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Leslie Drive and Beacon Lane
 
Southbound
 
97-38
 
9-3-97


Marigold Place and Meadowview Drive
 
Southbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


Mayors Row and Haven Avenue
 
Westbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Mayors Row and Pepperwood Trail
 
Southbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Meadowview Drive and Marshfield
 
Southbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


Meadowview Drive and Marshfield Lane
 
Both eastbound and westbound
 
93-38
 
6-16-93


Meadowview and Pristine
 
Both eastbound and westbound
 
95-01
 
3-1-95


Meadowview and 94th
 
Westbound
 
95-01
 
3-1-95


Morgan Lane and Boardwalk Terrace
 
Eastbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Morgan Lane and Christine Court
 
Eastbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Morgan Lane and Haven Avenue
 
All Directions
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


O'Brien Drive and 167th Street
 
Southbound
 
87-12
 
9-23-87


Park Place and Haven Avenue
 
All directions
 
98-07
2000-04
 
6-17-98
1-5-00


Park Place and Pepperwood Drive
 
Northbound 
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Pepperwood Drive and Boardwalk Terrace
 
Eastbound,
Southbound and Westbound
 
2005-008
 
4-6-05


Pepperwood Drive and Haven Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Pepperwood Trail and Haven Avenue
 
Northbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Pepperwood Trail and Meadowview Drive
 
Eastbound and Westbound
 
2005-006
 
3-16-05


Pepperwood Trail at Meadowview Drive
 
Northbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Pepperwood Trail at 16436 Pepperwood Trail
 
Southbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Pepperwood Trail at 16459 Pepperwood Trail
 
Northbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Pepperwood at 94th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
97-51
 
12-17-97


Pristine Place and Ridge Lane
 
Eastbound and Westbound
 
2005-006
 
3-16-05


Pristine Place and Ridge Lane
 
Northbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


Pristine Place and Meadowview Drive
 
Southbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


Quail Court and 162nd Street
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


Rachel Court and Boardwalk Terrace
 
Eastbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Robin Court and Haven Avenue
 
Westbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Rosebud Place and Meadowview Drive
 
Eastbound and Westbound
 
2005-006
 
3-16-05


Rosebud Place and Meadowview Drive
 
Northbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


Rosebud Place and Meadowview Drive
 
Southbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


Terrace Court and Boardwalk Terrace
 
Southbound
 
2000-04
 
1-5-00


Westwood Drive and Christopher Avenue
 
Westbound
 
87-18
 
12-9-87


Westwood Drive and Christopher Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
87-18
 
12-9-87


88th Avenue and 171st Street
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


88th Court and 70th Street
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


88th Avenue and Meadowview Drive
 
Eastbound
 
93-28
 
4-21-93


89th Avenue and 169th Street
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


89th Avenue and 167th Street
 
Southbound
 
87-12
 
9-23-87


91st Avenue and 159th Place
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


91st Avenue and 160th Place
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


91st Avenue and 160th Place
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


92nd and Meadowview
 
Southbound
 
95-01
 
3-1-95


160th Place and 91st Avenue
 
Westbound
 
96-26
 
8-21-96


161st Place and Haven Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


161st Place and 91st Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


161st Place and 91st Avenue
 
Westbound
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


162nd Street and Fox Court
 
Eastbound
 
2000-16
 
8-16-00


162nd Street and Haven Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


162nd Street and Quail Court
 
Westbound
 
2000-16
 
8-16-00


162nd Street and 92nd Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


162nd Street and 92nd Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


162nd Street and 92nd Avenue
 
Northbound
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


162nd Street and 92nd Avenue
 
Southbound
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


167th Street and Beacon Lane
 
Westbound
 
86-12
 
10-8-86


167th Street and Beacon Lane
 
Eastbound
 
86-12
 
10-8-86


167th Street and 88th Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-12
 
10-8-86


167th Street and Hobart Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 93rd Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and Haven Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 92nd Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and Highview Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 91st Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and Hilltop Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 90th Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and Haven Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and Haven Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and Haven Avenue
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 94th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 94th Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 94th Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Street and 94th Avenue
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Place and 89th Court
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Place and 89th Avenue
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Place and Vicky Lane
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Place and 88th Court
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Place and 90th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


167th Place and 88th Court
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


169th Place and 89th Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


169th Place and 90th Avenue
 
All directions
 
98-13
 
6-17-98


169th Place and 93rd Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


169th Place and 93rd Avenue
 
Westbound
 
96-26
 
8-21-96


169th Place and 92nd Avenue
 
All directions
 
98-07
 
6-17-98


169th Place and 93rd Avenue
 
Southbound
 
92-32
 
8-12-92


169th Place and Haven Avenue
 
Southbound
 
92-32
 
8-12-92


169th Place and Hobart
 
All directions
 
92-32
 
8-12-92


169th Street and 88th Court
 
Eastbound and Westbound
 
2004-013
 
8-18-04


169th Street and 89th Court
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


169th Street and 89th Avenue
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


169th Street and Vicky Lane
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


169th Street and 88th Court
 
Southbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


169th Street and 90th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


169th Street and 88th Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


170th Street and Hobart
 
Westbound
 
92-32
 
8-12-92


170th Street and 88th Court
 
Eastbound and Westbound
 
2005-008
 
4-6-05


170th Street and 89th Avenue
 
Northbound
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


170th Street and 89th Avenue
 
Southbound
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


170th Street and 90th Avenue
 
Southbound, eastbound and westbound
 
2006-004
 
1-18-06


170th Street and 93rd Avenue
 
Northbound
 
92-32
 
8-12-92


170th Street and Haven Avenue
 
Northbound
 
92-32
 
8-12-92


170th Street and 89th Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


170th Street and 88th Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


170th Street and 89th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


170th Street and 92nd Avenue
 
All directions
 
89-13; 89-27
 
5-10-89; 9-13-89


171st Street and 92nd Avenue
 
Southbound
 
89-13
 
5-10-89


171st Street and 94th Avenue
 
Westbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


 
 
 




 



   (C)   The Department of Public Works is hereby directed to post and
maintain such stop signs as are necessary to designate the intersections
described as stop intersections.



   (D)   Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this
schedule shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750.



(Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



SCHEDULE II:  YIELD STREETS.



   (A)   The following streets shall be yield streets:



 

YIELD STREET
 
RIGHT-OF-WAY STREET
 
DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE


91st Avenue
 
160th Place
 
Northbound
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


 
 
 
 



 



   (B)   Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this
schedule shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750.



(Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



SCHEDULE III:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL STREETS.



   The following intersections shall be controlled by traffic controls as
indicated:



 

INTERSECTION
 
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE




88th Avenue and 159th Street
 
Traffic light
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


91st Avenue and 159th Street
 
Traffic light
 
86-5
 
5-14-86


159th Street and 88th Avenue
 
Traffic light
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


159th Street and 88th Avenue
 
Traffic light
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


160th Street/Boardwalk Lane and 94th Avenue
 
Traffic light
 
2011-008
 
8-17-11


167th Street and 94th Avenue
 
Traffic light
 
2011-008
 
8-17-11


167th Street and 96th Avenue
 
Traffic light
 
86-05
 
5-14-86


171st Street and 88th Avenue
 
Traffic light
 
2011-008
 
8-17-11


171st Street and 94th Avenue
 
Traffic light
 
2011-008
 
8-17-11


 
 
 




 



SCHEDULE IV:  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   The following speed limits shall  be in effect:



 



STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
MILES PER HOUR
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE


88th Avenue
 
171st Street and 159th Street
 
30
 
86-05
2011-008
 
5-14-86
8-17-11


94th Avenue
 
171st Street and 167th Street
 
35
 
86-05
2011-008
 
5-14-86
8-17-11


94th Avenue
 
167th Street and 160th Street/Boardwalk Lane
 
35
 
2011-008
 
8-17-11


159th Street
 
94th Avenue and 88th Avenue
 
40
 
87-12
2011-008
 
9-23-87
8-17-11


167th Street
 
94th Avenue and 88th Avenue
 
25
 
86-05
2011-008
 
5-14-86
8-17-11


167th Street
 
96th Avenue and 94th Avenue
 
35
 
86-05
2011-008
 
5-14-86
8-17-11


171st Street
 
94th Avenue and 88th Avenue
 
45
 
86-05
2011-008
 
5-14-86
8-17-11


 
 
 
 




 



      (B)   On all other streets within the village, the speed limit
shall be 20 miles per hour.



      (C)   The Department of Public Works is hereby directed to
post and maintain such speed limit signs as are necessary to indicate the
speed limits set by this schedule.



      (D)   Anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this
schedule shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750.



(Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



SCHEDULE V:  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   The following streets shall be one-way:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
DIRECTION
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE


O'Brien Drive
 
167th Street
 
Westbound and 88th Avenue
 
87-12
 
9-23-87


 
 
 
 



 



   (B)   Anyone found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
schedule shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750.



(Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



SCHEDULE VI:  PROHIBITED TURNS.



   (A)   The following turns are prohibited:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
PROHIBITED TURN
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE


LaGrange Road
 
South of 167th Street to north of 171st Street
 
Left
 
2001-013
 
6-20-01


 
 
 
 



 



   (B)   Anyone found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
schedule shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750.



(Am. Ord. 2009-002, passed 3-4-09)



CHAPTER 76:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Prohibited parking



SCHEDULE I:  PROHIBITED PARKING.



   No parking is permitted on the following streets:



   (A)   North of 167th Street.



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE




Beacon Court
 
Along the circular portion and south side of entrance
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Beacon Lane
 
 
South and east
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Bridgette Court
 
Along the circular portion and west side of entrance
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Dwight Court
 
Along the circular portion and south side of entrance
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Elm Street
 
 
South and west
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Fox Court
 
Except that parking is permitted on the west side of 160 feet running south
from 162nd Street
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Haven Avenue
 
From 159th Street to 163rd Street
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Haven Avenue at 170th Street to 170th Place
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


Hawthorne Lane
 
From the south stub to the stop sign for eastbound traffic
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Hawthorne Lane
 
From the stop sign for northbound traffic to 94th Avenue
 
North
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Hawthorne Lane
 
From 94th Avenue to Hunter Court
 
South
 
99-29
 
10-20-99


Herbert Court
 
Along any portion
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Hickory Court
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


Hobart 169th to 170th
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


Hunter Court
 
Along any portion except for the east side approach to the Court and the
recess in the south side of the island
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Leslie Drive
 
 
South and East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Lindsay Street
 
 
South
 
93-51   9-1-93
 


Marigold Place and Ridge Lane
 
Cul-de-sac
 
All sides
 
2000-14
 
7-19-00


Marilyn Court
 
Along the circular portion and west side of entrance
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


O'Brien Drive
 
Along the south and  east sides of O'Brien Drive and in that area on the
north side identified as a bus loading zone between the hours of 8:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on schooldays
 
North and West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


O'Brien Drive
 
 
 
89-27
 
9-13-89


O'Brien Drive
 
Between No Parking Handicap Access signs on each side of the driveway at
16618 O'Brien Drive
 
Both
 
93-41
 
6-16-93


Quail Court
 
Except that parking is permitted along the west side of the 220 feet running
north from 162nd Street, and is also permitted in the recessed area at the
north side of the center island
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Redwood Court
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


Sharon Court
 
Along the circular portion and west side of the entrance
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Westwood Court
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


Westwood Drive from 170th to 89th Avenue
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


88th Court
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


89th Court
 
Along the circular portion and west side
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


90th Avenue
 
From 159th Place to 160th Place
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


91st Avenue
 
From 159th Street to 159th Place
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


91st Avenue
 
From 159th Place to 160th Place
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


91st Avenue
 
From 160th Place to 161st Place
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


92nd Avenue
 
From 161st Place to 162nd Street
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


92nd Avenue
 
From 162nd Street to 163rd Street
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


92nd Avenue between 170th and 171st
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


93rd Avenue between 170th Avenue to 170th Place
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


159th Street
 
Along any portion
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


159th Place
 
Along any portion
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


160th Place
 
 
North
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


161st Place
 
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


162nd Street
 
From Haven Avenue To Hawthorne Lane
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


170th Place between 92nd and 93rd
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


170th Street between Hobart and 89th Avenue
 
No parking 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. when school is in session
 
Both
 
2000-17
 
8-16-00


 
 
 
 




 



   (B)   167th Street and south.



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.
 
DATE




Christopher Avenue
 
Along any portion
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Haven Avenue
 
From 167th Street to the south limit
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Haven Avenue
 
From 170th Street to 170th Place
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Haven Avenue
 
Meadowview to 167th Street
 
West
 
2003-017
 
9-3-03


Hickory Drive
 
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Hickory Court
 
Along the circular portion and west side of entrance
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Highview Avenue
 
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Hilltop Avenue
 
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Hobart Avenue
 
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Meadowview Drive
 
Marshfield to West boundary line of lot commonly known as 8989 Meadowview.
 
South
 
97-40
 
9-17-97


Meadowview Drive
 
Resident parking by permit only, between Haven Avenue and west lot line of
8989 Meadowview Drive.
 
South
 
97-40
 
9-17-97


Redwood Court
 
Along the circular portion and west side
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Redwood Court
 
From 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Vicky Lane
 
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Westwood Court
 
Along the circular portion and west side
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Westwood Drive
 
From 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on weekdays
 
North and east
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Westwood Drive
 
 
South and West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


Westwood Drive
 
From 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days
 
North and East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


88th Court
 
Along the circular portions at either end
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


88th Court
 
Both sections
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


88th Avenue
 
From 159th Street and 167th Place
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


88th Avenue
 
From 169th Place to 171st Street
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


89th Court
 
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


89th Avenue
 
From 167th Place and 169th Street
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


89th Avenue
 
From 169th Street and Westwood Drive
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


89th Avenue
 
From 169th Street and Westwood Drive from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. school days
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


90th Avenue
 
From 167th Street and 170th Street
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


91st Avenue
 
From 167th Street to south limit
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


92nd Avenue
 
From 167th Street to 169th Place
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


92nd Avenue
 
Between 169th Place and 171st Street
 
West
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


92nd Avenue
 
Between 170th Street and 167th Place from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on school
days
 
West
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


92nd Avenue
 
Between 170th Street and 171st Street from 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school
days
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


93rd Avenue
 
 
East
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


167th Street
 
From 96th Avenue and 94th Avenue
 
Both
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


167th Street
 
From 94th Avenue and 88th Avenue
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


167th Place
 
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


169th Street
 
 
North
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


169th Place
 
 
North
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


170th Street
 
From 89th Avenue to western limit
 
North
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


170th Street
 
From 88th Avenue to 89th Avenue
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


170th Street
 
Between 89th Avenue and 92nd Avenue from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days
 
South
 
91-02
 
2-13-91


170th Place
 
From 92nd Avenue to the western limit
 
North
 
91-02
 
2-13-93


170th Place
 
At Hobart, within 12 feet on a sidewalk.
 
West
 
97-14
 
5-21-97


 
 
 
 




 



Penalty, see § 73.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES



      91.   ANIMALS



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION



      93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      94.   NOISE CONTROL



      95.   NUISANCES



      96.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      97.   POLLUTION CONTROL



      98.   TREES



      99.   FAIR HOUSING



      100.   INSPECTION AND LICENSING OF RENTAL DWELLINGS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Abandonment of motor vehicle; nuisance



   90.03   Written notice to dispose of inoperable motor vehicle



   90.04   Notification by person upon temporary possession or custody
of vehicle; removal



   90.05   Removal by towing service; costs



   90.06   Record of towed vehicles to be maintained



   90.07   Identification of unknown owner through state records;
stolen vehicles



   90.08   Sale or disposal of vehicle



   90.09   Reclamation of vehicle by owner; report of transaction



   90.10   Disposition of proceeds from public sale



   90.11   Liability for damages



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of
disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition;
or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for
seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years of age
or older.



   HIGHWAY.  Any street, alley, or public way within the village.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle from which,  for a
period  of at least six months, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been
removed, or on which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered,
damaged, or otherwise treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power; but shall not include a motor vehicle which has
been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations nor to any motor
vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use, to historic
vehicles over 25 years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
business engaged in wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.02  ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE; NUISANCE.



   (A)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any
part thereof on any highway in this municipality is unlawful and subject to
penalties as set forth in this chapter.  The abandonment of a motor vehicle
or other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, other
than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in this municipality
is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned
vehicle.  A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned
on private property may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the
Chief of the Police Department of the municipality, after a waiting period of
seven days or more has expired.



   (B)   Inoperable motor vehicles, and abandoned vehicles, as defined
in § 90.01, whether on public or private property, are hereby declared to be
a nuisance.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  WRITTEN NOTICE TO DISPOSE OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.



   All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicles
under their control upon written notice received from the corporate
authorities of the village or from the Chief of Police, or any member of the
Police Department designated by him commanding such disposition of said
inoperable motor vehicle.  Failure to comply with said notice within 72
hours from receipt thereof shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  NOTIFICATION BY PERSON UPON TEMPORARY POSSESSION OR CUSTODY OF
VEHICLE; REMOVAL.



   When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this
state, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the
Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the
municipality.  Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of the Police
Department shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of
the abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. 
The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents,
maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any
other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed
of as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.05  REMOVAL BY TOWING SERVICE; COSTS.



   (A)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a
highway in this village, ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service
may be authorized by order of the Chief of the Police Department.



   (B)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard
because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance
is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by
a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of the Police
Department.



   (C)   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property
is authorized by order of the Chief of the Police Department, the owner of
the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.06  RECORD OF TOWED VEHICLES TO BE MAINTAINED.



   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away,
the Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the color, year of manufacturer, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, Vehicle Identification Number, and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle.  The record shall
also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed
to, reason for towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.07  IDENTIFICATION OF UNKNOWN OWNER THROUGH STATE RECORDS; STOLEN
VEHICLES.



   (A)   When the Police Department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a directed
communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.



   (B)   The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle
files of the State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the
State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle.  When the
State Police files are searched with negative results, the information
contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be
searched by the State Police.  The information determined from these record
searches will be used by the Police Department in sending a notification by
certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the
vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made, and setting forth public
sale information.



   (C)   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from
the registration files of this state or from the registration files of a
foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the State
Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.  The information obtained
by the State Police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement
agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of owner.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.08  SALE OR DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE.



   Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale
or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled
to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police
Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle.  No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under
this division until all towing and storage charges have been paid.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed
motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven years of age or newer, remains
unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its
possession for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided
herein, the Police Department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it
to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder.  Notice of the time and
place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten
days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been
impounded.  At least ten days prior to the sale, the Police Department shall
cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail
to the registered owner or other person known by the Police Department or
towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. 
Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold
and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the
vehicle.



      (2)   In those instances where the certified notification
specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police
Department due to the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address
obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required.



   (B)   (1)   When the identity of the registered owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed
vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or
disposed of in the manner authorized by the chapter without notice to the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle.



      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of
age is impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for
a minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining ownership, the
contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. Mail, public service, or in
person for a determination of disposition; and, an examination of the State
Police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information.  At the
expiration of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner, the Chief of Police
will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.



      (3)   A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an
antique vehicle is excluded from this chapter.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.09  RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE BY OWNER; REPORT OF TRANSACTION.



   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police
Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of
as provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained
by the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale
or disposal.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.10  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS FROM PUBLIC SALE.



   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of this village is
authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set
forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after
the deduction of towing, storage, and processing charges shall be deposited
in the municipal treasury.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.11  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator, or employee shall
not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, or
any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as
provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount
not exceeding $500.  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable
hereunder as such.



(Ord. 73-17, passed 8-7-73)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definition



   91.02   Harboring numerous animals



   91.03   Hunting



   91.04   Raising or slaughtering of poultry or animals



   91.05   Domestic animal defecation, urination



   91.06   Inoculations



   91.07   Care and treatment of animals



Licensing



   91.20   Licensed required



   91.21   Application for license



   91.22   License fees



   91.23   License tags; record; display



   91.24   Expiration and renewal



Running at Large; Impoundment



   91.35   Dogs running at large



   91.36   Releasing from owner's property



   91.37   Removal of collar or license tag or rabies tag prohibited



   91.38   Impoundment of dogs



Rabies Control



   91.50   Rabies inoculation; certificate



   91.51   Rabies tag to be attached to collar



   91.52   Animal bites; procedure



Dangerous Animals



   91.65   Dangerous animals defined



   91.66   Exhibition of dangerous animals



   91.67   License fee



Dangerous and Vicious Dogs



   91.80   Definitions



   91.81   Licensing of dangerous dogs



   91.82   Confinement of dangerous and vicious dogs



   91.83   Reporting requirements of licensee



   91.84   Sign required



   91.85   Fighting prohibited



   91.86   Impoundment of a dangerous dog running at large



   91.87   Impoundment of vicious dogs



   91.88   Revocation of license



   91.89   Exceptions



   91.90   Dog bites



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER.  Any person  that shall harbor or suffer or permit any dog or
cat  to be and remain at or about his farm, home, store, or other premises
in the village shall be held to be the owner of the same, and subject to the
penalties contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)



§ 91.02  HARBORING NUMEROUS ANIMALS.



   It is hereby declared a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to own, harbor, or keep more than five dogs, cats, or any combination
thereof.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, dogs or cats less than two months
old shall not be included in the number so harbored.  For purpose of this
section, each resident of a home of living unit shall be deemed to own, keep,
or harbor all dogs or cats living in or about the premises.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  HUNTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any animal
other than as prescribed by law, in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 8) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3- 65)  Penalty,
see § 91.99



§ 91.04  RAISING OR SLAUGHTERING OF POULTRY OR ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or raise any
cattle, hogs, sheep, or poultry, or any such animal which can be used for
food purposes, within 300 feet of any residence or school.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to slaughter or kill any poultry or fowl
or use any house, place, or building in which the business of slaughtering
such poultry or fowl may be carried on in the village, unless such house,
place, or building is not less than 300 feet from any residence or school.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  DOMESTIC ANIMAL DEFECATION, URINATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping, or in
charge of any dog, cat or other domestic animal or pet to cause, suffer, or
allow such animal to urinate, soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park, school grounds, or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon
any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 4-18-01)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  INOCULATIONS.



   All animals required to be inoculated by any state or county law or
regulation will be so inoculated.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 4-18-01)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  CARE AND TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.



   No owner or person shall cruelly treat, beat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse any animal. No owner of an animal shall fail to
provide such animal with sufficient and wholesome food and water, adequate
shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary care when necessary to
prevent suffering by any animal.



(Ord. 2017-008, passed 6-21-17)



LICENSING



§ 91.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog or cat which
is over four months of age which does not have a license for it issued by the
Village Clerk.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.21  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Applications for the license required herein shall be made not later
than 60 days after a person acquires a dog or cat four months old or older or
such animal shall attain the age of four months and within 60 days after
January 1 of each year for any animal required to be licensed on said date. 
Applications shall be made to the Village Clerk.  The applicant's name and
address and the name, breed, color, sex of each dog or cat owned or kept by
the applicant, and whether the animal has been neutered, castrated, or
spayed, shall be supplied to the Clerk.  The applicant shall also deliver to
the Clerk at the time of the application a currently valid rabies vaccination
certificate, completed by a duly registered veterinarian showing that such
animal has been inoculated for rabies, in compliance with this chapter, and
that such inoculation is providing, at the time of application, protection
from the disease.  Upon the foregoing information and certificate being
supplied, and the payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue the
license tag.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)



§ 91.22  LICENSE FEES.



   The license fees to be paid pursuant to this subchapter to the village
shall be $4 for each dog or cat annually.  In those cases where it is shown
by a certification from a licensed veterinarian that the animal has been
neutered, castrated, or spayed the annual fee shall be $2.50.  In the event
the owner of an animal shall be over the age of 65, the fee shall be $1 for
each animal annually.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)



§ 91.23  LICENSE TAGS; RECORD; DISPLAY.



   (A)   The Village Clerk shall provide, each and every year, such
number of metal cat or dog license tags as may be necessary (the shape and
color to be changed every year), having stamped thereon the year for which
the license fee is paid, the word "Orland Hills" with a sequential number on
each tag.  The Clerk shall keep a complete register in a book specially kept
for the purpose, of all licensed dogs and cats, describing the same by name,
breed, color, sex, and whether the animal has been neutered, castrated, or
spayed.  The register shall also show the name and address of the owner or
keeper, as given, and number of the village license tag.



   (B)   Every dog and cat shall be provided by its owner or keeper
with a collar made of metal, leather, or other substantial material, to which
the dog or cat license tag will be securely fastened; no dog or cat shall be
permitted to remain within the limits of the village unless the owner or
keeper thereof shall have caused the dog or cat to be licensed as herein
provided and provided with such collar and tag.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76) Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.24  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.



   All dog and cat licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
Renewal licenses shall be obtained and displayed no later than February 1 of
each year.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)



RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT



§ 91.35  DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any dog to run at large in the village and any
such dog may be impounded and disposed of by the Police Department as
provided herein.  Whoever shall knowingly suffer or permit any dog owned or
possessed by him to run at large shall be guilty of an offense.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.36  RELEASING FROM OWNER'S PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to untie, take, or release any dog
or cat from the enclosure or premises of its owner or keeper without the
consent of such owner or keeper.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.37  REMOVAL OF COLLAR OR LICENSE TAG OR RABIES TAG PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without consent of the owner or
keeper, to remove the required collar or license or rabies tag from any dog
or cat for which the village animal license has been paid.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.38  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.



   (A)   Any dog found in the village running at large in violation of
this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be impounded by
the Police Department as herein provided.



   (B)   The owner of any dog impounded hereunder may redeem the same
by paying all the costs, fees, and penalties assessed, if any, that have
accrued up to the time of making the redemption.  When the same are paid to
the Police Department the dog shall be released and delivered to the owner
thereof, upon proper evidence of ownership and upon exhibiting a current,
duly issued license tag for such dog or a receipt for the payment of fees for
such license tag.



   (C)   Immediately after impounding any dog hereunder, it shall be
the duty of the Police Department to enter upon the record of the pound in a
book to be kept by him for such purpose the date of impounding, a description
of the animal impounded, and tagged as required by this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to cause notice
to be served by mail upon the registered owner of any licensed dog impounded
under the provisions of this section, such notice to be mailed at least two
days prior to the posting of the notice of impounding hereinbefore provided.



   (E)   A fee of $15 to offset the cost of picking up the dog will be
assessed.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76; Am. Ord. 80-04, passed - -80)



RABIES CONTROL



§ 91.50  RABIES INOCULATION; CERTIFICATE.



   It shall be unlawful for any resident dog or cat owner or any person
having charge of a dog or cat over the age of four months within the limits
of the village not to cause such animal to be inoculated against rabies by
the county rabies inspector, his deputy, or by any licensed veterinarian. 
Evidence of such inoculation shall consist of a certificate signed by the
person administering the vaccine.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76) Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.51  RABIES TAG TO BE ATTACHED TO COLLAR.



   Every cat and dog shall be provided by the owner or keeper with a
leather or chain collar, to which a rabies tag will be securely fastened. 
No cat or dog shall be permitted to remain within the limits of the village
unless the owner or keeper thereof shall have caused such animal to be
inoculated and provided with such collar and rabies tag.  Any owner or
keeper of a dog or cat failing to provide such collar and tag shall be guilty
of an offense.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76) Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.52  ANIMAL BITES; PROCEDURE.



   Whenever any dog or cat bites or scratches a person, the owner of said
dog or cat shall immediately notify the Chief of Police who shall order the
animal held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded for a period
of ten days.  The owner of said animal shall cause the animal to be examined
by a licensed veterinarian on the first, fifth, and tenth day following the
biting incident.  If at the end of the ten-day period the veterinarian
determines the animal has symptoms of rabies, it shall be destroyed and the
head sent to the State Department of Health for examination for rabies.  If
at the end of ten days, a veterinarian is convinced that the animal is then
free from rabies the animal shall be released from quarantine or from the
pound as the case may be.  Any expense incurred in handling of any animal
under this section shall be borne by the owner or keeper.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)



DANGEROUS ANIMALS



§ 91.65  DANGEROUS ANIMALS DEFINED.



   As used herein a dangerous animal means a lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot,
jaguar, cheetah, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, bear, hyena, wolf, coyote,
alligator, crocodile, or any poisonous reptile, or any other animal whose
possession or ownership requires a Class C Exhibitors License from the United
States Department of Agriculture.



(Ord. 97-36, passed 8-20-97)



§ 91.66  EXHIBITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or display any dangerous
animal in the village without first obtaining a license from the village not
less than five days before the exhibition or display. No person shall receive
a permit the village without proof of a valid Class C Exhibitors License
issued by the United States Department of Agriculture.



(Ord. 97-36, passed 8-20-97)



§ 91.67  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee to be paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be $150
per day provided that no license shall be issued for any period in excess of
five days.



(Ord. 97-36, passed 8-20-97)



DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS



§ 91.80  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BITE.   To seize and cut with the teeth.



   CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE.   A securely locked pen, kennel, structure or
fence capable of containing a dangerous or vicious dog and shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to prevent the animal's escape and prevent the
entry of children. Such pen, kennel, structure or fence must have secure
sides and any gaps or spaces present in the structure must not allow the dog
to escape or place its head through such gap or space. All structures used to
confine a dangerous or vicious dog must be securely locked when such an
animal is within the structure. Any fence used to contain a dangerous or
vicious dog must have a minimum height of six feet. All structures erected to
house a dangerous or vicious dog must comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the village. All structures must be adequately lighted,
ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



   DANGEROUS DOG.   Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled,
unleashed, or unattended by its owner or keeper:



      (1)   Approaches any person in a vicious or terrorizing manner
with an apparent attitude of attack upon a street, sidewalk, or any public
grounds or place; or



      (2)   Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of
dogfighting or is a dog trained for dogfighting.



   This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement
officers in the performance of their duties.



   FIGHT.   A prearranged conflict between two or more animals, but does
not include a conflict that is accidental.



   K-9 PATROL DOG OR POLICE DOG.   A professionally trained dog used by
law enforcement officers for law enforcement purposes and activities.



   LEASH.   A cord, chain, rope, strap or other physical restraint having
a tensile strength of not less than 300 pounds.



   MUZZLE.   A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal
muzzle. The MUZZLE must be made in a manner which will not cause injury to
the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from
biting any person or animal.



   NIP.   To pinch or squeeze with the teeth with no breaking of skin or
tissue.



   RUNNING AT LARGE.   The failure to confine a dangerous dog in
accordance with § 91.82.



   VICIOUS DOG.



      (1)   Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites
or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property.



      (2)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals.



      (3)   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic
and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked
attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular
manner or with special equipment.



      (4)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a
"dangerous dog" upon three separate occasions.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.81  LICENSING OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   No person shall possess any dangerous or vicious dog for a
period of more than 48 hours without having first obtained a license for the
dog from the village.



   (B)   An application for a license to possess a dangerous or vicious
dog shall be filed with the Village Clerk on a form prescribed and provided
by the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by all of the following:



      (1)   Verification of the identity of the owner and current
address by providing a copy of the owner's driver's license;



      (2)    Proof of ownership of the dog;



      (3)    A copy of the current immunization and health record of
the dog prepared by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of
Illinois;



      (4)   Two photographs of the dog to be licensed taken not less
than one month before the date of the application. One photograph shall show
a front view and one photograph shall show a side view of the dog;



      (5)   An annual licensing fee of $25; and



      (6)   Such other information as may be required by the village.



   (C)   Upon receipt of any application, the Village Clerk shall
forward such application to the Police Department, or that village employee
designated by the President to perform the duties of animal control, who
shall inspect the premises on which the dog shall be kept to determine that
all provisions of this section relating to confinement and posting of signs
have been complied with by the applicant. Upon completion of the inspection,
the Police Department shall notify the Village Clerk in writing of the
results of its inspection.



   (D)   Upon receipt of the results of the Police Department
inspection, the Village Clerk shall notify the applicant of the approval or
denial of the license.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.82  CONFINEMENT OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   No person shall possess any dangerous dog unless the dog is
confined in accordance with this section.



      (1)   Confinement indoors. No dangerous or vicious dog may be
kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would
allow the dog to exit the structure on its own.



      (2)   Confinement in an exterior yard. No person shall confine
a dangerous or vicious dog in an exterior area unless the dog is confined in
a confinement structure constructed and maintained in accordance with this
section.



      (3)   Confinement on leash. No person shall permit a dangerous
or vicious dog to go outside a confinement structure, house or other
structure unlessthe dog is securely restrained with a leash no longer than
three feet in length and fitted with a muzzle. No person shall permit a
dangerous or vicious dog to be kept on a leash unless a person is in physical
control of the leash. No leash restraining a dangerous or vicious dog shall
be attached to any inanimate object, including, but not limited to, trees,
posts, stakes and buildings.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.83  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEE.



   Any person holding a license pursuant to this section shall report the
incidence of any of the following events, except division (E) of this
section, to the Police Department:



   (A)   The sale, barter, exchange, gift or death of any dangerous or
vicious dog shall be reported within 48 hours;



   (B)   The escape from confinement or theft of any dangerous or
vicious dog shall be reported upon discovery of the escape or theft;



   (C)   The biting or nipping of any person or animal by a dangerous
or vicious dog shall be reported upon occurrence;



   (D)   The birth of any offspring of a dangerous or vicious dog shall
be reported within 48 hours of the birth of the offspring; and



   (E)   The permanent removal of any dangerous or vicious dog from the
territorial limits of the village shall be reported within 48 hours of such
removal by surrender of the license of the owner to the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.84  SIGN REQUIRED.



   All persons possessing a dangerous dog shall display in a prominent
place on the premises where the dog is to be kept a sign, which is legible
from a distance of not less than 100 feet, stating "BEWARE OF DOG". A similar
sign shall be posted on any confinement structure.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.85  FIGHTING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall fight or bait, conspire to fight or bait, or keep,
train or transport for the purpose of fighting or baiting any dog.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.86  IMPOUNDMENT OF A DANGEROUS DOG RUNNING AT LARGE.



   Any dangerous dog as defined in § 91.80 found to be running at large
by any member of the Police Department shall be presumed to be in violation
of this section and shall be subject to impoundment and transported to a
humane facility for the keeping of dogs. The owner of a dangerous dog may
redeem the dog from the shelter if permitted by state law, but the dog shall
not be kept in the village until any and all fines with respect to violation
of this section are paid and a new license is approved and issued.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.87  IMPOUNDMENT OF VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any
dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times
kept indoors or in a confinement structure as defined in § 91.80. The only
times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are:



      (1)   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care for the dog; or



      (2)   To comply with the order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a
leash having a tensile strength of not less than 300 pounds and not exceeding
three feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision
of the owner or keeper of the dog.



   (B)   Any dog which is a vicious dog as defined in § 91.80 and
which is not found indoors or within a confinement structure shall be
impounded and transported to a humane facility for the keeping of dogs. The
owner of the vicious dog may redeem the animal from the shelter if permitted
by state law, but the dog will not be allowed in the village and any license
issued to the owner shall be revoked.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.88  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be automatically
revoked upon any violation by the licensee of any provision contained in this
section. Upon revocation, the owner shall be required to remove the dog from
the village. In the event of a revocation of the license, the village shall
retain the licensing fee.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.89  EXCEPTIONS.



   Sections 91.80 through 91.88  shall not apply to any K-9 patrol dogs
or police dogs as defined in § 91.80.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.90  DOG BITES.



   No person shall permit or allow a dog in his or her possession or
control to bite a person or another animal. A person shall be held strictly
liable for any bite inflicted by a dog in his or her possession or control.



   (A)   First offense. A person shall be fined $100 the first time a
dog in his or her possession or control bites a person or another animal.
Additionally, that dog shall have to wear a muzzle as required by the village
at all times.



   (B)   Second offense. A person shall be fined $250 the second time a
dog in his or her possession or control bites a person or another animal. If
the dog is not wearing a muzzle as required in division (A) of this section,
the fine shall be increased to $500.



   (C)   Third offense.  A person shall be fined $500 the third time a
dog in his or her possession or control bites a person or another animal. If
the dog is not wearing a muzzle as required in division (A) of this section,
the fine shall be increased to $1,000. Additionally, that dog will no longer
be allowed on any properly owned or controlled by the village.



   (D)   Any person who owns or controls a dog that is required to wear
a muzzle, as described in division (A) of this section, but is not wearing
the required muzzle, shall be fined $500 per offense. Additionally, any
person who owns or controls a dog that is prohibited from being present on
property owned or controlled by the village (as described in division (C) of
this section), but is present on such property, shall be fined $500 per
offense.



   (E)   In the event the Administrative Hearing Officer deems any dog
to be dangerous or vicious as defined in the definitions of § 91.80, then
the animal must wear a muzzle at all times while outdoors. If such dog is not
wearing the muzzle as required by the Administrative Hearing Officer, fines
will be set in accordance with divisions (A) through (D) above.



(Ord. 2010-003, passed 5-5-10)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 76-26 A, passed  - -76)



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Combustible refuse



   92.02   Bonfires



   92.03   Outdoor grills



Fire Prevention Code



   92.15.1   Fire Prevention Code - adoption by reference



   92.15.2   Sprinkler systems



   92.16   Carbon monoxide alarm detectors



   92.17   Fire alarm monitoring and supervision



Fireworks



   92.20   Licensing requirements for fireworks displays



   92.21   Notification to fire department or fire protection district



   92.22   Generally



   92.23   Transfer



   92.24   Fees



 



   92.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Air pollution, see §§ 97.01 through 97.04



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE.



   It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such
a way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw away any refuse of any
kind in any alley, street, or other public place in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 11) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6- 3-65)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.02  BONFIRES.



   It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to any
building or other structure as to endanger such building or structure, or on
any street or sidewalk pavement.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 12) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



Cross-reference:



   Open burning, see § 97.04



§ 92.03  OUTDOOR GRILLS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   GRILL.  Any device, whether fired by charcoal, propane,
natural gas, electricity, or other combustible matter, whose primary purpose
and design is to cook food out-of-doors.



      (2)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  Any building designed for
residential occupation by more than two families.



      (3)   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, or organization of any kind.



   (B)   The use of any grill, by any person, at any multiple-family
dwelling, whether used upon a patio, porch, stoop, deck, or upon any other
outdoor area within 15 feet of the dwelling is hereby prohibited.



(Ord. 83-18, passed  - -83) Penalty, see § 92.99



Cross-reference:



   Charcoal fires, see § 97.04(B)



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 92.15.1  FIRE PREVENTION CODE - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village hereby adopts the 2015 International Code Council's (ICC)
I-Codes, including Building, Residential, Fire, Mechanical, Fuel Gas, Energy
Conservation, Private Sewage Disposal, Performance, Property Maintenance,
Zoning and Existing Building Code; and the 2017 National Electrical Code of
the National Fire Protection Association.



(Ord. 76-6, passed  - -76; Am. Ord. 79-06, passed 3-28-79; Am. Ord. 92-03,
passed 1-22-92; Am. Ord. 92-29, passed 7-22-92; Am. Ord. 99-09, passed
3-3-99; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06; Am. Ord. 2010-013, passed
12-15-10; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 1-18-17) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.15.2  SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   Automatic sprinkler systems and electrically supervised fire alarm
systems are not required in single family detached dwellings.



(Ord. 2010-013, passed 12-15-10; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 1-18-17)



§ 92.16  CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM DETECTORS.



   (A)   Definitions.  The following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them for the purposes of this section.



      (1)   APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM.  A carbon monoxide
alarm that complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of
the Illinois State Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized
testing laboratory, and complies with the most recent standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories of the Canadian Standard Association.



      (2)   DWELLING UNIT.  A room or suite of rooms used for human
habitation, and includes a single- family residence as well as each living
unit of a multi-family residence and each living unit in a mixed use building.



   (B)   Carbon monoxide detector.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one
approved carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be
combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit is an
approved carbon monoxide alarm and provided that the combined unit emits a
warning in a manner that clearly differentiates the hazard.



      (2)   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling
unit shall contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating
condition within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.



      (3)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to
supply and install all required carbon monoxide alarms. It is the
responsibility of a tenant to test and to provide general maintenance for the
carbon monoxide alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit or rooming unit, and
to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing of any
deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The owner is responsible for
providing one tenant per dwelling unit with written information regarding
carbon monoxide alarm testing and maintenance.



      (4)   The tenant is responsible for replacement of any
required batteries in the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling
unit, except that the owner shall ensure that the batteries are in operating
condition at the time the tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The
tenant shall provide the owner or the authorized agent of the owner with
access to the dwelling unit to correct any deficiencies in the carbon
monoxide alarm that have been reported in writing to the owner or the
authorized agent of the owner.



      (5)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this section
may be either battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or wired into
the structure's AC power line with secondary battery back-up.



   (C)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to install
or maintain a carbon monoxide alarm as required by this section.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with,
remove, destroy or disconnect any installed carbon monoxide alarm.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries
from an installed carbon monoxide alarm except for the purposes of
contemporaneously replacing such batteries.



   (D)   Exemptions.  The following residential units shall not
require carbon monoxide detectors:



      (1)   A residential unit in a building that: does not rely on
combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; is not
connected in any way to a garage; and is not sufficiently close to any
ventilation source of carbon monoxide, as determined by the Building
Commissioner, to receive carbon monoxide from that source.



      (2)   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any
source of carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide
from that source, as determined by the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 2007-004, passed 1-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.17  FIRE ALARM MONITORING AND SUPERVISION.



   All new fire suppression, detection and protective signaling systems
installed within the Village of Orland Hills shall be monitored by the remote
supervisory station as indicated by the Village of Orland Hills as the AHJ,
in accordance with NFPA 72. All existing fire suppression, detection and
protective signaling systems installed within the Village of Orland Hills
shall be monitored by the remote supervisory station as indicated by the
Village of Orland Hills as the AHJ, in accordance with NFPA 72.



(Ord. 2014-005, passed 9-17-14)



FIREWORKS



§ 92.20  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREWORKS DISPLAYS.



   As used in this subchapter the term FIREWORKS shall mean and include
any explosive composition, or any substance or combination or substances, or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of
a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or
detonation and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which
explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to
propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles,
sparklers, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing
any explosive substance or containing combustible substances producing visual
effects; provided, however, that the term FIREWORKS shall not include toy
pistols, toy cannons, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing .025 grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing
they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap
when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which
contain less than .020 grains of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which
shall be permitted at all times.



(Ord. 2006-014, passed 6-21-06)



§ 92.21  NOTIFICATION TO FIRE DEPARTMENT OR FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT.



   The fire department or fire protection district servicing the site at
which a fireworks display is to be conducted shall be notified not less than
15 days prior to the date of the display for which a permit has been issued
hereunder. The notice shall include a list of the fireworks to be used and
shall state the qualifications of the person conducting the display.



(Ord. 2006-014, passed 6-21-06)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.22  GENERALLY.



   Permits for supervised public displays of fireworks shall hereafter be
granted under the following rules and regulations:



   (A)   Every display of fireworks shall be supervised by a competent
person who is licensed as a lead pyrotechnic operator by the State of
Illinois, or in the absence of state licensing regulations, qualified under
standards of a nationally recognized fireworks or fire safety association and
approved by the fire department or fire protection district providing
coverage to the area of display. Every such display shall be of such a
character and so located, discharged or fired by the person named in the
application for a permit as not to be hazardous to property or endanger
person or persons; the display shall be not nearer than 500 feet of any
residence and spectators must be separated from the display by suitable
barrier. Indoor pyrotechnics displays are prohibited.



   (B)   Single-event, one day permits may be granted hereunder to any
group of three or more adult individuals applying therefore.



   (C)   Multi-event, one year permits may be granted hereunder to any
qualified person, firm or corporation for a fireworks display on behalf of
any professional, semi-professional or amateur sporting organization that
holds regularly scheduled sporting events at an established outdoor sporting
facility. Sporting facilities includes but may not necessarily be limited to
baseball, football, polo or soccer fields, race tracks, and golf courses.
Every such permit shall name both the person, firm or corporation conducting
the display and the sponsoring organization.



   (D)   Application for permits for supervised public displays of
fireworks shall be made in writing to the village at least 15 days in advance
of the date of the display.



   (E)   Application for a permit shall state the full name and address
of each applicant; the date and exact location of the site where the display
will be conducted and in the case of a single-event, one day permit, two
alternate dates on which said display may be conducted in case of
cancellation due to inclement weather and in the case of a multi-event, one
year permit the schedule of sporting events shall be provided; the name and
address of the owner of the site at which the display is to take place; a
statement that the display will be conducted in strict adherence to the
village's ordinances and regulations pertaining to public displays of
fireworks and to state and federal laws pertaining to the use of fireworks;
the name and address of the person supervising the display and all persons
who will handle the display; the name and address of the fire department or
fire protection district servicing the site at which the display is to be
conducted, and such other relevant information as the village may reasonably
require.



   (F)   A multi-event, one year permit shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner
revoked and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntary or involuntary, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but shall expire upon the death of the licensee.  A
multi-event, one year permit may be revoked by the village upon good cause
shown. Notwithstanding any language herein to the contrary, all multi-event,
one year permits shall expire on May 1st of each year.



   (G)   Every applicant shall file with the application for a permit a
certificate of an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the
State of Illinois certifying that it has issued to or for the benefit of the
applicant and the named person conducting the display a liability policy or
policies covering any liability for money damages thereafter incurred by said
persons resulting from the conduct or operation of the fireworks display for
which a permit is issued hereunder in the amount of at least $100,000 not
less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury to or death of any person and $500,000
for bodily injury to or death of two or more persons and $100,000 for damage
to property conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of state law and
the regulations of the State Fire Marshal adopted hereunder.



   (H)   Every permit shall be issued only after inspection of the
display site by the issuing officer, to determine that such display shall be
in full compliance with the regulations and rules of the State Fire Marshal,
and in compliance with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1123
guidelines for outdoor displays and shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person or persons. In addition to the regulations and
requirements of this code, every applicant for permit shall comply with the
regulations of the fire department or fire protection district servicing the
site where the fireworks will be displayed.



   (I)   Fireworks or pyrotechnics display may be conducted under the
supervision of the chief of the applicable fire department or fire protection
district, or his or her designee, who is authorized to suspend or terminate
the display if adverse conditions arise from the improper handling or
discharge of fireworks, crowd conditions, or adverse weather conditions.



(Ord. 2006-014, passed 6-21-06)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.23  TRANSFER.



   Permits issued hereunder are not transferable.



(Ord. 2006-014, passed 6-21-06)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.24  FEES.



   A nonrefundable fee of $100 shall be paid by the applicant to the
village at the time of the filing of each application for a single event, one
day permit hereunder. A nonrefundable fee of $1,500 shall be paid by the
applicant to the village at the time of the filing of each application for a
multi-event, one year permit. The applicant shall also pay any required fees
by the applicable fire department or fire protection district.



(Ord. 2006-014, passed 6-21-06)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of Chapter 92
shall be fine not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.  Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   A violation of § 92.15(F) and (G) is punishable by a fine of
not more than $25.  Each day that the violation continues may be deemed a
separate punishable offense.



(Ord. 92-29, passed 7-22-92)



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any
provision of §§ 92.20 through 92.24 shall be fined not less than $500 for
each offense, in addition to any penalties provided by state law.



(Ord. 2006-014, passed 6-21-06)



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Establishment of unwholesome businesses



Excavations and Open Foundations



   93.15   Materials excavated from construction site



   93.16   Open foundations; barriers



Dumping Upon Public and Private Property



   93.25   Dumping prohibited



   93.26   Nuisance condition



Rat Control



   93.35   Rats a health hazard



   93.36   Removal notice



   93.37   Abatement procedure; costs



   93.38   Lien



Composting



   93.50   Definition



   93.51   Maintaining compost piles; procedure



   93.52   Restricting certain materials; permitted ingredients



   93.53   Responsibility of owner



   93.54   Registration



Smoking Restrictions



   93.70   Smoking restrictions



   93.71   Smoking allowed



   93.72   Required signs



   93.73   Smoking prohibitions



   93.74   Encouraged voluntary participation



 



   93.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to establish or conduct any packing
plant, slaughterhouse, rendery, tallow chandlery, soap factory, glue factory,
tannery, or any offensive or unwholesome business within the village or
within one mile of the limits thereof.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 16) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)  Penalty,
see § 93.99



EXCAVATIONS AND OPEN FOUNDATIONS



§ 93.15  MATERIALS EXCAVATED FROM CONSTRUCTION SITE.



   Material excavated from a construction site may remain on that
construction site, notwithstanding the provisions of § 93.25, providing that
construction work is continuing.  If construction work is halted for 30 days
or more, the excavated debris must be leveled or removed in accordance with
§ 93.25.



(Ord. 86-11, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.16  OPEN FOUNDATIONS; BARRIERS.



   An open foundation or excavation site is regarded as an attractive
nuisance, and will only be permitted providing that construction work is
continuing.  If construction work is halted for 30 days or more, the
foundation or excavation must be enclosed by a protective barrier, such as a
fence, acceptable to the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 86-11, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 93.99



DUMPING UPON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 93.25  DUMPING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall dump, deposit, place,
leave, or cause to remain any debris, garbage, abandoned or discarded
property, dirt, fill, building materials, or other materials of any nature
upon any public or private real property within the village, except when such
is being used for the filling, back filling, leveling, grading, construction
upon, or landscaping of that real estate upon which a permanent building has
been or is being constructed, or except within an enclosed area designed for
such purpose upon real estate which is zoned to permit such a use.



   (B)   When such material or debris is being used for the filling,
back filling, leveling, grading, or landscaping of real estate, the material
must be leveled and graded to the top of any foundation located on the lot;
or to curb level if no foundation exists, or to a grade established by the
village.  This leveling must occur within 72 hours of the original deposit
of the material.  These regulations do not affect construction excavations
as regulated in § 93.15.



(Ord. 76-29, passed  12-8-76; Am. Ord. 86-11, passed - -86)  Penalty, see
§ 93.99



§ 93.26  NUISANCE CONDITION.



   Any debris, garbage, abandoned or discarded property, dirt, fill,
building materials, or material of any other nature dumped, deposited, or
allowed to remain upon any public or private real estate within the village,
except when such is being used for the filling, back filling, leveling,
grading, construction upon, or landscaping of that real estate upon which a
permanent building has been or is being constructed, or except within an
enclosed area designed for such purpose upon real estate which is zoned to
permit such a use, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the same may be
removed, buried, spread, or otherwise abated by the Village President or the
Board of Trustees, or such other person as he may from time to time designate.



(I.R.S. Chapter 24, § 11-20.13) (Ord. 76-29, passed  12-8-76)



RAT CONTROL



§ 93.35  RATS A HEALTH HAZARD.



   Any lot, tract of land, or structure found to harbor or provide ingress
to rats in the village is hereby declared to be a health hazard, and it shall
be unlawful to permit this condition to exist in any such place.



(Ord. 76-29, passed  12-8-76) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.36  REMOVAL NOTICE.



   The village shall serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner
or occupant of any premises found to harbor or provide ingress to rats in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter and to demand the
extermination of the rats and the elimination of the means of ingress within
five days.



(Ord. 76-29, passed  12-8-76)



§ 93.37  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE; COSTS.



   If the person so served does not exterminate the rats and eliminate the
means of ingress within five days, the village may proceed to exterminate, or
cause to have exterminated, such rats, and eliminate, or cause to have
eliminated, such means of ingress, keeping an account of the expense of such
extermination and elimination, and such expense shall be charged and paid by
such owner or occupant.



(Ord. 76-29, passed  12-8-76)



§ 93.38  LIEN.



   Charges for extermination of rats and elimination of means of ingress
shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other existing
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens if within 60 days after such cost
and expense is incurred.  The village or person performing the service by
authority of the village, in his own name, shall file notice of lien in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the real estate is
located or in the office of the Registrar of Titles of such county if the
real estate affected is registered under the Torrens system.  The notice
shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real
estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money
representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and
the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village. 
The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages
or mechanics' liens.  Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within
one year after the date of filing notice of lien.



(Ord. 76-29, passed  12-8-76)



COMPOSTING



§ 93.50  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPOSTING.  A biochemical process where an organic material is
gradually decomposed under controlled conditions to form a humus-like
material that can be used for soil conditioning.



(Ord. 92-10, passed 5-13-92)



§ 93.51  MAINTAINING COMPOST PILES; PROCEDURE.



   All compost piles shall be maintained using approved composting
procedures to comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   All compost piles shall be enclosed in a free- standing bin. 
Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than 100 cubic feet, and shall
be no taller than four feet.



   (B)   All compost piles shall be so maintained as to prevent the
attraction or harborage of rodents and pests.  The presence of rodents in or
near a compost pile shall be cause for the Building Department to proceed
under §§ 93.35 through 93.38.



   (C)   All compost piles shall be so maintained as to prevent
unpleasant odors.  Compost piles containing hors manure or fruits shall be
kept covered, except when turning.



   (D)   No compost pile shall be located in any yard except as
follows:  In a rear yard not less than three feet from all lot lines, nor
closer than 20 feet from any dwelling unit.



(Ord. 92-10, passed 5-13-92)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.52  RESTRICTING CERTAIN MATERIALS; PERMITTED INGREDIENTS.



   (A)   No compost piles shall contain any of the following:



      (1)   Lake weeds.



      (2)   Cooked food scraps.



      (3)   Fish, meat, or other animal products.



      (4)   Manures other than horse manure.



   (B)   Permitted ingredients shall include:



      (1)   Yard waste.



      (2)   Raw vegetables and fruit scraps of four inches.



      (3)   Horse manure.



      (4)   Commercial compost additives.



(Ord. 92-10, passed 5-13-92)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.53  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   Every owner or operator shall be responsible for maintaining all
property under his or her control in accordance with the requirements of this
section.



(Ord. 92-10, passed 5-13-92)



§ 93.54  REGISTRATION.



   All residents who maintain a compost pile must register their compost
pile with the village on a form approved by the village.



(Ord. 92-10, passed 5-13-92)  Penalty, see § 93.99



SMOKING RESTRICTIONS



§ 93.70  SMOKING RESTRICTIONS.



   The "Cook County Clean Indoor Air Ordinance," adopted by the Cook
County Board of Commissioners on March 15, 2006, is hereby declared to be
inoperative in the village pursuant to Article VII, Section 6(c) of the
Illinois Constitution.



(Ord. 2006-030, passed 12-20-06)



§ 93.71  SMOKING ALLOWED.



   Notwithstanding Section 4 of the Cook County Clean Indoor Air
Ordinance, smoking in all public places and places of employment is hereby
declared to be legal in the village, subject only to such restrictions as
existed under federal law, the Illinois Clean Indoor Air Act and city
ordinances prior to the enactment of Cook County Ordinance 06-0-12.



(Ord. 2006-030, passed 12-20-06)



§ 93.72  REQUIRED SIGNS.



   Any commercial establishment, within the corporate boundaries of the
village, which chooses to allow and/or permit smoking on their premises, is
required to have affixed on the doors to their establishment, which are used
by the public, a sign of at least four inches square, with letters of at
least one-half inch in height, clearly written in the English language,
notifying potential patrons that smoking is allowed on the premises, and to
enter at their own risk.



(Ord. 2006-030, passed 12-20-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.73  SMOKING PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Smoking is prohibited in all publicly owned buildings or
within ten feet of an entrance to such building, except in any open air
patio, veranda, balcony or the like.



   (B)   Smoking is prohibited in all buildings used for the purpose of
educating children, any of whom are under the age of 18 years, or within ten
feet of an entrance to such building.



(Ord. 2006-030, passed 12-20-06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.74  ENCOURAGED VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION.



   The village strongly encourages all commercial establishments to
consider the value of voluntarily participating in the prohibition of smoking
in their establishments.



(Ord. 2006-030, passed 12-20-06)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person convicted of violating any provision of Chapter 93 shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.  Each day that
a violation existing shall constitute separate and distinct offense.



CHAPTER 94:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   94.01   Declaration; purpose



   94.02   Loud or unnecessary noises



   94.03   Enumeration of acts resulting in noise



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DECLARATION; PURPOSE.



   It is found and declared that:



   (A)   The making and creation of loud, unnecessary, or unusual
noises within the limits of the village is a condition which has existed for
some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing;



   (B)   The making, creation, or maintenance of such loud,
unnecessary, unnatural, or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual, and
unnatural in their time, place, and use affect and are a detriment to public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the
residents of the village; and



   (C)   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of
legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that
the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity and the peace and quiet
of the village and its inhabitants.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76)



§ 94.02  LOUD OR UNNECESSARY NOISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be
made or continued any distinctly and loudly audible noise, unnecessary or
unusual noise which, at any hour either annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others, within the
limits of the village.  The creation of any noise as aforesaid between the
hours  of 11:00  p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such a manner as to be distinctly
and plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this chapter and shall be declared a nuisance.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76) Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  ENUMERATION OF ACTS RESULTING IN NOISE.



   The following acts, among others, may result in the creation of such a
distinctly and loudly audible noise or an unnecessary or unusual noise so as
to create a violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive, namely:



   (A)   Horns, signaling devices, and the like.  The sounding of any
horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on
any street or public place of the village, except as a danger warning; the
creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.  The use of any signaling device except one
operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle, or other
device operated by engine exhaust; the use of any such signaling device when
traffic is for any reason held up.



   (B)   Radios, phonographs, and the like.  The using, operating, or
permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than
is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the
room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who
are voluntary listeners thereto.



   (C)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising.  The using,
operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier,
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.



   (D)   Shouting and the like.  Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing so as to create distinctly and loudly, audible noises
upon the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or
other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.



   (E)   Animals, birds, and the like.  The keeping of any animal or
bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.



   (F)   Steam whistles.  The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle
or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of
the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon
request of proper authorities.



   (G)   Exhausts.  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.



   (H)   Defect in vehicle or load.  The use of any automobile,
motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.



   (I)   Loading, unloading, or opening boxes.  The creation of a loud
and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.



   (J)   Construction or repairing of buildings.  The erection
(including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair  of any  building
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except
in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety,
and  then only  with a permit from the Building Inspector, which permit may
be granted for a  period not to  exceed three days or less while the
emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days
or less while the emergency  continues.  If the  Building Inspector should
determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the
erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation
of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if
he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any
party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time
the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.



   (K)   Schools, courts, churches, or hospitals.  The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any
hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such
institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital,
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the
same is a school, hospital, or court street.



   (L)   Hawkers and peddlers.  The shouting or crying of peddlers,
hawkers, and vendors, which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood
by creating an unlawful noise as previously defined.



   (M)   Drums.  The use of any drum or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show, or sale.



   (N)   Metal rails, pillars and columns, or transportation thereof. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other
material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays,
cars, trucks, or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as
to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.



   (O)   Motor vehicles.  The running of the engine of a motor vehicle
while the vehicle is stationary or in motion in such a manner as to create a
noise prohibited by this chapter.



   (P)   Pile drivers, hammers, and the like.  The operation between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the
use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76) Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less
than $25 nor exceeding $500.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76; Am. Ord. 86-11, passed - -86)



CHAPTER 95:  NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Definition



   95.02   Abatement of nuisance required



   95.03   Deposit of grass and rubbish prohibited in public streets



   95.04   Snow and ice removal from public sidewalks and placement of
snow and ice on the public right-of-way



   95.05   Storm sewer, channel and stream dumping



Weed Control



   95.15   Weeds declared a nuisance



   95.16   Removal notice



   95.17   Costs of removal



   95.18   Lien



 



   95.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  The following acts shall constitute a PUBLIC
NUISANCE:



      (1)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any
offal, filth, or noisome substance to be collected, deposited, or to remain
in any place, to the prejudice of others.



      (2)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter,
or the carcass of any dead animal, in any water course, lake, pond, spring,
well or common sewer, street or public highway.



      (3)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private
ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying places.



      (4)   To erect, continue, or use any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells, or otherwise, is offensive
or dangerous to the health of individuals, or of the public.



      (5)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of
the same on, or affixing them to fences or other private property, or on
rocks or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in
the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the municipal authorities of any incorporated city, town, or village
from declaring what shall be nuisances, and abating them within their limits.



      (6)   To permit discarded machinery and materials, inoperative
automobiles or trucks, accumulations of broken concrete, or any other
material which is offensive physically to the census to remain on any
property within the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 1) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3- 65)



§ 95.02  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit or
maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property under his control. 
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to abate any such nuisance existing
in the village, whether such nuisance is specifically recognized by ordinance
or not.



('65 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 1) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3- 65)  Penalty,
see § 95.99



§ 95.03  DEPOSIT OF GRASS AND RUBBISH PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to dump or
deposit, or cause to be dumped or deposited any grass, leaves, branches, or
any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public street in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 19) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6- 3-65)  Penalty,
see § 95.99



§ 95.04  SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC SIDEWALKS AND PLACEMENT OF SNOW
AND ICE ON THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Snow and/or ice removal from public sidewalks adjacent to
owners property shall be the responsibility of the property owners.



   (B)   No person shall cause or permit the shoveling, plowing,
dumping, throwing, pushing or depositing of snow, ice or seasonal debris from
private property, public property or from the driveway or public sidewalk
onto the street area.



   (C)   Snow and/or ice may be deposited on the parkway right-of-way
grass area, adjacent to single- family homes, providing said snow and/or ice
does not create a vision problem at intersection or driveway opening onto the
street.



(Ord. 95-40, passed 11-15-95)  Penalty, see § 95.99(C)



§ 95.05  STORM SEWER, CHANNEL AND STREAM DUMPING.



   (A)   The deliberate or unintentional disposal of grass clippings,
brush, fill, trash, debris, obstructions, unwanted materials or pollutants
into the storm sewers or within detention basins or along banks of man-made
or natural water courses or in adjacent floodplain areas which may wash into
channels, streams, storm sewers or detention basins is unlawful.



   (B)   Power and authority of inspectors. The Chief of Police or
Building Commissioner or their designee employee of the village shall be
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation and measurement, in accordance with the provisions of this
section.



(Ord. 95-41, passed 11-15-95)  Penalty, see § 95.99(D)(1)



WEED CONTROL



§ 95.15  WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, poison
oak, poison ivy, or other weeds of a like kind and all weeds exceeding eight
inches  in height  found growing in  any lot  or tract of land in the
village are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76) Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.16  REMOVAL NOTICE.



   It shall be the duty of the village to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner of any premises on which weeds or plants are permitted
to grow in violation of the provisions of this subchapter demanding the
removal, or cutting, of such weeds within ten days from the date of such
notice.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76)



§ 95.17  COSTS OF REMOVAL.



   If a person so served does not remove or cut such weeds within any
ten-day period the village may proceed to remove, or cut such weeds keeping
an account of the expense of the removal, or cutting, and such expense shall
be charged to and paid by such owner.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76)



§ 95.18  LIEN.



   Charges for weed cutting shall be a lien upon the real estate affected,
superior to all other liens and encumbrances except tax liens; provided that
within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred, the village, or the
person performing the service by authority of the village, in his own name,
files notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in
which such real estate is located or in the office of the Registrar of Titles
of such county if the real estate affected is registered under the Torrens
system.  The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service, and the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
village.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation permitting and maintaining a
nuisance as set forth in §§ 95.01 and 95.02, in addition to any other
remedy or penalty herein set forth, shall be fined not less than $1 nor more
than $100 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each and every day during or on which a violation occurs  or is permitted to
continue.



('65 Code, Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 3) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of § 95.15 through 95.18 shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which such nuisance continues after ten
days from receipt of notice.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12- 8-76)



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any or all of the
provisions of § 95.04 shall be fined not less than $25 no more than $100 for
each offense, each day or portion of a day thereof shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense in the event such violation continues. 



(Ord. 95-40, passed 11-15-95)



   (D)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any or all
of the provisions of § 95.05 shall be served by the Village Chief of Police
or Building Commissioner or their village employee designee with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing ten days for the
satisfactory correction thereof.  The offenders shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.



      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in § 95.05 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $25 no
more than $100 for each offense, each day or portion of a day thereof shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense in the event such violation
continues.



(Ord. 95-41, passed 11-15-95)



CHAPTER 96:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Hours when park closed



   96.03   Use of park in violation of posted notices prohibited



   96.04   Permit to be produced upon request by officer



Prohibited Acts



   96.15   Interfering with park employees



   96.16   Erection of unauthorized signs



   96.17   Sale of articles or services



   96.18   Weapons



   96.19   Throwing missiles



   96.20   Fires



   96.21   Tampering with park equipment, facilities, or property



   96.22   Damaging trees and plants



   96.23   Climbing upon park property



   96.24   Removal of materials; excavations



   96.25   Throwing substances in or polluting park waters



   96.26   Boating; swimming



   96.27   Depositing refuse and waste



   96.28   Hunting; fishing



   96.29   Animals running at large



   96.30   Driving, parking in park



   96.31   Loitering



   96.32   Alcoholic beverages



   96.33   Drugs



   96.34   Disturbing the peace



   96.35   Begging



   96.36   Concerts; electrically amplified instruments



   96.37   Assemblies; demonstrations



   96.38   Erecting permanent or temporary structures



   96.39   Interfering with occupation of park by others



 



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Parks and Recreation Commission, see §§ 32.030 through 32.035



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD.  The President and Board of Trustees of the village.



   PARK.  Any playfield, playground, tot lot, lake, ice skating rink,
drainage system retention area, open area, building, parts thereof, or other
facility, and the materials and equipment therein owned, leased, or in use by
the village.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, group, association,
corporation, governmental unit, company, or organization of any kind, except
police officers of the village and its employees and Board Members while said
employees and Board members are engaged in the performance of village duties.



   VEHICLE.  Any motor powered conveyance, including off-road vehicles
(O.R.V.), mini-bikes, go- carts, and snowmobiles, but not including
conveyances in use by the village.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80)



§ 96.02  HOURS WHEN PARK CLOSED.



   No person shall enter any park between dusk and dawn, except when so
authorized to do so by the Board of Trustees, or except when attending an
authorized meeting or other activity being held in a park building or
departing therefrom.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  USE OF PARK IN VIOLATION OF POSTED NOTICES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall enter a park or part thereof posted as "Closed to the
Public", nor shall any person use or abet the use of any such park or part
thereof in violation of posted notices.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  PERMIT TO BE PRODUCED UPON REQUEST BY OFFICER.



   No person issued a permit by the Board of Trustees shall fail to
produce the permit and exhibit it upon request of a police officer.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



PROHIBITED ACTS



§ 96.15  INTERFERING WITH PARK EMPLOYEES.



   No person shall hinder, interfere with, or cause or threaten to do
bodily harm to any employee of the village while such employee is engaged in
performing his duties in and on behalf of the village.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.16  ERECTION OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.



   No person shall paste, glue, tack, or otherwise affix or post any sign,
placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatever on any structure or thing in a park, except as
authorized by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.17  SALE OF ARTICLES OR SERVICES.



   No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor
shall any person station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the
transportation, sale, or display of any such article or thing in any park,
except a regularly licensed concessionaire or other person acting under an
official permit of the Board of Trustees; nor shall any person within any
park or on its borders announce, advertise, or call public attention in any
way to any article, or service for sale or hire.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.18  WEAPONS.



   No person shall bring or have in his possession, or set off or
otherwise cause to explode or discharge any gun, B-B gun, bow and arrow,
air-powered rifle, pistol, revolver, cracker, torpedo, rocket, squib, or
other fireworks, or explosives of inflammable materials, including any
substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other
substance or compound could cause injury to human or animal life, in any park.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.19  THROWING MISSILES.



   No person shall throw or propel any stone, brick, bottle, or other
missiles not designed for recreational purposes and being used therein or
upon any park.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.20  FIRES.



   No person shall light, build, or attempt to light or build a fire in
any park except in such areas of a park and under such regulations as may be
designated by the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.21  TAMPERING WITH PARK EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES, OR PROPERTY.



   No person shall deface, disfigure, break, cut, tamper with, or displace
or remove in or from any park, any buildings or part thereof, any table,
bench, fireplace, coping, lamp post, fence, wall, paving or paving material,
water line or other public utility, parts, or appurtenances thereof, or any
sign, notice, or placard whether temporary or permanent, equipment,
facilities, or other park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real
or personal.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.22  DAMAGING TREES AND PLANTS.



   No person shall damage, cut, carve, uproot, or injure any tree or
injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant in any
park; not shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any
tree or plant, in any park, nor shall any person in any other way injure or
impair the beauty or usefulness of any park.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.23  CLIMBING UPON PARK PROPERTY.



   No person shall climb any tree nor climb, walk, stand, or sit upon any
wall, building, fountain, fence, or railing in any park, nor upon any other
park property not designed for such purpose.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.24  REMOVAL OF MATERIALS; EXCAVATIONS.



   No person shall remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, plants,
timber, or other wood or materials from any park nor make any excavation by
tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency within any park, except
as authorized by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.25  THROWING SUBSTANCES IN OR POLLUTING PARK WATERS.



   No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or
drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid, or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution or the hindrance of the use
of said waters.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.26  BOATING; SWIMMING.



   No person shall boat, raft, swim, wade, or otherwise enter any waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to
any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such
water.



(Ord. 80-09, passed 8-13-80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.27  DEPOSITING REFUSE AND WASTE.



   No person shall bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, fill, boxes, manure, cans, dirt, rubbish, or waste in
the park.  Refuse from material consumed in a park must be deposited in
receptacles provided therefor.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.28  HUNTING; FISHING.



   (A)   No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap,
chase, tease, shoot, or throw stones, rocks, or other missiles at any animal
or bird in any park, nor shall any person remove or have in his possession a
bird, wild animal, or the eggs or nest of any bird or wild animal in any
park, with the exception that fishing is permitted in designated areas.



   (B)   Fishing will not be allowed without a village issued permit. 
The Village Board of Trustees from time to time, shall establish permit fees
and restrictions necessary to protect the village fishery and surrounding
lands.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80; Am. Ord. 82-03, passed - -82)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.29  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   No person shall leave or allow to run loose upon park premises any
animal.  All animals are to be held by a suitable line, chain, or strap in
areas where animals are allowed.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.30  DRIVING, PARKING IN PARK.



   (A)   No person shall bring, drive, use, or ride in any park, a
vehicle which has not been  licensed by the state, nor shall any person
bring, drive, use, or ride any vehicle in any park except where authorized by
the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle in any park, except upon
paved roads, parking areas, or other areas designated for such purposes and
only then in accordance with posted signs as to speed, direction, parking,
stopping, lane markings, and traffic controls.



   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle in any park, driveway, or
parking area of a park between dusk and dawn, unless attending an authorized
meeting or other activity in a park building nor shall any person leave any
vehicle anywhere in a park more than 24 hours because of mechanical failure,
nor shall any person fail to notify the Village Police Department and obtain
the services of a tow truck for any vehicle that has failed to function
within one hour of such failure.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.31  LOITERING.



   No person shall enter into, loiter, or remain in any toilet, rest room,
pavilion, or structure, or section thereof, of any park which has been
reserved and designated by the Board of Trustees for the use of the opposite
sex.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.32  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   No person shall bring within, sell, or give away, or drink alcoholic
beverages at any time in any park except as permitted by the Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.33  DRUGS.



   No person shall bring within, sell, use, or give away any drugs (as
defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 1 et seq., and known as the "Cannabis
Control Act" which act is hereby incorporated herein by reference as if
specifically set forth), nor shall any person be under the influence of said
drugs or cannabis while upon park property.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.34  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   No person shall make, aid, or countenance or assist in making any loud
or raucous noise, riot, or disturbance tending to a breach of the peace in
any park, or collect, with other persons in bodies or crowds for unlawful
purposes.  No person shall use abusive, insulting, or obscene language or
language calculated to occasion a breach of the peace in any park.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.35  BEGGING.



   No person shall beg or solicit any alms or any contributions in any
park.  Nor shall any person solicit, collect any donations, or charge any
fees for any service, whether private or public, except fees as charged by
the park and approved by the Board of Trustees, without first having obtained
a written permit from the Board.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.36  CONCERTS; ELECTRICALLY AMPLIFIED INSTRUMENTS.



   No person shall conduct any musical concert, play any electrically
amplified instrument, nor set up or use any communication system in a park
without first obtaining a written permit from the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.37  ASSEMBLES; DEMONSTRATIONS.



   No person shall hold or attempt to hold any meeting, assembly,
demonstration, celebration, parade, rally, religious worship, or any
sponsored entertainment, social, recreational, or athletic event without
first obtaining a written permit from the Board of Trustee.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.38  ERECTING PERMANENT OR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.



   No person shall construct or erect any building, tent, or structure of
whatever kind in any park, whether permanent or temporary in character, or
string any public service utility into, upon, or across any park, without
first having obtained a written permit from the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.39  INTERFERING WITH OCCUPATION OF PARK BY OTHERS.



   No person shall disturb or interfere with any person or party occupying
any park under the authority of a permit.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80) Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any clauses or provisions of any section of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25 for each offense upon conviction
thereof.



(Ord. 80-05, passed  - -80)



CHAPTER 97:  POLLUTION CONTROL



Section



Air Pollution



   97.01   Smoke emission limits



   97.02   Sources in excess of limitations; nuisance



   97.03   Failure to comply



   97.04   Open burning



Smoking



   97.15   Definition



   97.16   Smoking at public meetings prohibited



 



   97.99   Penalty



AIR POLLUTION



§ 97.01  SMOKE EMISSION LIMITS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   RINGELMANN CHART.  As published and described in the
U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888, and on which are illustrated
graduated shades of gray to black for use in estimating the light obscuring
capacity of smoke, shall be standard for determining the appearance, density,
or shade of smoke.  Observations of smoke emissions under this subchapter
shall be made by comparing the observed density of smoke with the Ringelmann
Chart numbers. Where the density of the smoke as observed falls between two
consecutive Ringelmann numbers, the lower Ringelmann number shall be
considered the density of the smoke observed.



      (2)   SMOKE UNITS.  The number obtained by multiplying the
density of the smoke observed so determined in Ringelmann Numbers by the time
of emission in minutes.  For the purpose of this calculation, a Ringelmann
density reading shall be made at least once every minute during the period of
observation:  and each reading shall be multiplied by the time in minutes
during which it is observed.  The various products thus obtained shall be
added together to give the total number of SMOKE UNITS observed during the
total period under observation.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful within the village, for any person owning
or in charge of any fuel burning, combustion, or process equipment or device,
or portable boiler, or open fire, to cause, suffer, or allow the emission or
discharge of smoke from any single such source into the atmosphere except in
conformity with the limits set forth in the following table:



 


Smoke Emission Maxima



 
Ringelmann Number*
 
Class I
 
Class II
 
Class III
 
Class IV


 
 

Minutes per 60 Minutes



Operation
 
4,5
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0




 
3
 
0
 
0
 
2
 
6


 
2
 
8
 
8
 
12
 
25


 
1
 
60
 
60
 
60
 
60


Units per 60 minutes
 
 
60
 
68
 
76
 
97


Building new fires, banking, and cleaning fires, soot blowing, and process
purging
 
4,5
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0


 
3
 
4
 
6
 
6
 
6


 
2
 
8
 
12
 
40
 
60


 
1
 
60
 
60
 
60
 
60


Units per 60 minutes
 
 
72
 
84
 
112
 
126


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 

Frequency



Building new fires, cleaning or banking fires, soot blowing, or process
purging
 
 
Once daily one time per six hours
 
Once daily one time per six hours
 
No specification one time per two hours
 
No specification two times per two hours


 
 
 
 
 


*Ringelmann number smoke unit as defined above.
 
 
 
 
 




 



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76) Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.02  SOURCES IN EXCESS OF LIMITATIONS; NUISANCE.



   Any emission of smoke, particulate matter, or other matter from any
single such source in excess of the limitations established in or pursuant to
§ 97.01, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be
summarily abated by the Health Officer of the village.  Such abatement may
be in addition to the administrative proceedings, fines, and penalties
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76) Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.03  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   Failure of any person as owner or agent, operator, member of any
operating crew, engine person, firefighter, janitor, or in any other
capacity, to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter and shall be subject to the fines and penalties
as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76) Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   No person shall hereafter burn, set fire to, or cause to be
burned any grass, leaves, twigs, or other combustible material whatsoever,
within the corporate limits of the village.



   (B)   Carefully controlled fires of charcoal or similar material,
within containers specifically designed for the cooking of food, are exempt
from the prohibition of open outdoor burning within the village.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76; Am. Ord. 86-11, passed - -86) Penalty, see §
97.99



Cross-reference:



   Bonfires, see § 92.02



   Outdoor grills, see § 92.03



SMOKING



§ 97.15  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SMOKE or SMOKING.  The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar,
or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or the
lighting or emitting or exhaling of the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette
of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment.  SMOKE  also means a
gaseous producta and particles created by the use of a lighted pipe, cigar or
cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment.



(Ord. 93-19, passed 4-6-93)



§ 97.16  SMOKING AT PUBLIC MEETINGS PROHIBITED.



   Smoking is prohibited in any enclosed room, chamber, or place of
meeting or public assembly located within a public building or structure
owned by the village in which public, civic, or governmental business or
recreational programming is being conducted and which is open to members of
the general public either as participants or spectators.



(Ord. 93-19, passed 4-6-93)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of chapter shall be fined not more than
$500 for each offense.  Every day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76)



CHAPTER 98:  TREES



Section



General Provisions



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Arborist's license; bond



   98.03   Memorial tree planting program



   98.04   Interference with tree board while performing duties
prohibited



Standards; Care and Maintenance



   98.15   Street tree species to be planted



   98.16   Size



   98.17   Spacing



   98.18   Distances



   98.19   Utilities



   98.20   Public tree care



   98.21   Pruning



   98.22   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property



Village Tree Board



   98.35   Establishment



   98.36   Term of office



   98.37   Compensation



   98.38   Duties and responsibilities



   98.39   Operation of Board



   98.40   Review by Board of Trustees



 



   98.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the village, or
to which the public has free access as a park or recreation area.



   STREET TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation
on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues,
or ways within the village.



(Ord. 86-19, passed - -86)



§ 98.02  ARBORIST'S LICENSE; BOND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within
the village without first applying for and procuring a license.  No license
shall be required of any public service company or village employee doing
such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors.  Before any
license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of
possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000 for
bodily injury and $100,000 property damage indemnifying the village of any
person injured or damage resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as
described in this chapter.



(Ord. 86-19, passed - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.03  MEMORIAL TREE PLANTING PROGRAM.



   (A)   The village shall cooperate with individuals or groups wishing
to donate a tree to be planted on public lands, within the village, to
memorialize a deceased person.  The tree should provide a tribute to the
departed and also a benefit to the village as a whole.  The species should
be compatible with the location and shall be of such size and type as to have
a reasonable chance for survival.  The planting site for such trees will be
primarily in parks and tot lots, however, other publicly owned land may also
provide a suitable site.



   (B)   The program shall consist of:



      (1)   The planting of a donated tree on village property.



      (2)   The inscription of the name, the year of birth and death
of the deceased on the village maintained plaque.



      (3)   The platting of the location of the tree on the village
maintained map, identifying the species of tree and the donor.



      (4)   A letter of appreciation being sent to the donor.



   (C)   The application shall be completed by the donor.  A suitably
sized tree of an appropriate species, and the location for the tree will be
decided upon with the assistance and concurrence of the villages' memorial
tree planting coordinator.  Arrangements will be made between the donor and
the village with regard to purchase and pick-up of the tree and donator's
participation in planting, if so desired.



   (D)   The village shall be responsible for the planting and
maintenance of the tree.  If the tree is guaranteed by a nursery, that
information shall be recorded.  Should the tree die it will be the
responsibility of the village to obtain a replacement through the guarantee
or otherwise, at no additional cost to the donor.



(Ord. 86-01, passed 3-12-86)



§ 98.04  INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD WHILE PERFORMING DUTIES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Village Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and
about planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any
street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this
chapter.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



STANDARDS; CARE AND MAINTENANCE



§ 98.15  STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.



   The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the
village. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as
street trees without written permission of the Village Tree Board:



   (A)   Large size trees (over 45 feet, mature height):



   *Acer freemanii - Autumn Blaze Freeman Maple



   *Acer freemanii - Scarlet Sentinel Freeman Maple



   *Acer platanoides - Norway Maple



   Celtis occidentalis - Hackberry



   *Gleditsia triacanthos - Thornless Honeylocust



   Gymnocladus dioicus - Kentucky Coffeetree



     (male only)



   Platanus x acerifolia - London Planetree



   Quercus bicolor - Swamp White Oak



   Quercus imbricaria - Shingle Oak



   Quercus macrocarpa - Bur Oak



   Quercus robur - English Oak



   Quercus shumardii - Schumard Oak



   Tilia cordata - Littleleaf Linden



   Tilia platyphyllos - Bigleaf Linden



   Tilia tomentosa - Silver Linden



   (B)   Medium size trees (30 - 45 feet, mature height):



   Acer campestre - Hedge Maple



   Carpinus betulus - Hornbeam (European)



   Gingko biloba - Gingko   (male only)



   Ostrya virginiana - Hophornbeam (American)



   Prunus sargentii - Sargent Cherry



   *Pyrus calleryana - Callery Pear (not Bradford)



   (C)   Small size trees (under 30 feet, mature height):



   Acer platanoides `Globosum' - Globe Norway



     Maple



   *Amelancher spp. - Serviceberry



   *Cornus Kousa - Dogwood Kousa



   Crataegus crusgalli - Cockspur Hawthorn



     (thornless)



   *Malus spp. - Flowering Crabapple



   *Morus alba - Mulberry



   Prunus virginiana - Chokecherry



   Syringa reticulata - Japanese Lilac



*Cultivars subject to review by the Village Tree Board



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86; Am. Ord. 95-24, passed 10-18-95; Am. Ord.
2008-005, passed 3-5-08) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.16  SIZE.



   Street trees provided as a public improvement under § 156.54(G)(2),
shall be at least 2-½ inch calliper, six inches above grade level at time of
planting.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.17  SPACING.



   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three
species size classes listed in § 98.15.  Trees shall be spaced as
follows:  Small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50
feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by the Village Tree
Board.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.18  DISTANCES.



   (A)   The distance trees may be planted from curb or curblines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in
§ 98.15, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following:  Small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large
trees, four feet.



   (B)   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any
street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curblines.  No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any
fireplug.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.19  UTILITIES.



   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in §
98.15(A) may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead
utility wire.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.20  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain,
and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets,
avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds.



   (B)   The Village Tree Board may recommend to the Village Board of
Trustees to remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof
which is in an  unsafe condition  or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water  lines, or
other public improvements, or is affected  with any  injurious fungus,
insect, or other  pest.  This  section does not prohibit the planting of
street tress by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and
location of said trees is in accordance with §§ 98.15 through 98.18.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.21  PRUNING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to
top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.  Severe
pruning is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy or disfigure the tree.  Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted
from this division at the determination of the Village Tree Board.



   (B)   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street right-of-way
within the village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the
surface of the street or sidewalk.  Said owners shall remove all dead,
diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public.  The village shall have the right to
prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the
proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes
with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign, or interferes with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.22  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the village when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the village.  The
Village Tree Board will notify in writing the owners of such trees.  Removal
shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the
date of service of notice.  In the event of failure of owners to comply with
such provisions, the village shall have the authority to remove such trees
and charge the cost of removal as a lien on the property.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86)



VILLAGE TREE BOARD



§ 98.35  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created and established a Village Tree Board which
shall consist of five members all of whom shall be residents of the
Village.  All appointments to the Tree Board shall be made by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.  In the
event the Board of trustees fails to consent to an appointment, the Village
President may make a temporary appointment until such time as the Board of
Trustees consents to an appointment.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86; Am. Ord. 93-56, passed 11-3- 93)



§ 98.36  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the five persons to be appointed shall be three years
except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first Tree Board
shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first Board
shall be two years.  In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term
of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of
the term.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86)



§ 98.37  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86)



§ 98.38  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate,
counsel, and develop or update annually, and administer a written plan for
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, and disposition
of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas.  Such
plan will be presented annually to the Village Board of Trustees and upon
their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive
city tree plan for the village.  The Tree Board, when requested by the
Village Board of Trustees, shall consider, investigate, make findings,
report, and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the
scope of its work.  The Tree Board shall meet a minimum of four times each
year, or more frequently as needed.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86)



§ 98.39  OPERATION OF BOARD.



   The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings.  A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86)



§ 98.40  REVIEW BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The Village Board of Trustees shall have the right to review the
conduct, acts, and decisions of the Village Tree Board.  Any person may
appeal from any ruling or order of the Village Tree Board to the Village
Board of Trustees who may hear the matter and make final decision.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $100.



(Ord. 86-19, passed  - -86)



CHAPTER 99:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   99.01   Policy adopted by reference



§ 99.01  POLICY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The village fair housing policy, being Ordinance 93-18, passed 4-6-93,
and all subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein.



CHAPTER 100:  INSPECTION AND LICENSING OF RENTAL DWELLINGS



Section



   100.01   Definitions



   100.02   License requirements



   100.03   License application



   100.04   Inspection by village



   100.05   Certificate of occupancy



   100.06   Revocation or denial of license or certificate of occupancy



 



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person designated by the village as being
responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.



   DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling or the part of a rental dwelling that is used
as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons who maintain a
household, together with the common areas, land and appurtenant buildings
thereto, and all housing services, privileges, furnishings and facilities
supplied in connection with use or occupancy thereof, including garage and
parking facilities.



   MANAGER. The person managing a rental dwelling on behalf of the owner.



   OWNER. One or more persons, corporations, partnerships, limited
liability company or any other entity jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to a rental dwelling, or all or part of the
beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of a rental
dwelling.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association or any other legal or commercial entity.



   RENTAL DWELLING. A means a building containing one to ten dwelling
units.



(Ord. 2018-002, passed 2-21-18)



§ 100.02  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No building shall be operated as a rental dwelling unless the
owner or landlord of such building holds a current, unrevoked license issued
by the village, in his, her, or its name for the specific rental dwelling.



   (B)   Every license shall be issued in January for a period of one
year unless sooner revoked and may be renewed for successive annual periods.
Licenses issued during the year will be prorated accordingly by the Building
Department.



   (C)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner or
manager has first made application therefor on an application form provided
by the village. The initial application for a license shall be filed with the
village within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. The
village's Building Department shall organize and schedule the timing of the
inspection on an annual basis that allows for continual annual inspections.



   (D)   The village's Building Official is hereby authorized to
investigate and to issue licenses and renewals in the names of owners or
managers of rental dwellings. No license shall be issued unless the rental
dwelling, in connection with which the license is sought, is found after
inspection by the Building Official or his or her designee, to meet the
applicable requirements of this chapter. Each applicant shall be notified by
the village in advance of the date and time of such inspection.



   (E)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the completed
application form is accompanied by payment of an annual license fee. The
annual fee for licenses for rental dwellings shall be $200 per dwelling unit.
No inspection fee shall be charged for any owner-occupied unit.



   (F)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant has
first designated an agent for the receipt of service of complaints for any
violation of the provisions of any of the village's codes, and for service of
process for all notices, complaints and lawsuits that may be filed in
connection with the rental dwelling. Such designation shall be made in
writing and shall accompany each application form.



   (G)   An application for renewal of a license shall be made 30 days
prior to the expiration of the present license.



   (H)   Each license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within
the rental dwelling. Every person holding a license shall give notice in
writing to the Building Official within five days after having transferred or
otherwise disposed of the legal control of any rental dwelling. Such notice
shall include the name and address of the person or persons acquiring control
of the rental dwelling.



(Ord. 2018-002, passed 2-21-18)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Each applicant for a license to maintain a rental dwelling
shall file a written business license application with the village stating:



      (1)   The full legal name, address and home and work telephone
numbers of each and every legal and beneficial owner.



      (2)   The address of the rental dwelling.



      (3)   A statement by the owner that service by regular mail
upon the owner at the address stated in the application will be considered
sufficient service for all purposes.



   (B)   All license fees shall be due and payable at the time the
license application is filed. All licenses shall expire on the first annual
anniversary, next after the date of issue.



   (C)   (1)   Each license application shall be accompanied by a
fee of $200 per single-family dwelling unit and for each dwelling unit
contained in any rental dwelling. If an application for a renewal of an
existing license is received after the expiration of the existing license,
the license fee shall be increased to $250 per dwelling unit.



      (2)   The fee includes an annual inspection and one
re-inspection if necessary. If more than one reinspection per dwelling unit
is required, the fee for each re-inspection shall be $100 per re-inspection
per dwelling unit.



   (D)   Whenever there is a change in the ownership of a rental
dwelling or a change in the owner's manager, the owner shall, within 15 days
of such change, file a written notice with the village indicating such change
including the name and address of the new manager and/or new owner.



   (E)   Application for license renewal shall be made in the same
manner as a new application except that the application shall state that it
is for renewal.



(Ord. 2018-002, passed 2-21-18)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.04  INSPECTION BY VILLAGE.



   (A)   Each rental dwelling and each dwelling unit shall be subject
to inspection for compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations.
Upon passing a successful inspection, each dwelling unit will be issued a
certificate of occupancy by the Building Department. A license shall be
denied if the rental dwelling or dwelling unit has been inspected and is not
in compliance with any applicable ordinance or regulation. In such a case,
the licensee may apply for a conditional license.



   (B)   Initial and subsequent annual licensing inspections shall
include the exterior, common areas, basement of the rental dwelling and the
individual dwelling units.



   (C)   The owner or manager will be given at least 30 days’ notice
by regular mail prior to any inspection being conducted. Upon receipt of the
notice of inspection, the owner or manager shall notify the tenants, on a
form provided by the village, of the date and time of the inspection by
either placing the completed form under or on the door of the dwelling unit
at least 72 hours prior to the inspection. The form shall contain a
certification that the owner or manager has served the notice as set forth in
this division (C). Each notice shall inform the occupant of their right to
refuse to consent to the inspection and to require the village to obtain an
administrative search warrant.



   (D)   If any owner, manager, tenant or other person in control of a
rental dwelling or a dwelling unit fails or refuses to consent to free access
and entry to the rental dwelling or dwelling unit for any inspection pursuant
to this chapter, the Building Official may apply to the circuit court for an
administrative warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such
inspection. Such an application shall not be a waiver of the village's right
to seek other remedies pursuant to this chapter.



   (E)   When a licensing inspection reveals any violation, a time
period for compliance shall be set by the Building Official in accordance
with the village code. The Building Official shall send notice of the
violations and the compliance period to the owner or the manager by regular
U.S. mail at the address provided on the most recent license application. The
notice shall include the following:



      (1)   Identification of the property.



      (2)   A statement listing the violations and applicable codes
sections.



      (3)   The time period for compliance.



      (4)   An explanation that if all violations have not been
corrected within the compliance time period the license is subject to
revocation and/or nonrenewal.



   (F)   A licensing re-inspection will be conducted at the request of
the owner or manager.



   (G)   The Building Official shall, prior to entering an occupied
building, give the owner or manager a reasonable opportunity to be present
during the inspection. Unless otherwise specified in a court order or
warrant, the Building Official will not inspect or search any personal
property of the occupant. The Building Official will fully consider the
privacy and dignity of the occupant and will not enter or open closets,
medicine cabinets or the other closed cabinets or lockers unless the
inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that to do so would establish
evidence of a code violation. If an occupant desires to be present for an
inspection and it would result in an unusual hardship for that occupant to be
present during regular village business hours, the Building Official shall
attempt to conduct the inspection at a time reasonably convenient to the
occupant.



   (H)   (1)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect
any property, no entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of
a warrant from the circuit court, the court may consider any of the following
factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision
as to whether a warrant shall issue:



         (a)   Eyewitness account of any violations.



         (b)   Citizen complaints.



         (c)   Occupant complaints.



         (d)   Plain view violations.



         (e)   Violations apparent from village records.



         (f)   Property deterioration.



         (g)   Age of property.



         (h)   Nature of alleged violation.



         (I)   Similar properties in the area.



         (j)   Documented violations of similar properties in the
area.



         (k)   Passage of time since last inspection.



         (l)   Previous violation on the property.



      (2)   Cause of issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist
in light of reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show
that there is reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with
respect to a particular rental dwelling in violation of a village ordinance.



(Ord. 2018-002, passed 2-21-18)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.05  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of any dwelling
unit to lease a dwelling unit without having first tendered to the lessee a
valid license for the dwelling unit.



   (B)   The village does not guarantee the condition of any rental
dwelling or dwelling unit and is not responsible for any claims arising out
of the condition of a rental dwelling or dwelling unit.



(Ord. 2018-002, passed 2-21-18)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.06  REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Whenever, upon inspection of a rental dwelling or dwelling
unit for an initial license or renewal of a license, the Building Official
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or of any applicable provisions of this code, or
of any applicable rules or regulations, the Building Official shall serve the
owner or manager with notice of such violation or violations. Such notice
shall state that unless the violations cited are corrected within a
reasonable time of not less than seven days, except for emergency situations,
the license may be suspended or revoked.



   (B)   At the end of the time the Building Official has allowed for
correction of any violation cited, the Building Official shall reinspect the
rental dwelling or dwelling unit and if he or she determines that such
conditions have not been corrected, he or she may issue an order suspending
the license to take effect five days following service upon the owner or
manager unless, in the interim, the owner or manager requests, in writing, a
hearing.



   (C)   Any person whose license for a rental dwelling or dwelling
unit is subject to suspension pursuant to a suspension order shall be
entitled to a hearing on the suspension action by filing with the Village
Clerk, a written request for a hearing by the Village Administrator within
five business days following the receipt of the suspension order. Upon
receipt of said request, a hearing shall be scheduled to be held by the
Village Administrator at a date not more than ten business days thereafter.
Upon completion of the hearing, the Village Administrator may either:



      (1)   Confirm the suspension; or



      (2)   Suspend the suspension and allow additional compliance
time; or



      (3)   Rescind the suspension.



   (D)   If no petition for reconsideration of a suspension order is
filed as provided in division (C) above, then the suspension order shall
remain in effect until the violations in question have been corrected, as
determined by the Building Official upon inspection of the rental dwelling or
dwelling unit.



   (E)   In the event a license is suspended, and such suspension is
affirmed after hearing, if any, during the period of suspension:



      (1)   No existing rental agreement shall be renewed, and no
new rental agreement shall be entered into with respect to the rental
dwelling or dwelling unit that is the subject of the inspection.



      (2)   The village shall have the right to seek enforcement of
any other applicable law.



(Ord. 2018-002, passed 2-21-18)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $750. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 2018-002, passed 2-21-18)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS



      111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      112.   AMUSEMENTS



      113.   FOOD



      114.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      115.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Licenses required



   110.03   Contractors registrations required



   110.04   Vending machines and amusement devices



   110.05   Issuance of licenses and registrations and their terms



   110.06   Conditions barring the issuance of a license or registration



   110.07   Fee



   110.08   Revocation and suspension



   110.09   Application for license



   110.10   Initial license application expense



   110.11   Investigations, rejection, or approval of applications for
license



   110.12   Persons ineligible for license



Hearing Procedure



   110.20   Application of regulations



   110.21   Initiation of hearing



   110.22   Hearing process



   110.23   Pleadings



   110.24   Date of hearing



   110.25   Finding and decision



   110.26   Violations



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AREA, OR SQUARE FOOTAGE.   The gross horizontal areas of each floor of
the building and all exterior, above ground, storage (not parking) and
display areas and accessory structures. Where there are multiple tenants,
these secondary spaces shall be defined as that area leased or rented by the
tenant.



   COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT.   Any for-profit business,
including but not limited to: food service, retail, wholesale, manufacturing,
service, sales offices, and model homes. Governmental (including political
campaign headquarters), not-for-profit, religious, home occupations,
educational, public recreational or other similar uses will not be licensed.



   CONTAINER.   Any container, box, crate or vessel used for the storage
of merchandise (new or used), used for the storage of waste or used for the
storage of other goods or materials.



   CONTAINER SIZE.   The approximate volume of the container determined
by the measurements of the top length, top width and height (length x width x
height) of the container.



   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. The supervising contractor and/or the construction
manager.



   LANDLORD.   Any person who is engaged in the business of renting land,
buildings, or any portion of a building or dwelling unit(s).



   SUBCONTRACTOR.   Someone other than the general contractor or a
contractor specializing in a certain area of construction.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord.
2003-022, passed 12-3-03)



§ 110.02  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each commercial and business establishment located within the
village limits shall be required to obtain an annual business license.
Application forms for the licenses shall be made available by the village.



   (B)   Each landlord renting any land, buildings, or any portion of a
building, or dwelling unit(s) within the village shall be required to obtain
an annual business license from the village. The applicant must list all
properties owned in whole or in part in the village. Application forms for
the license shall be made available by the village.



   (C)   Each container in excess of 30 cubic feet in volume is
required to have displayed thereon a license, obtained from the village for
the fee set forth herein.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord.
2003-022, passed 12-3-03)



§ 110.03  CONTRACTORS REGISTRATIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Each contractor or subcontractor listed on the
following schedule shall meet the following requirements before a building
permit (where they are indicated as doing work) is issued, or before
beginning any phase of construction.  Applications for such registrations
shall be provided for by the village.



      (2)   Contractors that require registration:  Acoustical,
paving, carpenter, communications, concrete, demolition, drywall and
plastering, electrical, excavating, fencing, fire and burglar alarm, floor
finishing, garage door, glazing, heating and air conditioning, insulation,
landscape, mason, painting, plumbing, resilient floor, roofing, sheet metal,
sewer, sidewalk or curb siding, sign, sprinkler, structural steel, swimming
pool, tuckpointing, wall tile, water, water proofing.



   (B)   Each contractor listed shall submit a license and permit bond
or a surety bond, guaranteeing the completion of the work as well as
compliance with codes, in the amount of $10,000 which shall be valid for at
least the term of the registration or one year whichever is longer.



   (C)   Electrical contractors shall be required to submit a photostat
copy of a valid registration from another municipality located within the
State of Illinois. The provisions and restrictions allowed and required by
this registration shall also apply as a condition of approval.



(Ord.  88-40,  passed  12-14-88;  Am. Ord. 91-22, passed 9-9-91; Am. Ord.
93-05, passed 1-12-93)



§ 110.04  VENDING MACHINES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



   Any person, firm or association displaying for public patronage, any
vending machine, mechanical amusement device or juke box shall have such
device registered with the village before it is placed in use. Applications
for such registration shall be provided for by the village.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88)



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND REGISTRATIONS AND THEIR TERMS.



   (A)   Subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter, and the
codes and standards of the village and the state, the Building Commissioner
or his designee will, with the attestment of the Village Clerk issue such
licenses and/or registrations.



   (B)   Each application shall be processed, if not approved a written
reason for denial shall be forwarded to the applicant.



   (C)   The term of each license and/or registration shall begin on
January 1 of the year the license and/or registration is issued for, until
December 31, of the same year.



   (D)   Exception 1. For new businesses or contractors the starting
date will be the date of issuance.



   (E)   Exception 2. If for any reason the requirements of this
chapter are not complied with or lapse, the license and/or registration may
be suspended, until such compliance is made. If compliance is not made,
within 30 days of written notification, the license and/or registration may
be terminated.



   (F)   Approved registrations for vending machines and amusement
devices shall include a display tag. Such tag shall be conspicuously located
and visible, on each device.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88)



§ 110.06  CONDITIONS BARRING THE ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION.



   If any of the following issues are found to exist, the license or
registration requested may not be issued.



   (A)   The business or structure is not in compliance with the
provisions and terms of the ordinances and codes of the village, and/or the
State of Illinois.



   (B)   The owner of the establishment, business or such legal entity
comprising the ownership is indebted, either financially or by performance,
to the village, at the time of application.



   (C)   The owners or managers permit or suffer to permit the
commission of a nuisance, breach of morality, safety, or health or other
similar act as defined under the codes, ordinances, and laws of the village
and the state.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88)



   (D)   The owner, proprietor or the representative of the business or
the establishment, has not complied with, completed or maintained the
conditions or requirements of any agreements and/or codes, relating to the
site or the establishment.  This shall include the maintenance of signs,
landscaping, parking areas, parkways and public sidewalks.  (Ord. 89-30,
passed 11-8-89)



§ 110.07  FEES.



   (A)   Business licenses. 



      (1)   Each commercial and business establishment obtaining a
business license shall be required to pay an annual fee as indicated in the
following schedule:



         (a)   $140 for each 2,000 square feet or fraction
thereof. The maximum fee charged shall not exceed $1,200.



         (b)   For new establishments the fee shall be prorated
at the rate of $12 per month for each 2,000 square feet or fraction thereof.



         (c)   Temporary or special event operations shall pay a
fee of $50 per month for each 2,000 square feet or fraction thereof.



      (2)   Additional fees for routine inspections; signs,
sanitation, elevators or other similar inspections shall be charged back to
the business. The charge of such inspection when made by a consultant or
third party shall be billed back plus a $15 handling fee.



      (3)   Refunds of fees for businesses discontinued or relocated
will not be allowed.



      (4)   Transfer of locations, for existing buildings already
located within the village limits, will only be charged an additional fee if
the square footage of the new establishment has increased.



      (5)   Transfer of ownership, will be designated as a
discontinuance of the business.



      (6)   All commercial and business establishments will be
required to pay a minimum fee based on a floor area of one square foot.



   (B)   Amusement devices/video gaming terminals.



      (1)   The annual license fees for all amusement devices shall
be $150.



      (2)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 65, the annual fee
for the operation of a video gaming terminal is $25.



   (C)   Vending machines.



      (1)   All vending machines for any tobacco products receiving
a registration shall pay an annual fee of $120 each.



      (2)   All vending machines for non-tobacco products receiving
a registration shall pay an annual fee of $50 each.



   (D)   Exceptions and refunds. 



      (1)   An exception to the fees listed in divisions (B) and (C)
above may be requested from the Village Board when the proceeds from such a
device are intended for a charitable organization.



      (2)   Refunds for vending machines, or amusements devices
replaced will not be allowed. When an identical device is used as a
replacement no additional fee will be charged.



   (E)   Contractor fees.  Each contractor or subcontractor shall pay
an annual license fee of $100.00 which shall be in addition to any other fee
required to be paid by any contractor or subcontractor. This requirement
shall not apply to any electrical contractor holding a valid license from any
other municipality. Any license issued pursuant to this section shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of its issuance.



   (F)   Refunds. Refunds of fees for businesses discontinued,
contracts terminated, or construction suspended or discontinued will not be
allowed.  Transfer of ownership, or a change in the business name will be
designated as a discontinuance of the business.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88; Am. Ord. 94-36, passed 11-16-94; Am. Ord.
2002-015, passed 9-4-02)



   (G)   Commercial and business licenses. 



      (1)   Each existing commercial and business establishment
required to obtain a business license shall do so prior to the first day of
the calendar year.



      (2)   Each new commercial and business establishment required
to obtain a business license shall do so prior to the first day of operation
of such business, or before occupancy is approved.



      (3)   Failure to comply in the time frames indicated in
divisions (G)(1) and (2) above shall result in a late charge of $25 per month
or fraction thereof being assessed, in addition to the full amount of the
license fee, and penalties that may be due.



   (H)   Contractors or subcontractors. 



      (1)   Reserved.



      (2)   Each contractor or subcontractor as listed in § 110.03
shall obtain a registration before beginning any construction or installation
or before a building permit listing them as a contractor can be issued.



      (3)   Failure to comply in the time frames indicated in
divisions (H)(1) and (2) above shall result in a late charge of $25 per month
or fraction thereof being assessed, in addition to the full amount of the
license fee, and penalties that may be due.



   (I)   Date of vending or amusement license.



      (1)   Each existing commercial and business establishment
required to obtain a vending or amusement device license shall do so prior to
the first day of the calendar year.



      (2)   Each new commercial and business establishment is
required to obtain a vending or amusement device license shall do so prior to
the first day of operation of such business.



      (3)   Where new or replacement devices are installed, the
commercial and business establishment is required to obtain a vending or
amusement device license, prior to the first day of installation of such
device.



      (4)   Failure to comply in the time frames, indicated in
divisions (I)(1) and (2) above shall result in a late charge of $25 per month
or fraction thereof being assessed, in addition to the full amount of the
license fee, and penalties that may be due.



   (J)   Each container, which size is in excess of 30 cubic feet,
shall have paid the following annual license fee according to container size:



      (1)   From 1.1 cubic yards (30 cu. ft.) up to 6 cubic yards
(162 cu. ft.) - $100.00



      (2)   From 6 cubic yards (162 cu. ft.) up to 18 cubic yards
(486 cu. ft.) - $200.00



      (3)   From 18 cubic yards (486 cu. ft.) up to 59 cubic yards
(1593 cu. ft.) - $300.00



      (4)   From 59 cubic yards (1593 cu. ft.) up to 150 cubic yards
(4050 cu. ft.) - $400.00



      (5)   From 150 cubic yards (4050 cu. ft.) and larger - $500.00



   (K)   Every commercial and business establishment storing any motor
vehicle intended for sale, other than at a motor vehicle sales facility
located entirely within the village, shall pay the following annual license
fee:



      (1)   Storage of no more than 20 vehicles at any one time -
$3,000.00



      (2)   Storage of no more than 30 vehicles at any one time -
$4,500.00



      (3)   Storage of more than 30 vehicles at any one time -
$10,000.00



   (L)   Grace period.  A grace period of up to 15 days may be
authorized to contractors and businesses, where circumstances involving the
completion of the requirements are recognized by the Building Official or his
assignee as being beyond the control of the applicant.



(Ord. 89-30, passed 11-8-89; Am. Ord. 93-05, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 99-07,
passed 2-17-99; Am. Ord. 2003-022, passed 12-3-03; Am. Ord. 2012-002, passed
3-7-12)



§ 110.08  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Every license and registration issued under this chapter is
subject to revocation, should any license or registration holder, directly or
indirectly be found guilty of violating the ordinances, codes or laws of the
State of Illinois, the County of Cook or the Village of Orland Hills.



   (B)   Every license and registration issued under this chapter is
subject to suspension, should any owner of the establishment, business or
such legal entity comprising the ownership becomes indebted, either
financially or by performances to the village. during the license and/or
registration period and fails to satisfy such indebtedness within 60 days of
such billing.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88)



§ 110.09  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Every person, group of persons, or corporation, desiring to engage in
the business which requires the issuance of a license by the village shall
make application for a business license in writing on forms furnished by the
village. A separate application for each place of business or location shall
be made under oath and shall be filed with the Village Clerk. Each applicant
shall furnish under oath the following information:



   (A)   The name, age, date of birth, Social Security number, address,
phone number, credit information, and fingerprints of each applicant and such
other information as may be required by such application, and in case of a
partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits, and in case of a
corporation or a club, the object for which it was organized, a list of
names, residence address, and phone numbers of its officers, directors,
shareholders, and members, and a certified copy of the Articles of
Incorporation or charter;



   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization;



   (C)   The character of the business of the applicant;



   (D)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license;



   (E)   A statement whether applicant has made any other application
for a similar license on premises other than described in this application,
and the disposition of such application. Such statement shall include any
other application which the applicant was in any way involved with regardless
of the name, structure, and the like of the business entity;



   (F)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of
either a misdemeanor nor a felony and is not disqualified to receive a
license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of
the state, or other ordinances of the village;



   (G)   Whether a previous license by a state or subdivision thereof,
or by the federal government has been suspended or revoked, and the reasons
therefor;



   (H)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the
laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinance of the village in
the conduct of his place of business;



   (I)   The type of license desired by the applicant;



   (J)   Whether the applicant owns the premises for which a license is
sought, and if he does not, the name of his landlord and the period of his
lease. A complete and correct copy of the lease shall be attached to the
application;



   (K)   Whether the applicant intends to manage and conduct the
business in person, and if not, the name of the manager or agent who is to
conduct the business for which the license is sought;



   (L)   A statement that the applicant shall be required to and shall
require all officers, agents, and employees of the applicant to testify
(subject to constitutional limitations) at any hearing that may be called by
the village, or any of its committees, commissions, board, or agencies,
relating directly or indirectly, to any events or occurrences of which they
may have knowledge arising out of their position as officer, agent, or
employee of the licensee. In addition, a statement that applicant has so
informed all officers, agents, and employees, and has made the same a
condition of employment for all employees.



   (M)   (1)   In addition to the foregoing information, the
application shall contain such other information as the Village Clerk may
prescribe in order to process the business license application.



      (2)   In case the application is made by a partnership, all
partners must sign the application and the information required by this
section shall be furnished as to each partner.



      (3)   In case the applicant is a corporation, the application
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the corporation, and the
corporate seal shall be affixed. The information required by this section
shall be furnished as to each corporate officer and to any person owning 5%
or more of the stock in the corporation.



      (4)   Every application for a license, whether new or renewal,
where the real estate title of the premises is in a trust, shall be
accompanied by a sworn affidavit of the land trustee or a beneficiary of the
trust, disclosing the names, residence addresses, and beneficial interest of
each beneficiary of the land trust.



      (5)   By making application hereunder, the applicant agrees
that the Village Clerk shall cause to be conducted a background search and
credit check on the applicant, and applicant further agrees to cooperate
fully regarding the same, including, but not limited to, identifying and
authorizing the release of relevant credit information, and criminal history
information.



      (6)   The applicant must also provide a letter of intent
indicating the type and nature of the applicant's business, and the types of
activities to be conducted on the licensed premises. Any basic change in the
activities to be conducted or the type and nature of the premises or business
must be submitted to the Village Clerk for approval by the Village President.



(Ord. 2012-005, passed 3-21-12)



§ 110.10  INITIAL LICENSE APPLICATION EXPENSE.



   (A)   In connection with the first application of any person, group
of persons, partnership, or corporation applying for a license under this
section, said applicant shall pay at the time of such application a
non-refundable initial license application fee of $750 which shall be in
addition to the license fee required in the village. Such amount shall be due
and paid at the time when the application is completed and filed with the
Village Clerk. The initial license application fee shall be for the purpose
of defraying any costs which the village may incur as a result of the review
and investigation of the application.



   (B)   The village may, following approval by a majority vote of the
Board of Trustees, retain or refund any or all of the initial license
application fee, regardless of whether the applicant has been granted a
license.



(Ord. 2012-005, passed 3-21-12)



§ 110.11  INVESTIGATIONS, REJECTIONS, OR APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS FOR
LICENSE.



   (A)   All applications for license under this section shall be
presented to the Village Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk or
the Village Clerk's designee to investigate and consider the application. For
this purpose the Village Clerk may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police to
complete the investigation.



   (B)   Every person who is fingerprinted in connection with any
license shall pay a processing fee of $200.



(Ord. 2012-005, passed 3-21-12)



§ 110.12  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who is not of good character and reputation;



   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
under federal or state law, if the Village President or Village President's
designee determines after investigation that such person is not of sufficient
character to warrant the public trust and to have issued to him a license;



   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is
keeping a house of ill fame or prostitution;



   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality or involving moral turpitude;



   (F)   A person who has been convicted of or has pending any felony
or misdemeanor under any federal or state law dealing with or regulating
alcoholic liquor, drugs, cannabis sativa, or any controlled substances as
defined under any such law;



   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been
revoked for cause, or any person who applies as an individual but who was a
partner or an officer, manager, director, or shareholder with at least a 5%
ownership interest in a corporation which corporation or partnership is
ineligible or has previously had a license revoked;



   (H)   A person who has had a license by any other unit of government
which has been revoked for cause;



   (I)   A person who has had a license issued under this chapter or by
any other unit of government which has been suspended, if the Village
President or the Village President's designee determines, after
investigation, that such a person is not of sufficient character to warrant
the public trust and to have issued to him a license;



   (J)   A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;



   (K)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof,
or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate of more than 5% of
the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship;



   (L)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state or
unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act to transact business in the state;



   (M)   A person whose place of business is operated by a manager or
agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
by the licensee;



   (N)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which
a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;



   (O)   Any law enforcing public officer or employee of the village;



   (P)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee; or



   (Q)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling or weapons
offense under the laws of the state as heretofore or hereafter amended.



(Ord. 2012-005, passed 3-21-12)



HEARING PROCEDURE



§ 110.20  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   In all matters involving the revocation or suspension of any license or
contractor's registration issued by the village, no revocation or suspension
shall occur except after a hearing conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.  This subchapter shall not apply to any
liquor license.



(Ord. 90-37, passed 6-27-90)



§ 110.21  INITIATION OF HEARING.



   (A)   Charges may be initiated by any village officer against any
firm, corporation, association, partnership or individual who has been issued
a license or registration by the village.



   (B)   In all cases, a written complaint shall be filed in
triplicate, setting forth a plan and concise statement of the facts upon
which the complaint is based.



   (C)   Upon the filing of a complaint with the Village Clerk, the
Village Clerk shall serve a copy of the complaint on the respondent and
notify the respondent, either by certified mail, return receipt requested or
by personal service, of the time and place of the hearing on the complaint.



(Ord. 90-37, passed 6-27-90)



§ 110.22  HEARING PROCESS.



   The following rules shall govern the conduct of all hearings.



   (A)   The provisions of the "Civil Practice Act" do not apply to the
hearings.



   (B)   All hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act.



   (C)   All parties to the hearing may be represented by counsel;



   (D)   All proceedings shall be recorded by a court reporter to be
employed by the village. The record of the proceeding will not be transcribed
unless so requested by the village or the respondent. The party ordering the
transcription shall be responsible for the cost thereof.



   (E)   All witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying and the
matter will be decided solely on the evidence presented at the hearing.



   (F)   The party initiating the proceeding shall have the burden of
proof to establish by a preponderance of evidence that cause exists for the
suspension or revocation of the respondent's license or registration.



   (G)   The Village Administrator or his designee shall serve as the
hearing officer. It shall be the duty of the hearing officer to conduct the
hearing and consider all relevant evidence adduced at the hearing. Following
the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare, in writing,
findings of facts and recommendations which shall be forwarded to the Village
Board. Thereafter, the Village Board shall take a vote relative to the
suspension or revocation of the respondent's license or registration. However
prior to taking any vote, the Village Board may reopen the hearing for the
purpose of taking additional evidence or clarifying evidence previously
introduced.



   (H)   The hearing officer will first hear the witnesses and evidence
substantiating the charges which have been made against the respondent.
Thereafter, the respondent may present and examine those witnesses whom he
desires the hearing officer to hear.



   (I)   All parties shall have the right to cross- examine witnesses
presented by the opposite party. The testimony of any witness who is not made
available for cross-examination may be stricken at the discretion of the
hearing officer.



(Ord. 90-37, passed 6-27-90)



§ 110.23  PLEADINGS.



   (A)   All pleadings or motions to be presented must be filed in
writing.



   (B)   All papers filed in any proceeding shall be legibly written,
typewritten, printed, or otherwise copied on paper 8½ inches by 11 inches in
size.



   (C)   The original of all papers filed shall be signed in ink by the
party or his attorney and shall bear the name, address and phone number of
the party or his attorney.



   (D)   All papers shall be filed with the village by mailing or
delivering them to the office of the Village Clerk. The filing date of any
paper shall be the date the paper is received at the office of the Village
Clerk.



   (E)   All pleadings or motions shall be delivered personally to the
other party or his attorney at least two business days, or if by mail at
least five business days prior to the presentation of the pleading or motion
for hearing thereon.



(Ord. 90-37, passed 6-27-90)



§ 110.24  DATE OF HEARING.



   The time for hearing of the charges shall be set by the hearing
officer, within 30 days of the time of the filing of such charges.
Continuances may be granted from time to time upon motion of any party at the
sole discretion of the hearing officer.



(Ord. 90-37, passed 6-27-90)



§ 110.25  FINDING AND DECISION.



   (A)   Within a reasonable time after the hearing is completed, the
board shall enter a written finding and decision.



   (B)   In the event the respondent is found guilty of the charges,
the Board may suspend the respondent's license(s) or registration(s) for any
period up to the end of the effective date of the licenses(s) or
registrations(s) or the Board may revoke the license(s) or registration(s).
In the event of a revocation, the respondent shall not be allowed to reapply
for any license or registration with the village for one year beyond the
original expiration date of the license or registration so revoked. The
Village Board may, in its sole discretion, waive all or part of the one year
waiting period for reapplication following revocation.



   (C)   The finding and decision shall become effective immediately
upon its entry by the Board.



   (D)   A written copy of the decision shall be mailed to all parties
to the proceeding.



(Ord. 90-37, passed 6-27-90)



§ 110.26  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to continue to conduct any business or
other operations within the village following the entry of a finding and
decision suspending or revoking their license or registration.



(Ord. 90-37, passed 6-27-90)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of §§ 110.01 through 110.08 is punishable  by a
fine of $25.  Each day that the violation continues may be deemed a separate
punishable  offense.  In  addition to the fine established the violator
will also be required to pay the cost of the license and/or registration that
would have been required.



(Ord. 88-40, passed 12-14-88; Am. Ord. 89-30, passed 11-8-89)



   (B)   A violation of §§ 110.20 through 110.26 shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500. Each and every day that
the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.  (Ord. 90-37,
passed 6-27-90)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Acts of agent of employer



   111.03   Other regulations to apply



   111.04   Exceptions



Licensing



   111.20   License required



   111.21   Application for license



   111.22   Initial license application expense



   111.23   Payment of fees; proration



   111.24   Investigations, rejection, or approval of applications for
license



   111.25   Persons ineligible for license



   111.26   Expiration



   111.27   License classification; fees; conditions



   111.28   Number of licenses



   111.29   Posting license and warning



   111.30   Hours of operation



   111.31   License limitations



   111.32   Change of location or in personnel



   111.33   Conduct of licensee



   111.34   Sale or discontinuance of business; continuation of license



   111.35   Licensing of premises for which license is revoked



   111.36   Suspension, nonrenewal, or revocation of license; denial of
applications; notice; hearing



Sales



   111.45   Limitation on sale of alcoholic beverages



   111.46   Purchase or possession of alcoholic liquor by person under
age prohibited



   111.47   Retail sales prohibited in certain areas



   111.48   Sale, consumption, or delivery on government owned or
controlled property



   111.49   Sales on credit



   111.50   Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages



   111.51   Sanitary conditions



   111.52   Prohibited sale or promotion of alcoholic beverages



Administration; Enforcement



   111.65   Local Liquor Control Commissioner



   111.66   Inspection



   111.67   Premises to be kept clean; health certificates



   111.68   Village hearings; testimony required



 



   111.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL.  The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol.  It does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.  Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer,
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.  The
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture
of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and
regulations promulgated thereunder, not to any liquid or solid containing
one-half of 1% or less, of alcohol by volume.



   BEER.  A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and the like.



   CLUB.  A group of persons, or a corporation organized under the laws
of this state, not for pecuniary profit, or organized solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale of or consumption of
alcoholic liquors, kept, used, and maintained by its members and owning,
hiring, or leasing a building or space in a building, or such extent and
character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable
use and accommodation of its members and their guests, and provided with
suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment.  Such
club shall file with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its
application for original license, or renewal thereof, a list of the names,
resident address, and phone number of its officers (and members); and
provided that its affairs and management are conducted by a Board of
Directors, Executive Committee, or similar board chosen by the members at
their annual meeting; and that no member, or any officer, agent, of employee
of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of
salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of
alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests
introduced by members, or by its Board of Directors, or other governing body
out of the general revenue of the club.



   CONSUMPTION SALES.  The sale or offering for sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold.



   HOTEL.  Every building or other structure, kept, used, maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay
to traveler and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in
which 25 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations and dining
rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection
therewith and such building or structure being provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.



   ORIGINAL PACKAGE.  Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead, or other receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked or capped,
sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to
convey any alcoholic liquid.



   PACKAGED SALES.  The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor in the original package and not to be consumed in whole or in part on
the premises where sold.



   PERSON.  A natural human being, unless the context of its use would
indicate it would apply to any applicant or licensee hereunder even if such
applicant or licensee is a group of persons, a partnership, or a corporation.



   RESTAURANT.  Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient  number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.



   RETAILER.  A person, a group of persons, a partnership, or a
corporation who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.



   SALE.  Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner, or by any
means whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through
the transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, for a
consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.



   SELL OR SALE AT RETAIL.  Refers to and means sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.



   SERVICE OF FOOD.  The service of meals, for consumption only on the
premises in an adequate and sanitary kitchen as defined in any appropriate
health or food service ordinance of the village.  The meals must consist of
more than the service or sale of packaged foods such as potato chips,
pretzels, peanuts, cheese and crackers, or frozen or pre-made foods, such as
pizzas, hamburgers, or sandwiches which can be prepared by being heated or
warmed in an oven.  And, the meals must be actually and regularly served and
eaten at tables and not only at a bar or counter.



   SPIRITS.  Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by
distillation, mixed with water or other substances in solution, and includes
brandy, rum, whisky, gin, vodka, or other spirituous liquids; and such
liquors when rectified, blended, or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other
substances.



   TO SELL.  Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent
to sell.



   WINE.  Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined in this
section.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.02  ACTS OF AGENT OF EMPLOYER.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, shareholder,
associate, representative, agent, or employee of any licensee, shall be
deemed and held to be an act of such employer or licensee and said employer
or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission
had been done or omitted by him personally.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.03  OTHER REGULATIONS TO APPLY.



   Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor,
or person in charge of any place within the village where alcoholic liquor is
sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other ordinances of the
village or of the statutes of the state.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used
in the manufacture of denatured alcohol, nor to any liquid or solid
containing 0.5%, or less, of alcohol by volume, nor shall the provisions of
this chapter apply to flavoring extracts, concentrates, syrups, or medicinal,
mechanical, scientific, culinary, or toilet preparations; or food products
unfit for beverage purposes, but the provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed to exclude or not apply to alcoholic liquor used in the
manufacture, preparation, or compounding of such products.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to wine
intended for use or used by any church or religious organization for
sacramental purposes, nor shall anything herein contained prevent any duly
licensed, practicing physician or dentist from possession or any hospital or
other institution caring for sick and diseased persons from possessing
alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of such hospital or
other institution or prevent any licensed pharmacist from possessing and
using alcoholic liquors in the preparation of prescriptions written by duly
licensed physicians.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



LICENSING



§ 111.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in
the village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's
license, or in violation of the terms of such license.



   (B)   Each separate place or business or location wherein alcoholic
liquor shall be sold, or offered for sale, shall have a separate license.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.21  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Every person, group of persons, or corporation, desiring to engage in
the business of selling alcoholic liquor at retail shall make application for
a liquor license in writing on forms furnished by the village.  A separate
application for each place of business or location shall be made under oath
and shall be filed with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.  Each
applicant shall furnish under oath the following information:



   (A)   The name, age, date of birth, Social Security number, address,
phone number, credit information, and fingerprints of each applicant and such
other information as may be required by such application, and in case of a
partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits, and in case of a
corporation or a club, the object for which it was organized, a list of
names, residence address, and phone numbers of its officers, directors,
shareholders, and members, and a certified copy of the Articles of
Incorporation or charter;



   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization;



   (C)   The character of the business of the applicant;



   (D)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license, including the number of
bars to be operated thereon;



   (E)   A statement whether applicant has made any other application
for a similar license on premises other than described in this application,
and the disposition of such application.  Such statement shall include any
other application which the applicant was in any way involved with regardless
of the name, structure, and the like of the business entity;



   (F)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of
either a misdemeanor nor a felony and is not disqualified to receive a
license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of
the state, or other ordinances of the village;



   (G)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been suspended or revoked, and the
reasons therefor;



   (H)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the
laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinance of the village in
the conduct of his place of business;



   (I)   The class of license desired by the applicant;



   (J)   Whether the applicant owns the premises for which a license is
sought, and if he does not, the name of his landlord and the period of his
lease.  A complete and correct copy of the lease is to be attached to the
application;



   (K)   Whether or not the applicant intends to manage and conduct the
business in person, and if not, the name of the manager or agent who is to
conduct the business to be carried on the premises for which the license is
sought;



   (L)   A statement that the applicant will be required to and shall
require all officers, agents, and employees of the applicant to testify
(subject to constitutional limitations) at any hearing that may be called by
the village, or any of its committees, commissions, boards, or agencies, or
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, relating, directly or indirectly, to
any events or occurrences of which they may have knowledge arising out of
their position as officer, agent, or employee of the licensee.  In addition,
a statement that applicant has so informed all officers, agents, and
employees, and has made the same a condition of employment for all employees;



   (M)   (1)   In addition to the foregoing information, the
application shall contain such other information as the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may prescribe.



      (2)   In case the application is made by a partnership, all
partners must sign the application and the information required by this
chapter shall be furnished as to each partner.



      (3)   In case the applicant is a corporation, the application
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the corporation, and the
corporate seal shall be affixed.  The information required by this chapter
shall be furnished as to each corporate officer.



      (4)   Every application for a license, whether new or renewal,
where the real estate title of the premises is in a trust, shall be
accompanied by the sworn affidavit of the land trustee or a beneficiary of
the trust, disclosing the names, residence addresses, and beneficial interest
of each beneficiary of the land trust.



      (5)   Every application for a license, whether new or renewal,
shall be accompanied by a copy of the applicant's policy of dram shop
insurance written by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed
to do business in the state insuring such applicant against liability as
required under the Liquor Control Act, ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
as amended from time to time.  The applicant shall keep such policy of
insurance in full force and effect during the term of the license (and any
renewals), or shall provide a suitable substitute policy and each such policy
shall contain a provision that such cannot be canceled without ten days prior
written notice to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.



      (6)   By making application hereunder, the applicant agrees
that the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause to be conducted a
background search and credit check on the applicant, and applicant further
agrees to cooperate fully regarding the same, including, but not limited to,
identifying and authorizing the release of relevant credit information, and
criminal history information.



      (7)   The  applicant  must also  provide  a letter of 
intent indicating  the type and nature of the applicant's  business, and 
the types  of  activities  to be conducted  on the licensed premises. 
Any basic change  in the  activities to be conducted or the type and nature
of the premises or business must be submitted to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner for approval.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-5-08)



§ 111.22  INITIAL LICENSE APPLICATION EXPENSE.



   (A)   In connection with the first application of any person, group
of persons, partnership, or corporation applying for a license under this
chapter, said applicant shall pay at the time of such application a
non-refundable initial license application fee of $750 which shall be in
addition to the license fee required in this chapter. Such amount shall be
due and paid at the time when the application is completed and filed with the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The initial license application fee shall
be for the purpose of defraying any costs which the village may incur as a
result of the review and investigation of the application.



   (B)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, following approval
by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees, retain or refund any or all of
the initial license application fee, regardless of whether the applicant has
been granted a license.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 2007-005, passed 2-21-07)



§ 111.23  PAYMENT OF FEES; PRORATION.



   (A)   All license fees shall be paid to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.



   (B)   In the event a license is not issued, any fees other than
license application fees which have been paid, shall be refunded to an
applicant.



   (C)   All license fees collected by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be forthwith paid to the Village Treasurer or the Village
Clerk, and the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep a record of all
licenses issued.



   (D)   No license fee shall be reduced, prorated, or diminished in
any manner unless approved by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees.



   (E)   Any person renewing a Class A, AA, B, D, EE, or H license may
elect to pay the annual license fee in two installments.  One-half (50%) of
the license fee shall be paid at the time the license renewal application is
submitted and the balance shall be paid on or before March 31 following
submission of the license renewal application.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 94-41, passed 12-7-94; Am. Ord. 98-02,
passed 3-4-98)



§ 111.24  INVESTIGATIONS, REJECTION, OR APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS FOR
LICENSE.



   (A)   All applications for license under this chapter shall be
presented to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.  It shall be the duty of
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to investigate and consider the
application.  For this purpose the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
enlist the aid of the Chief of Police to complete the investigation.  The
investigation shall include a background search and credit check.  Prior to
the issuance or renewal of any liquor license (except a Class F and H
license) the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause notice of such
application to be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at
least ten days prior to issuance or renewal.  The notice shall contain the
name and address of the applicant, the location of the premises to be
licensed, and shall contain an invitation and solicitation of public
commentary, which shall be duly considered and retained on file by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.  In addition, prior to the issuance or renewal
of any liquor license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner will notify the
Board of Trustees, in writing, at least ten days prior to issuance or
renewal.  Upon completion of these prerequisites the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall approve or disapprove of the issuance of a license based
on said application, provided, in the case of approval, that there exists an
available license.



   (B)   Every person who is fingerprinted in connection with any
liquor license shall pay a processing fee of $200.



(Ord 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 92-24, passed 7-8-92; Am. Ord. 94-41,
passed 12-7-94; Am. Ord. 2007-005, passed 2-21-07)



§ 111.25  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who is not of good character and reputation;



   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
under federal or state law, if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
determines after investigation that such person is not of sufficient
character to warrant the public trust and to have issued to him a license;



   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is
keeping a house of ill fame or prostitution;



   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality or involving moral turpitude;



   (F)   A person who has been convicted of or has pending any felony
or misdemeanor under any federal or  state  law dealing with or regulating
alcoholic liquor, drugs, cannabis sativa, or any controlled substances as
defined under any such law;



   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been
revoked for cause, or any person who applies as an individual but who was a
partner in a partnership or an officer, manager, director, or shareholder
with at least a 5% ownership interest in a corporation which corporation or
partnership is ineligible or has previously had a license revoked;



   (H)   A person who has had a license by any other unit of government
which has been revoked for cause;



   (I)   A person who has had a license issued under this chapter or by
any other unit of government which has been suspended, if the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner determines, after investigation, that such a person is
not of sufficient character to warrant the public trust and to have issued to
him a license;



   (J)   A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;



   (K)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof,
or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate of more than 5% of
the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship;



   (L)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state or
unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act to transact business in the state;



   (M)   A person whose place of business is operated by a manager or
agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
by the licensee;



   (N)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which
a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;



   (O)   Any law enforcing public officer or employee of the village,
including the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, the President, and Village
Board of Trustees.  No such official shall be financially or beneficially
interested in any way, either directly or indirectly in the manufacture,
sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor within the village;



   (P)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;



   (Q)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling or weapons
offense under the laws of the state as heretofore or hereafter amended;



   (R)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp, a federal
wagering stamp, or Federal Firearms License has been issued by the federal
government for the current tax period;



   (S)   A co-partnership to which a federal wagering stamp or Federal
Firearms License has been issued by the federal government for the current
tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming
device stamp, federal waging stamp, or Federal Firearms License by the
federal government for the current tax period;



   (T)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof,
or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax
period;



   (U)   Any premises for which a federal wagering stamp has been
issued by the federal government for the current tax period;



   (V)   Any person, firm, or corporation not eligible for a state
retail liquor dealers license.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 89-25, passed 8-3-89)



§ 111.26  EXPIRATION.



   Every license, except the temporary liquor license referred to in §
111.65(G) and a Class F license referred to in § 111.27(H) shall expire on
December 31 following its issuance.



(Ord 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 88-02, passed - -88)



§ 111.27  LICENSE CLASSIFICATION; FEES; CONDITIONS.



   Liquor licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are
hereby divided into the following classes:



   (A)   Class “A” license, which shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor by the drink only on the premises designated therein for
consumption on such premises or the retail sale of alcoholic liquor to be
consumed off the premises; provided that such alcoholic liquor shall at the
time it leaves the premises be sealed in its original container. The annual
fee for such a license shall be $3,500.



   (B)   Class “AA” license, which shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor by the drink only on the premises designated therein for
consumption on such premises or the retail sale of alcoholic liquor to be
consumed off the premises; provided that such alcoholic liquor shall at the
time it leaves the premises be sealed in its original container. The annual
fee for such a license shall be $3,500.



   (C)   (1)   Class”B” license, which shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises designated therein, but not
for consumption on the premises where sold; provided that such alcoholic
liquor shall at the time it leaves the premises be sealed in its original
container. The annual fee for such license shall be $3,000.



      (2)   If said sale of alcoholic liquor is carried out on
premises which are utilized primarily for other retail sales activity, the
sale of such liquor shall be confined to an area which is separated from the
other retail sales portions of the premises by a suitable enclosure or
partition of such design and construction as may be approved by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner. No Class B license outstanding on the effective
date of this chapter shall be renewed upon its expiration unless such
approved enclosure or partition has been constructed.



      (3)   No Class B license shall be issued for a location at
which motor vehicle fuel is dispensed.



   (D)   (1)   Class “BB” license which shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises designated therein, but not
for consumption on the premises where sold; provided that such alcoholic
liquor shall at the time it leaves the premises be sealed in its original
container and subject to the following additional conditions:



         (a)   The licensed premises shall contain not less than
15,000 square feet of retail floor area open to the public.



         (b)   No more than 10% of the retail floor area open to
the public shall be allocated for the display and/or sale of alcoholic liquor.



         (c)   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold at any time
that the rest of the licensed premises is not open to the public for retail
sales of merchandise other than alcoholic liquor.



      (2)   The annual fee for such license shall be $3,500.



   (E)   Class “C” license, which shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor on the premises designated therein solely for the
consumption on the premises by a club as defined in this chapter. The annual
fee for such a license shall be $3,000.



   (F)   Class “CC” license. The holder of a Class C license may,
in addition, obtain a Class CC license. A holder of Class CC license shall be
subject to all regulations relative to holders of Class C licenses; provided
that holders of Class CC licenses may on one day of each week engage in the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor to the general public for consumption on the
premises designated. The annual fee for such license shall be $500, in
addition to the annual fee paid for a Class C license.



   (G)   (1)   Class “D” license, which shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises designated therein for
consumption by the drink only on such premises only; and provided further
that such sale of alcoholic liquor shall be restricted to sales made in
conjunction with the licensee’s operation of a restaurant on said premises,
and that such sale of alcoholic liquor on such premises shall be further
restricted to service of such alcoholic liquor at tables or booths only. Such
licenses may be issued and retained by those establishments which:



         (a)   Have a seating capacity at tables, booths, or bar
stools for a minimum of 140 persons for food and/or liquor;



         (b)   Are in fact operated as a restaurant with bar
serving a complete menu during all hours of operation; and



         (c)   Offer their patrons full and complete meals,
including dinner menu, and in which their serving of alcoholic beverages is
incidental and complimentary to the service of such meals.



      (2)   No such license shall be granted to or retained by any
establishment in which the facilities for food preparation and service are
not primarily those of a restaurant. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, limited food service, such as provided by lounges, luncheonettes,
diners, coffee shops, drive-ins, and the like does not satisfy the
requirements of this license classification. The annual fee for such license
shall be $3,500.



   (H)   Class “E” license, which shall authorize the retail sale
of wine and beer only on the premises designated therein for consumption by
the drink only on such premises; provided that such sale of wine and beer
shall be restricted to sales made in conjunction with the licensee’s
operation of a restaurant on said premises, and that such sale of wine and
beer on such premises shall be further restricted to service of such wine and
beer at tables or booths only. The annual fee for such license shall be
$2,500.



   (I)   (1)   Class “EE” license, shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. This
license shall only be issued to applicants operating multiple establishments
under the following conditions:



         (a)   Each establishment shall be a hotel or restaurant
as defined herein.



         (b)   Each establishment shall be under the ownership of
the applicant.



         (c)   Every establishment shall be located upon a single
or contiguous parcels.



      (2)   The annual fee for such license shall be $3,500 for the
first license issued and $3,500 for each subsequent Class EE license issued
to the same applicant for the same location.



   (J)   (1)   Class “F” license, shall authorize the retail
sale of beer and wine by a “Club” only on the premises designated thereon
for consumption by the drink only on such premises. If an event is being
conducted on village property by an organization other than the village, then
the organization conducting the event shall first receive approval from the
Village Board of Trustees to conduct the event and to sell alcoholic liquor
under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Village Board of
Trustees and then shall apply for a license hereunder.



      (2)   A Class F License shall have a limited duration of not
more than three (3) days, to be specified in the license. The fee for such
license shall be $100 per day. No more than two (2) such licenses, in a
calendar year, shall be issued to the same applicant, or for use at the same
location or venue.



      (3)   A Class F License (s) shall be issued for any Village
sponsored event being conducted on village property by an organization (s)
other than the village, providing the event shall first receive approval from
the Village Board of Trustees to conduct the event and to sell alcoholic
liquor under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Village
Board of Trustees and such license (s) shall be issued at no fee, and be
limited to no more than three (3) such licenses, running concurrently.



   (K)   Class “G” license, which shall authorize the retail sale
of only beer and wine on the premises designated therein only, provided that
the beer and wine are sold only in their original package and not for
consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee for such license shall
be $2,000.



   (L)   (1)   Class “H” license, which shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises designated therein for
consumption by the drink only on such premises only; and provided further
that such sale of alcoholic liquor shall be restricted to sales made in
conjunction with the licensee’s operation of a restaurant, with bar area,
on those premises, and that such sale of alcoholic liquor on such premises
shall be further restricted to service of such alcoholic liquor at tables,
booths, or bar area. Such licenses may be issued and retained by those
establishments which:



         (a)   Have a seating capacity at tables, booths, or bar
stools for a minimum of 140 persons for food and/or liquor.



         (b)   Are in fact operated as a restaurant with bar.



      (2)   The annual fee for such license shall be $3,000.



   (M)   Class “J” license which shall authorize the retail sale of
liquor for consumption on the licensed premises. A Class J license shall only
be issued to a licensee holding a valid Class A, AA, C, D, E, EE or H
license. A Class “J” license shall only be effective from August 15th in
the year that it is issued through January 15th of the following year. The
annual fee for a Class “J” license shall be $500.00.



   (N)   Conditions.



      (1)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, as a
condition to the issuance of any liquor license, impose such conditions and
restrictions upon each license as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
deem necessary to insure that operation of the liquor establishment shall not
be harmful to the safety, morals, and welfare of the community. The
conditions imposed upon each liquor license shall be enumerated upon said
license and shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place in such
establishment and shall reiterate in detail such conditions.



      (2)   Entry into the premises for which a Class C or Class CC
license has been issued shall be regulated by the club by restricting entry
by means of an electronic card entry system which allows entry only by
insertion of a membership card into an entry slot which electronically
activates opening of the entrance door, or such other system approved by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, with admission thereto restricted only to
club members and their guests. Except as otherwise provided herein, admission
of the general public shall be prohibited. Appropriate signs shall be posted.



      (3)   Drive-in or drive-up sales are hereby prohibited in any
license classification.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 88-02, passed - -88; Am. Ord. 91-23,
passed 9-11-91; Am. Ord. 94-03, passed 2-2-94; Am. Ord. 97-30, passed 7-2-97;
Am. Ord. 2007-005, passed 2-21-07; Am. Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-5-08; Am. Ord.
2011-012, passed 12-21-11; Am. Ord. 2012-015, passed 8-15-12; Am. Ord.
2013-001, passed 1-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-16-14)  Penalty, see
§ 111.99



§ 111.28  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   There shall be in force in the village:



 

Number of Licenses
 
Type of License




No more than zero
 
Class A


No more than four
 
Class AA


No more than zero
 
Class B


No more than two
 
Class BB


No more than zero
 
Class C


No more than zero
 
Class CC


No more than zero
 
Class D


No more than zero
 
Class E


No more than two
 
Class EE


No more than two
 
Class F


No more than two
 
Class G


No more than zero
 
Class H


No more than six
 
Class J


 




 



   (B)   The number of licenses authorized herein is subject to
increase or reduction by action of the Board of Trustees by a majority of
those holding office.



(Ord 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 90-43, passed 8-22-90; Am. Ord. 91-23,
passed 9-11-91; Am. Ord. 94-03, passed 2-2-94; Am. Ord. 95-27, passed
11-1-95; Am. Ord. 97-30, passed 7-2-97; Am. Ord. 2002-024, passed 12-4-02;
Am. Ord. 2002-025, passed 12-18-02; Am. Ord. 2003-009, passed 4-23-03; Am.
Ord. 2007-005, passed 2-21-07; Am. Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-5-08; Am. Ord.
2008-007, passed 4-2-08; Am. Ord. 2010-014, passed 9-22-10; Am. Ord.
2011-012, passed 12-21-11; Am. Ord. 2012-001, passed 1-4-12; Am. Ord.
2012-003, passed 3-7-12; Am. Ord. 2012-015, passed 8-15-12; Am. Ord.
2013-001, passed 1-16-13; Am. Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-16-14)



§ 111.29  POSTING LICENSE AND WARNING.



   (A)   Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be
framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.



   (B)   In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold,
there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed warning
which shall read substantially as follows:



      "WARNING - You are subject to a fine up to One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) under the ordinances of the Village of Orland Hills if you
purchase alcoholic liquor when under the age of 21 years, or misrepresent
your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor."



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.30  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   The following schedule shall be for the hours of operation for
licensed establishments:



 

License
 
Fee
 
Monday through Thursday
 
Friday through Saturday
 
Sunday
 
Specifications




A
 
$3,500
 
8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
On premises and carryout


AA
 
3,500
 
8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
8:00 a.m. through 3:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
On premises and carryout


B
 
3,000
 
8:00 a.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
8:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
Carryout only (non-gas station)


BB
 
3,500
 
8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
8:00 a.m. through 3:00 a.m.
 
8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
Carryout only (15mSF min)


C
 
3,000
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
On premises only (club)


CC
 
500
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
Only with Class C for special once per week event


D
 
3,500
 
12:00 p.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
On premises (restaurant)


E
 
2,500
 
11:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
11:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
Beer and wine only (restaurant)


EE
 
3,500
+ 3,500
 
12:00 p.m. through 5:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 5:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 5:00 a.m.
 
On premises
(hotel, banquet, restaurant)


F
 
100 (per day)
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 12:00 a.m.
 
Beer and wine on premises, special events
(3 day max., 2 per year)


G
 
2,000
 
8:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
8:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m.
 
12:00 p.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
Beer and wine only, carryout only


H
 
3,000
 
11:00 a.m. through 11:30 p.m.
 
11:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m.
 
11:00 a.m. through 11:30 p.m.
 
Restaurant with seating for 140 min. (on premises)


J
 
500
 
None
 
None
 
9:00 a.m. through 12:00 p.m.
 
Only in conjunction with Class A, AA, C, D, E, EE, or H license


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



   (B)   All patrons and customers shall leave the premises not later
than ten minutes following the closing hours stipulated above, except in
establishments which are full service restaurants in which the service of
alcoholic beverages is incidental and complimentary to the service of meals;
in such establishments all alcoholic beverages must be removed from all
service areas, tables, counters, bars, and the like within ten minutes
following the closing hours stipulated.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 88-41, passed 12-28-88; Am. Ord. 91-23,
passed 9-11-91; Am. Ord. 94-03, passed 2-2-94; Am. Ord. 95-27, passed
11-1-95; Am. Ord. 97-30, passed 7-2-97; Am. Ord. 2007-005, passed 2-21-07;
Am. Ord. 2008-003, passed 3-5-08; Am. Ord. 2011-012, passed 12-21-11; Am.
Ord. 2012-015, passed 8-15-12; Am. Ord. 2013-001, passed 1-16-13; Am. Ord.
2014-001, passed 1-16-14)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.31  LICENSE LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Any license issued hereunder shall be purely a personal
privilege to expire not later than December 31 next after the issuance unless
sooner revoked or expired as provided in this chapter, and such license shall
not constitute property nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment,
or execution nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, nor shall it be subject to be encumbered or hypothecated. 
Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but it shall cease and  terminate upon  the  death of  the
licensee.  Such license shall also cease and terminate upon the insolvency
or bankruptcy of any licensee; however, the executor or administrator of the
estate of any deceased licensee or the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue
under order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the
deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent
or insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license by no longer
than six months after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of such licensee.



   (B)   Any licensee may renew his license within 60 days prior to the
expiration thereof provided he is then qualified to receive a license; and
provided that the premises for which such renewal license is sought meet all
applicable health requirements, contain no building or fire/safety violations
or other violations of any applicable laws and ordinances, and otherwise meet
with the approval of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in the lawful
exercise of his powers and duties and that the renewal privilege herein
provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case
prevent the Board of Trustees from decreasing or increasing the number of
licenses to be issued within the village.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.32  CHANGE OF LOCATION OR IN PERSONNEL.



   (A)   A retail liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.  Such
locations may be changed upon the written application to make such change and
approval thereof issued by the Local Liquor  Control  Commissioner.  No
change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a
proper one for retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state
and the ordinances of the village.



   (B)   Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, person
holding directly, beneficially, or through any form of indirect or concealed
ownership or control, more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest of any
licenses or premises for which a license has been issued, or managers of
establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change.  All
new personnel shall meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise
qualify to hold a liquor license.  All such changes in personnel shall be
subject to review by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.33  CONDUCT OF LICENSEE.



   Every licensee and every officer, shareholder, associate, member,
agent, representative, and employee of every licensee under this chapter
shall be subject to the following regulations, and all persons shall likewise
be subject to the applicable regulations set forth below (when the term
LICENSEE is used in this section, it shall be deemed to include every
officer, shareholder, associate, member, agent, representative, and employee
of the licensee):



   (A)   Every licensee shall conduct his place of business in a quiet,
decent, and respectable manner and shall eject therefor or refuse admittance
thereto all persons rendering themselves objectionable or undesirable by
reason of undue noise or other acts disturbing the peace;



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor or intoxicating beverages to a person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.  Soliciting of drinks or prostitution is prohibited;



   (C)   Every licensee shall immediately report to the village police
any act by a person or patron rendering himself objectionable, causing undue
noise or disturbance, breach of peace, or unlawful conduct;



   (D)   No person licensed under the provisions hereof shall make any
loud or boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language, quarreling,
singing, fighting, or other disturbance of persons passing along any street
or public way in the vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the peace and
quiet of persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood thereof;



   (E)   All licensees dispensing or serving food or alcoholic liquor
shall be decently clothed.  Topless or similar attire is prohibited;



   (F)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any persons, while acting as
a waiter, waitress, bartender, entertainer, or any other position to:



         (a)   Expose his genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region;



         (b)   Expose any device, costume, or covering which
gives the appearance of, or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
natal cleft, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair regions; or



         (c)   Expose any portion of the female breast at or
below the areola thereof.



      (2)   It shall also be unlawful to allow any customer or any
other person to perform any of the foregoing acts.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any
waiter, waitress, bartender, entertainer, or any other employee or any person
to commit any of the unlawful acts in this section.  A person shall be
deemed to be a waiter, waitress, bartender, or entertainer if such person
acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is paid
any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity
is performed;



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any
act or form of entertainment which, when considered as whole, would be
considered obscene (for example, entertainment which has its predominant
appeal to prurient interests) as such term is defined by state law;



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any
of the following:  male or female striptease (regardless of whether they
strip off all their clothes), lingerie (either male or female), fashion
shows, wet T- shirt contests, wrestling in mud, jell-o, or any substance
other than air and any similar contest or performance.



   (J)   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious, or venereal disease.



   (K)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit any
species of gambling in his premises or any part thereof or any places
adjacent thereto under his control.



   (L)   It shall be unlawful for a license holder to employ any person
under the age of 21 in any capacity where the principal duty is the sale of
alcoholic liquor.  In situations where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not
the principal activity but a secondary consideration, no person under the age
of 18 may be directly involved.



   (M)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to bring or carry or to
cause or allow any weapon to be stored, possessed, or carried within any
licensed premise where alcohol is consumed on the premises.  A weapon is any
item so defined by the ILCS Ch. 720 Act 5, § 24-1 as amended.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.34  SALE OR DISCONTINUANCE OF BUSINESS; CONTINUATION OF LICENSE.



   In the event any licensee shall sell the business, or discontinue
operation for a period of more than 30 days (except closings for remodeling
and repairs), or any partnership or corporation shall be dissolved, such
license shall terminate forthwith.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) 



§ 111.35  LICENSING OF PREMISES FOR WHICH LICENSE IS REVOKED.



   When any license hereunder shall have been revoked for any cause, no
license shall be granted to any person, group of persons, partnership, firm,
or corporation for the period of one year thereafter for the sale of
alcoholic liquor in the premises described in such revoked license.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.36  SUSPENSION, NONRENEWAL, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; DENIAL OF
APPLICATIONS; NOTICE; HEARING.



   (A)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke
any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if he
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the
Liquor  Control  Act  of  1934  of  the  state  or  the provisions
of this chapter or any applicable rules or regulations established by the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission or any applicable rules or regulations
established by said Local Liquor Control Commissioner, or for any other
grounds established in the Liquor Control Act of 1934.



   (B)   (1)   No such license shall be revoked or suspended or
nonrenewed except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and Board of Trustees with written notice sent to the licensee
at least three days prior to the hearing affording said licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend; however, if the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason
for such conclusion, and without notice or hearing, order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee
shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the
licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business
or businesses.



      (2)   The notice hereunder shall include the time, date, and
place  of the hearing and a general description of the alleged causes  for
the possible revocation or suspension or the reasons for the nonrenewal.  At
any hearing hereunder, the licensee shall be entitled to all the protections
and rights allowed by law.  Such different or additional procedures as may
be allowed by law may be established from time to time by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner and approved by the Board of Trustees of the village.



   (C)   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines  after a
hearing that the license should be revoked, suspended, or nonrenewed, he
shall, within ten days after the hearing, state the reason for such
determination in a written order of revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal,
and shall serve a copy of the order upon the licensee.  The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner has the responsibility to prepare a written official
record of the proceedings of such hearing.



   (D)   The licensee, after the receipt of the order of suspension or
revocation, shall have the privilege within a period of 20 days after the
receipt of such order of suspension or revocation, of appealing the order to
the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.  If, and only if, such right exists
under state law, the licensee shall have the similar right to appeal any
decision of nonrenewal within said 20-day period to the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission.



   (E)   In the event an appeal is taken from an order of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner, the appeal shall be limited to a review of the
official record of the proceedings of such Local Liquor Control Commissioner.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



SALES



§ 111.45  LIMITATION ON SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   No licensee nor any officer, shareholder, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee shall sell, give, or
deliver alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine to any persons under the age of 21
years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a
habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient, or in need of
mental treatment.  No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining
alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to
another person under the age of 21 years except in the performance of a
religious ceremony or service.



   (B)   Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a
gift of such alcoholic liquor nor shall he have such alcoholic liquor in his
possession.



   (C)   If a licensee or his agent or employee believes or has reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such
delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.



   (D)   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface any identification
card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification
card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information.  No
person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of alcoholic
liquor using an identification card in violation of this section. The
possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of
age is forbidden.



   (E)   The possession and dispensing to, or consumption by, a minor
of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, is
not prohibited by this section.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor
dealer's license, or his agent, representative, or employee, or officer of
the license holder, to suffer or permit any person under the age of 21 to be
or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in
the room or place where such licensed premises is located.  This division
shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his  parent or guardian,
or to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the
sale of service or commodities other than  alcoholic liquor.



   (G)   The prices established for the retail sale of alcoholic 
beverages must remain the same from opening to closing of the licensed
establishment.



   (H)   The prices charged for retail sales of alcoholic beverages
must remain the same for all customers.



   (I)   In addition to all other fines and penalties which may be
authorized by law, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or
revoke the retail dealer's license for any violation  of this chapter.



   (J)   It is prohibited for any licensee to sell for consumption not
on the premises, single servings of beer, malt liquor or wine in containers
containing one quart or less, or to sell any other alcoholic liquor in
containers containing less than one pint.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 2013-008, passed 10-2-13)  Penalty, see
§ 111.99



§ 111.46  PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY PERSON UNDER AGE
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian of any 
person under the age of 21 years to allow such person to purchase, receive,
consume, or possess alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter upon either
public or private property within the village.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises
located within the village to allow any person under the age of 21 years to
remain on such premises while in possession of alcoholic liquor or while
consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.47  RETAIL SALES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.



   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, home for
aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any
military or naval station.  This prohibition shall not apply to hotels
offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants,
food shops, or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the
principal business, nor the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church where such church
has been established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original
license.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at
retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where
the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal
business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches,
or drinks for such minors.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.48  SALE, CONSUMPTION, OR DELIVERY ON GOVERNMENT OWNED OR CONTROLLED
PROPERTY.



   Unless specifically authorized by the laws of the state, the U.S.
government, or by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, no alcoholic liquor
shall be sold on, consumed on, or delivered to or on any building or property
belonging to or under the control of the U.S. government, the state, or any
of its political subdivisions, including but not limited to buildings, lots,
or parcels of real estate, public streets, rights-of- way, and easements.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.49  SALES ON CREDIT.



   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit, or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in exchange for
any goods, wares, or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered. 
If any person shall extend credit for such purpose, the debt thereby
attempted to be created shall not be recoverable by law.  Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent any club as defined in this chapter
from permitting checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by
members or bona fide guests of members and charged to the  account of such
members or guests in accordance with the bylaws of said club; and provided,
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any hotel as
defined in this chapter from permitting checks or statements for liquor to be
signed by guests residing at said hotel and charged to the accounts of said
guest. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit retail sales of alcoholic
liquor from being charged on a nationally recognized credit card or bank
charge card.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.50  MISREPRESENTATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, pour, or mix any
alcoholic beverage which is represented to be of a certain quantity or kind,
a given brand name or to be of certain ingredients when it is in fact
different from such representation.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.51  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in full compliance with
the village ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the
storage or sale of food for human consumption, and shall be in a clean and
proper sanitary condition.  All persons employed or working in any such
premises shall be cleanly clothed.  All utensils, appliances, vessels,
receptacles, refrigerators, closets, rooms, or other places or things
whatsoever which are used for the purpose of selling or offering for sale
such liquors or for the storing or dispensing of the same, must at all times
be kept in a clean, wholesome, and sanitary condition.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87) Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.52  PROHIBITED SALE OR PROMOTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   All licensees selling alcoholic beverages to be served and
consumed on the licensed premises are prohibited from engaging in any of the
following enumerated practices:



      (1)   No licensee, employee or agent of a license shall:



         (a)   Sell, offer or deliver to any person or persons
any drinks sold on the basis of two or more drinks for the price of one drink.



         (b)   Sell, offer or deliver to any person an unlimited
number of drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the public or full meal (banquet packages) and
hors d'oeuvres packages which are open to the public.



         (c)   Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages
contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price charged for
such drink during the same calendar week.



         (d)   Encourage or permit any game or contest which
involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes on the licensed
premises.



      (2)   No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way,
whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices
prohibited under this section.



   (B)   The prohibition contained herein shall not prohibit liquor
licensees from:



      (1)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time.



      (2)   Including a drink as part of a meal package.



      (3)   Free wine tastings.



      (4)   Offering room services to registered guests in hotels
licensed for such services.



   (C)   Licenses shall make nonalcoholic beverages available for
purchase by any person, and licensees shall make coffee available for
purchase by any person during the licensee's hours of operation.



(Ord. 88-37, passed 12-14-88) Penalty, see § 111.99



ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT



§ 111.65  LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   The President of the Board of Trustees of the village  shall  be 
the  Local  Liquor  Control Commissioner  and  shall  be  charged 
with  the administration within the village of the appropriate provisions 
of  the  Liquor  Control Act of the state and of this chapter.  Beginning
May 1, 1989, the Liquor Commissioner, pursuant to the Illinois Dram Shop Act,
shall receive $100 per month beginning the month when the first liquor
license is issued and continuing to the end of the Liquor Commissioner's term
of office.  The salary, once it commences, shall remain in effect,
regardless of how many, if any, liquor licenses are issued or remain in
effect.  The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following
powers, functions, and duties with respect to licenses, other than licenses
to manufacturers, import distributors, dis tributors, nonbeverage users,
railroads, airplanes, and boats:



   (A)   To grant or suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke for
cause all local licenses issued to persons for the premises within his
jurisdiction; however, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may impose a
fine of not more than $500 per day in lieu of a suspension;



   (B)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer or peace
officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder, to
determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules or
regulations adopted by him, the village, or by any other agency having the
authority to do so have been or are being violated, and at the time of such
entry to examine such premises in connection therewith;



   (C)   To receive complaints from any citizen that any of the
provisions of this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, or any other applicable rules or regulations, have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;



   (D)   To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a
license to an applicant he has determined to be ineligible therefor;



   (E)   To examine, or cause to be examined under oath any application
for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom
notice of revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal has been served in the manner
hereinafter provided; and to examine, or cause to be examined, any applicant
or licensee and the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to
hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his
duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in
any part of this state.  For the purpose of obtaining any of the information
desired by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he may
authorize the Chief of Police to act on his behalf;



   (F)   To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to
the Village Clerk or Treasurer as the case may be; or



   (G)   In the case of application for renewal of a liquor license
other than a Class F license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has the
authority to grant without additional fee a temporary liquor license, which
shall be valid for no more than 30 days.  The temporary liquor license shall
be clearly marked "temporary" and contain the date of issuance and date of
expiration.  The temporary liquor license may be renewed at the discretion
of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, providing that written notification
to the Board of Trustees is required in the event that more than three
consecutive temporary liquor licenses are issued to a single applicant for a
single location.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87; Am. Ord. 88-02, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 88-26,
passed 9-28-88)



§ 111.66  INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to
inspect and examine the premises wherein retail liquor business is carried
on, at least once every three months, the purpose of ascertaining whether or
not all health ordinances of the village relative to the carrying on of such
business are being complied with at such premises.  It shall be the duty of
every such person, group of persons, partnership, firm, or corporation
licensed under the provisions of this chapter to permit such inspection to be
made and to exhibit the premises to such persons making such inspection and a
record of such inspection shall be kept on file in the office of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.  A failure to permit such inspection shall be
sufficient cause to revoke or suspend a license for the premise.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.67  PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN; HEALTH CERTIFICATES.



   Every person in charge of such premises shall keep himself and his
employees in a clean condition and cleanly clothed and no person who has
tuberculosis or any venereal or communicable skin disease or who has an
infectious or contagious disease shall engage in or be employed in and about
such business or such premises, or engaged in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of alcoholic liquor.  Every person in charge of
such premises and his employees shall obtain and keep in effect all necessary
health certificates as may be required by the State Department of Public
Health or any other government agencies, including any certificates required
because the liquor establishment serves food as well as alcoholic liquor.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.68  VILLAGE HEARINGS; TESTIMONY REQUIRED.



   (A)   As a condition attached to the issuance of, or renewal of, a
liquor license hereunder, it shall be the duty of each licensee to require
all officers, agents, and employees of licensee to testify (subject to any
constitutional restrictions) at any hearing that may be conducted by the
village, or any of its committees, commissions, boards, or agencies, or the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, regardless of whether they would otherwise
be subject to subpoena power, when such hearings may relate directly or
indirectly to any events or occurrences of which they may have knowledge
arising out of their position as officer, agent, or employee of the
licensee.  It shall further be the duty of each licensee to inform all such
officers, agents, and employees of their duty to testify hereunder, and each
licensee shall make the same a condition of employment for all the licensee's
employees.



   (B)   If any such officer, agent, or employee fails or refuses to
testify to the full extent of their knowledge at any such hearing when
requested to do so by the village, such failure shall be deemed to constitute
a violation of this section by the licensee, unless such failure or refusal
is based upon a constitutional right to not so testify.



   (C)   The violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute due cause for the suspension or revocation of the license of
licensee, or sufficient grounds for nonrenewal of any such license.  Any
such suspension, nonrenewal or revocation shall be effective only after
compliance with the procedures and provisions set forth in § 111.36, or
otherwise in con formity with law.  The suspension, revocation, or
nonrenewal of such license shall be an additional remedy and shall not
prevent or exclude a prosecutorial action for a fine under § 111.99 hereof.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, or corporation
violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues;
and in addition thereto, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the
power to revoke, nonrenew, or suspend licenses granted under this chapter
pursuant to its provisions.



(Ord. 87-09, passed - -87)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Mechanical Amusement Devices and Juke Boxes



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License required



   112.03   Application



   112.04   License fees



   112.05   Investigations and inspection



   112.06   Display of license; transference



   112.07   Revocation of license



   112.08   Operation by persons under 21 years of age



   112.09   Seizure and destruction of machine



   112.10   Prohibiting pool tables in public places



 



   112.99   Penalty



MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND JUKE BOXES



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Includes pinball machines, bowling, or any game
played with any number of balls, spheres, or images electronically or
mechanically operated upon a table, board, surface, or wall with holes,
pockets, cups, or electrical activity devices, electrical impulse and cathode
games, and other similar games and devices.  The intent of this definition
is to include games such as Pac Man, Galaxy, Space Invaders, Blackjack, and
similarly reaction time devices but excluding video gaming terminals.



   JUKE BOX.  Any music vending machine, contrivance, or device which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, or key into any slot,
crevice, or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be
operated for the emission of songs, music, or similar amusement.



   POOL TABLE.  A rectangular cloth-covered table with raised cushion
edges in which a long tapering cue is used to hit small hard balls against
one another or the side cushions of the table or into pockets, including
billiard tables, pocket billiard tables as well as pool tables.



   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL.  Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that
can be redeemed for cash.  The term does not include a machine that directly
dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.



(Ord.  85-01,  passed  1-9-85;  Am.  Ord.  91-14,  passed 6-12-91; Am.
Ord. 2012-002, passed 3-7-12)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person, firm, corporation, or association displaying for public
patronage or keeping for operation any juke box or mechanical amusement
device as herein defined by § 112.01 shall be required to obtain a license
for each device from the village, upon payment of a license fee. 
Application for such license shall be made to the Village Clerk upon a form
to be supplied by the Village Clerk for that purpose.



(Ord.  85-01,  passed  1-9-85;  Am.  Ord.  91-14,  passed 6-12-91; Am.
Ord. 92-14, passed 5-13-92)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for such license shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date, and place
of birth.



      (2)   Prior criminal convictions of applicant, if any.



      (3)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that place.



      (4)   Description of machine to be covered by the license,
mechanical features, name of manufacturer, and serial number.



      (5)   Every application issued under this chapter is subject
to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to denial of such
application to operate any juke box or mechanical amusement device by the
Village President and Board of Trustees after written notice to the
applicant.  Such notice shall specify the reason or reasons for such
denial.  A hearing may be requested by the applicant.  At such hearing, the
applicant and his attorney may present and submit evidence or witnesses in
his defense.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be
over 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States.



(Ord. 85-01, passed 1-9-85)



§ 112.04  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Each license shall be controlled in accordance with provisions
of Chapter 110.



   (B)   The license fee for an amusement device shall be as specified
in § 110.07(B).



   (C)   The license fee for a juke box shall be as specified in §
110.07(B).



(Ord.  85-01,  passed  1-9-85;  Am.  Ord.  91-14,  passed 6-12-91; Am.
Ord. 92-14, passed 5-13-92; Am. Ord. 94-36, passed 11-16-94)



§ 112.05  INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Application for licenses shall be made out in duplicate, one
copy being referred to the Chief of Police and the other copy to the Village
Electrical Inspector.



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the location
wherein it is proposed to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is
a person of good moral character, and either approve or disapprove the
application.



      (2)   The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all wiring
connections to the machine, determine if the same complies with the
electrical code of the village, and shall either approve or disapprove the
application.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless reviewed by
the Chief of Police and the Electrical Inspector and approved by the License
and Permit Committee.



(Ord. 85-01, passed 1-9-85)



§ 112.06  DISPLAY OF LICENSE; TRANSFERENCE.



   (A)   The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted
permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises
wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.



   (B)   Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to
another similar machine upon application to the Village Clerk to such effect
and the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or
device.  Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license and
the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and
every machine displayed or operated by him.



   (C)   If the licensee shall move his place of business to another
location within the village, the license may be transferred to such new
location upon application to the Village Clerk, giving the street and number
of the new location.  The new location shall be reviewed by the Chief of
Police and the Electrical Inspector with approval by the License and Permit
Committee in the same manner as provided in § 112.05.



(Ord. 85-01, passed 1-9-85)



§ 112.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right, which
is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke same should the license, directly or
indirectly, permit the operation of any juke box or mechanical amusement
device contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the
village, or the laws of the state or where the operation of the premises
results in excess public disturbances or complaints relative to the
operations by the licensee.  Said license may be revoked by the President
and Board of Trustees after written notice to the licensee, which notice
shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is
charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such
violations.  Ten days notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. 
At such hearing the licensee and his attorney may present and submit evidence
of witnesses in his defense.



(Ord.  85-01,  passed  1-9-85;  Am.  Ord.  91-14,  passed 6-12-91; Am.
Ord. 92-14, passed 5-13-92))



§ 112.08  OPERATION BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class A or C liquor license to
allow anyone under the age of 21 to operate a juke box or mechanical
amusement device on the premises where such liquor license is held; provided
that this section shall not apply to a person under 21 years of age who is
accompanied by his parent or guardian.  It shall also be unlawful to operate
any game involving the use of dice or cards or any video game that displays
dice or cards on the video screen.



(Ord. 85-01, passed 1-9-85; Am. Ord. 85-02, passed 2-27-85) Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.09  SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINE.



   If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by
the police and impounded and if upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it
to be used as a gambling device said exhibitor be found guilty, such machine
shall be confiscated or destroyed by the police.



(Ord. 85-01, passed 1-9-85)



§ 112.10  PROHIBITING POOL TABLES IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be prohibited for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain
or keep a pool table in any place of public resort, it being the specific
intention of the President and Board of Trustees to prohibit the public use
and rental of pool tables.



(Ord. 92-14, passed 5-13-92)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone found violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.  Each day that
said violation continues shall be deemed a separate and punishable offense.



(Ord. 85-01, passed 1-9-85)



CHAPTER 113:  FOOD



Section



Food Service and Retail Food Service Establishments



   113.01   Purpose



   113.02   Certain state regulations to apply



Food Deliveries



   113.20   License required



   113.21   Application; fees



   113.22   Sanitation standards



   113.23   Temperature control



   113.24   Inspections



   113.25   Exemption



 



   113.99   Penalty



FOOD SERVICE AND RETAIL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 113.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to define food, potentially hazardous
food, retail food establishment (the term retail food establishment as used
in this subchapter shall mean either a food service establishment or a retail
food store), mobile food unit, temporary food service establishment,
regulatory authority, utensils, equipment, and the like:  providing for the
sale of only sound, properly labeled food; regulating the sources of food;
establishing standards for food, food protection, food personnel, food
operations, food equipment and utensils, sanitary facilities and controls,
and other facilities; requiring permits  for the operation of food service
establishments and retail food stores; regulating the inspection of such
establishments; providing for the examination and condemnation of food;
providing for incorporation  by reference  of  Chapter  10  compliance
provisions of the 1976 and subsequent editions of the Food and Drug
Administration "Food Service Sanitation Ordinance" except Sections 10-601 and
10-602 as amended; providing for incorporation by reference of the current
and subsequent Illinois Department of Public Health "Food Service Sanitation
Rules and Regulations" which are on file with the Village Clerk and the
current and subsequent edition of the Illinois Department of Public Health
"Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations" which are on file with
the Secretary of State; and providing for the enforcement of this subchapter,
and the fixing of penalties.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76; Am. Ord. 85-03, passed 2-27-85)



§ 113.02  CERTAIN STATE REGULATIONS TO APPLY.



   This issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to operate retail
food establishments; the prohibiting of sale of unsound or mislabeled food or
drink; the enforcement of this subchapter; shall be regulated in accordance
with Chapter 10 compliance procedures of the 1976 and subsequent editions of
the Food and Drug Administration "Food Service Sanitation Ordinance"; the
inspection of food service establishments shall be regulated in accordance
with the current and subsequent Illinois Department of Public Health "Food
and Sanitation Rules and Regulations" on file with the Secretary of State;
the inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated in accordance with
the Illinois Department of Public Health "Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules
and Regulations" on file with the Secretary of State.  Three certified
copies of the Food and Drug Administration "Food Service Sanitation
Ordinance," Illinois Department of Public Health "Food Service Sanitation
Rules and Regulations" and the Illinois Department of Public Health "Retail
Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations" shall be on file at the office
of the Village Clerk's office.



(Ord. 76-29, passed 12-8-76; Am. Ord. 85-03, passed 2-27-85) Penalty, see §
113.99



FOOD DELIVERIES



§ 113.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any vehicle, including
wagons and motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by human power, for the
storage or carrying of any meat, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard,
vegetables, bread or bakery products, or any other provisions intended for
human consumption, including beverages, in the village for the purpose of
delivering any such foodstuffs to any place in the village for use and
consumption at, wholesale or retail, unless a license for such vehicle is
first secured and the provisions of this subchapter are fully complied with.



('65 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 1) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.21  APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Village
Clerk, and shall recite the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the
name or names of  the persons from whom such deliveries are made, and the
nature of the goods carried.  The Village Clerk shall issued such licenses,
and shall give to the Village President a list of all such licenses issued.



   (B)   The annual fee for such licenses shall be $50 for each
vehicle.  Such fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk who shall turn them
over to the Treasurer forthwith.



('65 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 2) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
2002-015, passed 9-4-02)



§ 113.22  SANITATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used.  It
shall be unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter, or any other waste
material or product to accumulate in or on any such vehicle while it is so
used.



   (B)   If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle,
such goods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which
is screened and protected against dust and insects.



('65 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 4) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.23  TEMPERATURE CONTROL.



   Readily perishable foods or beverages, while in transit, shall be
maintained at a temperature of not less than 35° F. and not more than 50°
F.  The temperature for hot liquid foods or beverages shall be maintained at
not less than 150° F.; and for frozen foods at not more than 32° F.  The
compartments in vehicles used for carrying such foods shall be so
constructed, equipped, and maintained as to preserve the temperature as above
indicated for the respective types of food.



('65 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 5) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.24  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Village President to make or cause to be
made such inspections as may be necessary to insure compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



('65 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 6) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 113.25  EXEMPTION.



   No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver
foodstuffs from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food
dealing establishment in the village but all provisions of this subchapter,
other than that providing for the payment of a fee, shall be complied with in
connection with such vehicles.



('65 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 3) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 113.02
shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $500.  In addition thereto, such
persons may be enjoined from continuing such violations.  Each day upon
which such a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation.



(Ord. 76-29, passed  -  -76; Am. Ord. 85-03, passed 2-27-85)



   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any
provision of §§ 113.20 through 113.25 shall be fined not less than $5 nor
more than $100 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (2)   Any license issued under the provisions of these
sections may be revoked by the Village President for any violation of any
regulation hereof, and such revocation shall be in addition to any fine
imposed by virtue of this section.



('65 Code, Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 7) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



CHAPTER 114:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   114.01   Definition



   114.02   License required



   114.03   Application for license



   114.04   License fee



   114.05   Application for registration to solicit



   114.06   Issuance of registration card or badge upon approval;
deposit fee



   114.07   Duration of registration



   114.08   Registration card or badge; possession



   114.09   Number of personnel permitted in vehicle



   114.10   Peddling on Sundays



   114.11   Mobile catering



   114.12   Hours of operation



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SOLICITOR.  Transient merchants or transient vendors or any person
soliciting orders for the sale of any articles or things in the village to be
delivered in the future; or advertising for or soliciting orders, donations,
gifts, or customers for any association or business not residing in the
village.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Every person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange, at
retail or otherwise, any goods, wares, or merchandise, traveling from place
to place, on or along and upon the streets and alleys of the village, or who
shall sell and deliver from any vehicle, going from place to place, any
goods, wares, or merchandise, or who shall go about from place to place
selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise shall be deemed a peddler
and shall, before engaging in such business, obtain a license as a peddler as
hereinafter provided and no person shall engaged in or conduct the business
of a peddler, as above defined and specified, without a license.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Every person who desires a license as a peddler shall make application
in writing therefor to the Village President and Board of Trustees, setting
out in such application the full name and residence of such applicant and
whether he desires to be licensed to peddle from a vehicle or from a pushcart
or handcart, or as a pack peddler, or as a peddler of fruits, candy, cake,
nuts, or other like commodities, from baskets or other like receptacles
carried by himself.  Upon receipt of such application and the payment by
such applicant to the Village Clerk of a license fee, as hereinafter fixed
for the particular form of license issued, the President and Board of
Trustees shall order issued to such applicant a license attested by the
Village Clerk authorizing such applicant to engage in and carry on the
business of a peddler of the kind described in the application.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75)



§ 114.04  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee to be charged for a license in each case shall be as follows:



   (A)   To peddle from a vehicle drawn or propelled by animal power
other than that supplied by a human being, or drawn or propelled by
mechanical power, shall be $50.00 per annum, except in cases and instances
herein otherwise provided, and such license shall entitle the licensee to use
one such wagon or similar vehicle in and about his business, and for each
additional wagon or similar vehicle used by him he shall pay the same license
fee of $50.00.



   (B)   All licenses shall be for the year commencing May 1 and ending
on the succeeding April 30, and no such license shall be issued for any
period of time less than one year for a less sum than the annual license fee
hereinabove provided.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75; Am. Ord. 99-22, passed 8-18-99)



§ 114.05  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION TO SOLICIT.



   All applicants for registration to solicit within the village shall
execute an application blank at the office of the Police Department, which
application blank shall give the applicant's name, address, place of birth,
age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, place and state of nativity, and
telephone number; the name of the firm which he represents; the make of
automobile and license number of the automobile, if any, to be used while
making such solicitations; the articles to be solicited; or purpose for which
solicitation is to be made.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75)



§ 114.06  ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION CARD OR BADGE UPON APPROVAL; DEPOSIT FEE.



   No registration card or badge shall be granted until the application is
signed and receives the written approval of the Chief of Police or other
officer of the Police Department whose duty it is to examine the applicant,
and the applicant is fingerprinted and a deposit of $20.00 is paid to the
Village Clerk, which deposit shall be refunded upon the return of the
registration card or badge of $15.00.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75; Am. Ord. 99-22, passed 8-18-99)



§ 114.07  DURATION OF REGISTRATION.



   Registration to solicit within the village shall give the applicant the
right and privilege of soliciting within the village for the purposes named
in the application for a period of one day.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75)



§ 114.08  REGISTRATION CARD OR BADGE; POSSESSION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to call at any residence
or business, commercial, or industrial establishment within the village with
the intent or purpose of soliciting as provided in this chapter without
having in his possession a registration card or badge authorizing such
solicitation.



   (B)   No registration card or badge shall be in the possession of
any person other than the one to whom it is issued.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.09  NUMBER OF PERSONNEL PERMITTED IN VEHICLE.



   Upon each vehicle drawn or propelled by animal or mechanical power,
licensed under the provisions of this chapter, there shall be permitted but
one helper or assistant to the driver or operator of such wagon or vehicle.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.10  PEDDLING ON SUNDAYS.



   No one having a peddler's license shall peddle any fruits, goods,
wares, or merchandise or other article or thing whatsoever on Sundays.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.11  MOBILE CATERING.



   No permits, licenses, or solicitor registrations shall be granted for
mobile catering and sale of food of all kinds and descriptions for immediate
consumption.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75)



§ 114.12  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Whenever a registration card or badge shall be granted for solicitation
purposes within the village, such solicitation shall be made between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. specifically excluding, however, Sundays and
holidays.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75; Am. Ord. 81-03, passed 2-25-81; Am. Ord. 99-22,
passed 8-18-99)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter shall be fined
not more than $500 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each and every day during which a violation continues or exists.



(Ord. 75-4, passed 3-4-75)



CHAPTER 115:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   115.001   Purpose



   115.002   Definitions



   115.003   Registration



   115.004   Telecommunications license



   115.005   Telecommunications franchise



   115.006   Cable television franchise



   115.007   Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements



   115.008   Other remedies



   115.009   Severability



Registration of Telecommunications Carriers and Providers



   115.020   Registration required



   115.021   Registration and deposit fee



   115.022   Purpose of registration



Telecommunications License



   115.030   Telecommunications license



   115.031   License application



   115.032   Determination by the village



   115.033   Agreement



   115.034   Nonexclusive grant



   115.035   Rights granted



   115.036   Term of grant



   115.037   License route



   115.038   Location of facilities



   115.039   Construction permits



   115.040   Compensation to village



   115.041   Service to village users



   115.042   Amendment of grant



   115.043   Renewal applications



   115.044   Renewal determinations



   115.045   Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal



Telecommunications Franchise



   115.055   Telecommunications franchise



   115.056   Franchise application



   115.057   Determination by the village



   115.058   Agreement



   115.059   Nonexclusive grant



   115.060   Term of grant



   115.061   Rights granted



   115.062   Franchise territory



   115.063   Location of facilities



   115.064   Construction permits



   115.065   Compensation to village



   115.066   Nondiscrimination



   115.067   Service to the village



   115.068   Amendment of grant



   115.069   Renewal applications



   115.070   Renewal determinations



   115.071   Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal



Cable Franchise



   115.080   Reserved



Fees and Compensation



   115.090   Purpose



   115.091   Application and review fee



   115.092   Other village costs



   115.093   Reserved compensation for public ways



   115.094   Compensation for village property



   115.095   Construction permit fee



   115.096   Annual fees



   115.097   Cable fees



   115.098   Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax



Conditions of Grant



   115.110   Location of facilities



   115.111   Compliance with J.U.L.I.E.



   115.112   Construction permits



   115.113   Interference with the public ways



   115.114   Damage to property



   115.115   Notice of work



   115.116   Repair and emergency work



   115.117   Maintenance of facilities



   115.118   Relocation or removal of facilities



   115.119   Removal of unauthorized facilities



   115.120   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities



   115.121   Damage to grantee's facilities



   115.122   Restoration of public ways, other ways and village property



   115.123   Facilities maps



   115.124   Duty to provide information



   115.125   Leased capacity



   115.126   Grantee insurance



   115.127   General indemnification



   115.128   Performance and construction surety



   115.129   Security fund



   115.130   Construction and completion bond



   115.131   Coordination of construction activities



   115.132   Assignments or transfers of grant



   115.133   Transactions affecting control of grant



   115.134   Revocation or termination of grant



   115.135   Notice and duty to cure



   115.136   Hearing



   115.137   Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions



Construction Standards



   115.150   General provisions



   115.151   Construction codes



   115.152   Construction permits



   115.153   Applications



   115.154   Engineer's certification



   115.155   Traffic control plan



   115.156   Issuance of permit



   115.161   Noncomplying work



   115.162   Completion of construction



   115.163   As-built drawings



   115.164   Restoration of improvements



   115.165   Landscape restoration



   115.166   Construction surety



   115.167   Exceptions



   115.168   Responsibility of owner



Cable and Video Customer Protection Law



   115.180   Customer service and privacy protection law adopted



   115.181   Enforcement



   115.182   Customer credits



Cable and Video Service Provider Fees



   115.195   Definitions



   115.196   Cable/video service provider fee imposed



   115.197   Applicable principles



   115.198   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   115.199   Audits of cable/video service provider



   115.200   Late fees/payments



 



   115.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 115.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications
providers and services;



   (B)   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames
for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;



   (C)   Promote competition in telecommunications;



   (D)   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications
providers and services;



   (E)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive
telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses,
institutions and residents of the village;



   (F)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the
village for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;



   (G)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held
in public trust by the village;



   (H)   Assure that the village's current and ongoing costs of
granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are
fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;



   (I)   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the village and the
residents of the village for permitting private use of the public ways;



   (J)   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing
facilities or services within the village comply with the ordinances, rules
and regulations of the village;



   (K)   Assure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly
protect the public health, safety and welfare;



   (L)   Enable the village to discharge its public trust consistent
with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry
competition and technological development.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AFFILIATE.  A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls,
is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with
another person.



   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE.  Reserved.



   CABLE ACT.  The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §
532, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.



   CABLE OPERATOR.  A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide CABLE SERVICE within the village as that term is defined in the Cable
Act.



   CABLE SERVICE. For the purpose of this chapter shall have the same
meaning provided by the Cable Act.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The President and Board of Trustees of the
village.



   EXCESS CAPACITY.  The volume or capacity in any existing or future
duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public
way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.



   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC).  The federal administrative
agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.



   ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC).  The state administrative agency,
or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers in the State of Illinois.



   OTHER WAYS.  The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other
rights-of-way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.



   OVERHEAD FACILITIES.  Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.



   PERSON.  Corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies
or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and
individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.



   PUBLIC STREET.  Any highway, street, alley or other public
right-of-way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of
the village which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to
highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.



   PUBLIC WAY.  All public streets and utility easements, as those terms
are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the village, but only to the
extent of the village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.



   STATE.  The State of Illinois.



   SURPLUS SPACE.  That portion of the usable space on a utility pole
which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the
orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use
by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER.  Every person that directly or indirectly
owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the
village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications
service.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.  The plant, equipment and property,
including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit,
receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  Every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  The providing or offering for rent, sale
or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of
voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or
among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite
or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission
medium.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM.  See TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.  Utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities.



   USABLE SPACE.  The total distance between the top of a utility pole
and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois
Commerce Commission.



   UTILITY EASEMENT.  Any easement owned by the village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.



   UTILITY FACILITIES.  The plant, equipment and property, including but
not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires,
plant  and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground
within the public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose
of providing utility or telecommunications services.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Orland Hills (County of Cook, State of
Illinois).



   VILLAGE PROPERTY.  All real property owned by the village, other than
public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein, and
all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which are not
subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.003  REGISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers
and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications originating or terminating in the village
shall register with the village pursuant to §§ 115.020 through 115.022.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.004  TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers
who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons and areas outside the village shall first obtain a license granting
the use of such pubic ways from the village pursuant to §§ 115.030 through
115.045.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.005  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers
who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
village, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or areas
in the village, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such
public ways from the village pursuant to §§ 115.055 through 115.071.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.006  CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who
desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications
facilities in any public way of the village for the purpose of providing
cable service to persons in the village shall first obtain a cable franchise
from the village as provided in §§ 115.080.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.007  APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS.



   This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance
or franchise agreement until:



   (A)   The expiration of the franchise ordinance or agreement; or



   (B)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.008  OTHER REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of
this chapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.009  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion
of this chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any reason,
declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent
jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS



§ 115.020  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any
telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within
the village, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications
facilities within the village, shall register with the village pursuant to
this subchapter on forms to be provided by the Village Clerk, which shall
include the following:



   (A)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates.



   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent
or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.



   (C)   A description of registrant's existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the village.



   (D)   A description of the telecommunications service that the
registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or
providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the village.



   (E)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is
subject to public way licensing or franchising under this chapter.



   (F)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the village.



   (G)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has
applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the
Illinois Commerce Commission to provide telecommunications services or
facilities within the village.



   (H)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has
applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other
approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide
telecommunications services or facilities within the village.



   (I)   Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably
require.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.021  REGISTRATION AND DEPOSIT FEE.



   Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or
provider shall be accompanied by:



   (A)   A registration fee of $120;



   (B)   A deposit fee of $10,000.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.022  PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION.



   The purpose of registration under this subchapter is to:



   (A)   Provide the village with accurate and current information
concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the village;



   (B)   Assist the village in enforcement of this chapter;



   (C)   Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any
municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the
village;



   (D)   Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state
and federal laws.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE



§ 115.030  TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE.



   A telecommunications license shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the
village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to
persons or areas outside the village.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.031  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this
subchapter shall file an application with the village which shall include the
following information:



   (A)   The identity of the license applicant, including all
affiliates of the applicant.



   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or
will be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications
facilities.



   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by
the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.



   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network
map of the facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient
detail to identify:



      (1)   The location and route requested for applicant's
proposed telecommunications facilities.



      (2)   The local Bell overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.



      (3)   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.



      (4)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities
and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate.



   (E)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities,
evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications
facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.



   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient
detail to identify:



      (1)   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or
conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;



      (2)   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such
ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications
facilities.



   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within
new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:



      (1)   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;



      (2)   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.



   (H)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.



   (I)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



   (J)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial
ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.



   (K)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.



   (L)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all
other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.



   (M)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §§
115.090 through 115.098.



   (N)   Such other and further information as may be required by the
Village Administrator.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.032  DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE.



   Within 60 days after receiving a complete application under § 115.031
hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the
following standards. The corporate authorities may extend the time period by
an additional 60 days with a written notice containing the reasons for the
extension. The discretionary decision to extend the response time rest solely
with the Village. If the application is denied, the written determination
shall include the reasons for denial.



   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.



   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.



   (C)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.



   (D)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional
utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.



   (E)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private
facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is
granted.



   (F)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.



   (G)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region.



   (H)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if
the license is granted.



   (I)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities.



   (J)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws,
regulations and policies.



   (K)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.033  AGREEMENT.



   No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and
the village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular
terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of
the village will be granted.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.034  NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.



   No license granted under this subchapter shall confer any exclusive
right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of
the village for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.035  RIGHTS GRANTED.



   No license granted under this subchapter shall convey any right, title
or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the
grant.  Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.036  TERM OF GRANT.



   Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications
license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.037  LICENSE ROUTE.



   A telecommunications license granted under this subchapter shall be
limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.038  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall
be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions:



   (A)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an
existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such utility facility.



   (B)   A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities
shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to
existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.



   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.



   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable
facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated
underground within a public way of the village, a grantee that currently
occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within
a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made
concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.



   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for
nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.039  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in §§ 115.110 through 115.137,
provided, however, that nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village
and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.040  COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE.



   Each license granted under this subchapter is subject to the village's
right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee;
provided, nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village and a
licensee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.041  SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS.



   A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications
services to persons or areas within the village upon submitting an
application for approval pursuant to §§ 115.055 through 115.071 hereof.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.042  AMENDMENT OF GRANT.



   (A)   A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village which are not
included in a license previously granted under this chapter.



   (B)   If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways not included  in  a 
previously  granted  license,  the  village shall grant a license
amendment without further application.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.043  RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.



   A grantee that desires to renew its license under this subchapter
shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the
current license, file an application with the village for renewal of its
license which shall include the following information:



   (A)   The information required pursuant to § 115.031.



   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the license agreement
between the village and the grantee.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.044  RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS.



   Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under § 115.043
hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the
following standards. if the renewal application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.



   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.



   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.



   (C)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.



   (D)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and the license agreement.



   (E)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws,
rules and policies.



   (F)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant
to use the public ways will serve the community interest.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.045  OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL.



   No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in
the licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements
of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action
to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE



§ 115.055  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.



   A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the village
and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the
village.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.056  FRANCHISE APPLICATION.



   Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this
subchapter shall file an application with the village which shall include the
following information:



   (A)   The identity of the franchise applicant, including all
affiliates of the applicant.



   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or
will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or
proposed facilities.



   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by
the franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.



   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network
map of the facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient
detail to identify:



      (1)   The location and route requested for applicant's
proposed telecommunications facilities.



      (2)   The location of all overhead and underground public
utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities
in the public way along the proposed route.



      (3)   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.



      (4)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, 
facilities  and  obstructions,  if any, that applicant proposes to
temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.



   (E)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities,
evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications
facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.



   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient
detail to identify:



      (1)   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or
conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;



      (2)   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such
ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications
facilities.



   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within
new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:



      (1)   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;



      (2)   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.



   (H)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.



   (I)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



   (J)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial
ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.



   (K)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.



   (L)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all
other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.



   (M)   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video
dial tone service or other video programming  service,  and sufficient
information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.



   (N)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the village that applicant intends to use or
lease.



   (O)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant
will offer or make available to the village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.



   (P)   A description of applicant's access and line extension
policies.



   (Q)   The area or areas of the village the applicant desires to
serve and a schedule for build out to the entire franchise area.



   (R)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §§
115.090 through 115.098.



   (S)   Such other and further information as may be requested by the
Village Administrator.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.057  DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE.



   Within 60 days after receiving a complete application under § 115.056
hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the
following standards. The corporate authorities may extend the time period by
an additional 60 days with a written notice containing the reasons for the
extension. The discretionary decision to extend the response time rests
solely with the village. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.



   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.



   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.



   (C)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.



   (D)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional
utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.



   (E)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private
facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is
granted.



   (F)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.



   (G)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region.



   (H)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if
the franchise requested is granted.



   (I)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities.



   (J)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws,
regulations and policies.



   (K)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.058  AGREEMENT.



   No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the
village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms
and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the
village will be granted.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.059  NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.



   No franchise granted under this subchapter shall confer any exclusive
right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of
the village for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.060  TERM OF GRANT.



   Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a
telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of
ten years.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.061  RIGHTS GRANTED.



   No franchise granted under this subchapter shall convey any right,
title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to
use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated 
in  the  grant.  Further, no franchise shall  be construed as any
warranty of title.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.062  FRANCHISE TERRITORY.



   A telecommunications franchise granted under this subchapter shall be
limited to the specific geographic area of the village to be served by the
franchise grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.063  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities
shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following
terms and conditions:



   (A)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an
existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such utility facility.



   (B)   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities
shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to
existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.



   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.



   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable
facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated
underground within a public way of the village, a grantee that currently
occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within
a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made
concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.



   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for
nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.064  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in §§ 115.110 through 115.137
provided, however, that nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village
and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.065  COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE.



   Each franchise granted under this subchapter is subject to the
village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and
reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the
franchisee; provided, nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village
and a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.066  NONDISCRIMINATION.



   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to
any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service,
without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for
grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this subchapter shall
prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among
differently situated customers.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.067  SERVICE TO THE VILLAGE.



   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to
the village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.068  AMENDMENT OF GRANT.



   (A)   A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or
to locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village
which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.



   (B)   If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted franchise, the village shall grant a franchise amendment without
further application.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.069  RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.



   A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this subchapter
shall, not more than 240 days nor less than 150 days before expiration of the
current franchise, file an application with the village for renewal of its
franchise which shall include the following information:



   (A)   The information required pursuant to § 115.056.



   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement
between the village and the grantee.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.070  RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS.



   Within 150 days after receiving a complete application under §
115.069  hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in
part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied,
the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.



   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.



   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.



   (C)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.



   (D)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Title
and the franchise agreement.



   (E)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws,
rules and policies.



   (F)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant
to use the public ways will serve the community interest.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.071  OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL.



   No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults
in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the
requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the
corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



CABLE FRANCHISE



§ 115.080  RESERVED.



FEES AND COMPENSATION



§ 115.090  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the payment and
recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the village related
to the enforcement and administration of this chapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.091  APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE.



   (A)   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to §§
115.030 through 115.045 or §§ 115.055 through 115.071, shall pay a fee of
$1,500 or 1% of the estimated cost of applicant's proposed telecommunications
facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional engineer, whichever
is greater.



   (B)   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the
village as part of the application filed pursuant to §§ 115.030 through
115.045 or §§ 115.055 through 115.071.



   (C)   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been
withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within 60 days of its application and
review fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under this
section, less:



      (1)   $1,000; and



      (2)   All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the
village in connection with the application.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.092  OTHER VILLAGE COSTS.



   All license or franchise grantees shall, within 30 days after written
demand therefor, reimburse the village for all direct and indirect costs and
expenses incurred by the village in connection with any modification,
amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or
franchise agreement.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.093  RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS.



   The village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a
telecommunications license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this subchapter
shall prohibit the village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to
be paid for the granted property rights. The village's fee shall be $2,500
plus $1 per linear foot of grantee facilities used or constructed; and shall
be paid by the grantee to the village annually at the beginning of each
calendar year.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.094  COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY.



   If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner,
to use and occupy village property for the installation of telecommunications
facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the village.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.095  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.



   Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a
permit fee equal to $1,000 or 3% of the estimated cost of constructing the
telecommunication facilities, as certified by the applicant's engineer and
approved by the Village Engineer, whichever is greater.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.096  ANNUAL FEES.



   Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each
license or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the village
equal to $5,000 plus 5% of the annual gross revenue of the grantee's
operation as reimbursement for the village's costs in connection with
reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public
ways in behalf of the public and existing or future users.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.097  CABLE FEES.



   Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees,
payments and costs provided in § 115.080.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.098  REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX.



   The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this subchapter, and any
compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in § 115.093,
are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and
village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications
carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the
lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



CONDITIONS OF GRANT



§ 115.110  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise
specified in a license or franchise agreement:



   (A)   A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities
within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity
exists within such utility facility.



   (B)   A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.



   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.



   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable
facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated
underground within a public way of the village, a grantee that currently
occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within
a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the
grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made
concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.



   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for
nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.111  COMPLIANCE WITH J.U.L.I.E.



   All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any
construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of J.U.L.I.E.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.112  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction
permits for telecommunications facilities as required in §§ 115.150 through
115.168.  However, nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village and
a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.113  INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS.



   No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its
telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of
the public ways by the village, by the general public or by other persons
authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such
facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as
determined by the Village Engineer.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.114  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's
behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair
or damage any village property, public ways of the village, other ways or
other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.115  NOTICE OF WORK.



   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no
license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf,
shall commence any non-emergency work in or about the public ways of the
village or other ways without ten working days advance notice to the village.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.116  REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK.



   In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may
commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the village as promptly as
possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as
possible if advance notice is not practicable.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.117  MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.



   Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good
and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal,
state and local requirements.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.118  RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.



   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, a license or
franchise  grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications
facilities within the public ways whenever the corporate authorities shall
have determined that such removal, relocation, chant or alteration is
reasonably necessary for:



   (A)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
village or other public improvement in or upon the public ways.



   (B)   The operations of the village or other governmental entity in
or upon the public ways.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.119  REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES.



   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, any grantee,
telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances
within the public ways of the village shall, at its own expense, remove such
facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the village. A
telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal
in the following circumstances:



   (A)   Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's
telecommunications license or franchise.



   (B)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the
village.



   (C)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without
the prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.



   (D)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without
the prior issuance of a required construction permit.



   (E)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or
franchise.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.120  EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the village,
as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in
response to any public health or safety emergency.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.121  DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES.



   Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or
malicious acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage
to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the
village as a result of or in connection with any public works, public
improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind
in the public ways by or on behalf of the village.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.122  RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY.



   (A)   When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on
its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or
village property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any
obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a
condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise
directed by the village.



   (B)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore
the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the
licensee's sole expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and
complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other
conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.



   (C)   A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use
suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as
required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent
injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in
or affecting such ways or property.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.123  FACILITIES MAPS.



   Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the village with an
accurate map or maps certifying the location of all  telecommunications
facilities within the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps
annually.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.124  DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.



   Within ten days of a written request from the Village Administrator,
each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the village with information
sufficient to demonstrate:



   (A)   That grantee has complied with all requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications
taxes due the village in connection with the telecommunications services and
facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by
the grantee.



   (C)   All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by
the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be
made available for inspection by the village at reasonable times and
intervals.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.125  LEASED CAPACITY.



   A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior
village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers;
provided:



   (A)   Grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such
lease or agreement.



   (B)   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable,
with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.126  GRANTEE INSURANCE.



   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each
grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the village, and
its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as
coinsureds:



   (A)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:



      (1)   $5,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person;



      (2)   $5,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and,



      (3)   $5,000,000 for all other types of liability.



   (B)   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles
with a limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.



   (C)   Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's
liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.



   (D)   Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and
collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits
of not less than $3,000,000.



   (E)   The liability insurance policies required by this section
shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the
telecommunications license or franchise, and such other period of time during
which the grantee is operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or
is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such
insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:



      “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt
by the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the
Village Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”



   (F)   Within 60 days after receipt by the village of said notice,
and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee
shall obtain and furnish to the village replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.127  GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION.



   Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent
permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to defend, indemnity and hold
the village and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless
from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise  out of or result from the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal
of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts
or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.128  PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY.



   Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is
effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit
such monies, bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and
substance acceptable to the village as may be required by this chapter or by
an applicable license or franchise agreement.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.129  SECURITY FUND.



   Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the village
by depositing the amount of $50,000 with the village in cash, an
unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument acceptable to the
village, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of grantee so
long as any of grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the
public ways of the village.



   (A)   The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete
performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss
the village pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee
to comply with the codes, ordinances, rule, regulations or permits of the
village.



   (B)   Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the
village shall give written notice to the grantee:



      (1)   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied,
or the damages, cost or expenses which the village has incurred by reason of
grantee's act or default;



      (2)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first
remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;



      (3)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay
any monies due the village before the village withdraws the amount thereof
from the security fund, if applicable;



      (4)   That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review
the act, default or failure described in the notice with the Village
Administrator or his designee.



   (C)   Grantees shall replenish the security fund within 14 days
after written notice from the village that there is a deficiency in the
amount of the fund.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.130  CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND.



   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a
performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the village
equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of constructing grantee's
telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the village shall be
deposited before construction is commenced.



   (A)   The construction bond shall remain in force until 60 days
after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Village
Engineer, including restoration of public ways and other property affected by
the construction.



   (B)   The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of
the village:



      (1)   Timely completion of construction;



      (2)   Construction in compliance with applicable plans,
permits, technical codes and standards;



      (3)   Proper location of the facilities as specified by the
village;



      (4)   Restoration of the public ways and other property
affected by the construction;



      (5)   The submission of “as-built” drawings after
completion of the work as required by this chapter.



      (6)   Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands
or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.131  COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and with each
other.



   (A)   By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the village
with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that
may affect the public ways.



   (B)   Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and
users of the public ways annually or as determined by the village to schedule
and coordinate construction in the public ways.



   (C)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the Village Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.132  ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT.



   Except in the event of the merger, consolidation or reorganization of
the licensee, the licensee shall not have the right to assign its rights and
privileges under this chapter or to otherwise transfer it in any manner
whatsoever, without the prior written approval of the village, pursuant to an
ordinance enacted by the corporate authorities. In the event of a transfer or
assignment of the licensee's rights and privileges under this chapter, all
provisions of this chapter which are obligatory upon, or which inure to the
benefit of, the licensee shall also be obligatory upon and shall inure to the
benefit of any and all successors and assigns of the licensee.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.133  TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT.



   Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of
10% or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise, of
the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of
control of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee's telecommunication system,
facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or
transfer requiring village approval pursuant to § 115.132 hereof.



   Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from village
approval.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.134  REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT.



   A license or franchise granted by the village to use or occupy public
ways of the village may be revoked for the following reasons:



   (A)   Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways
of the village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.



   (B)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.



   (C)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.



   (D)   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.



   (E)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's
franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest therein.



   (F)   Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a
grantee in any application to the village.



   (G)   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public
ways.



   (H)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this
chapter.



   (I)   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as
due the village.



   (J)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.



   (K)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter.



   (L)   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise
agreement.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.135  NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE.



   In the event that the Village Administrator believes that grounds exist
for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the grantee written
notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and
concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or
noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not
exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:



   (A)   That corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.



   (B)   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.



   (C)   That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty
or sanction less than revocation.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.136  HEARING.



   In the event that a grantee falls to provide evidence reasonably
satisfactory to the Village Administrator as provided in this section, the
Administrator shall refer the apparent violation or non- compliance to the
corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee
with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.137  STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.



   If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with
material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement,
the corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or
franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the
nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by
one or more of the following factors:



   (A)   Whether the misconduct was egregious.



   (B)   Whether substantial harm resulted.



   (C)   Whether the violation was intentional.



   (D)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or
other requirements.



   (E)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance.



   (F)   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or
cured.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



§ 115.150  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   No person shall commence or continue with the construction,
installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the village
except as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.151  CONSTRUCTION CODES.



   Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated
and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.152  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities
within the village without first obtaining a construction permit therefore,
provided, however:



   (A)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation
of telecommunications facilities within the village unless the
telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the
village pursuant to §§ 115.020 through 115.022.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation
of telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the
telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license or
franchise pursuant to §§ 115.030 through 115.045, §§ 115.055 through
115.071 or § 115.080.



   (C)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation
of telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit
fee established in § 115.095.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.153  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities
shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the village and shall be
accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to
demonstrate:



   (A)   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations.



   (B)   The location and route of all facilities to be installed on
existing utility poles.



   (C)   The location and route of all facilities to be located under
the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the
burial at all points along the route which are within the public ways.



   (D)   The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits,
ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along
the underground route proposed by the applicant.



   (E)   The location of all other facilities to be constructed within
the village, but not within the public ways.



   (F)   The construction methods to be employed for protection of
existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the
public ways.



   (G)   The location, dimension and types of all trees within or
adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant,
together with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing
and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.154  ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION.



   All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a
registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications
submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules
and regulations.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.155  TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN.



   All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or
along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan
demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed,
consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury
or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.156  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Within 45 days after submission of all plans and documents required of
the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this chapter, the
Village Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and document
comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit
authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further
conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner
of performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 156.157  CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.



   The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the
Village Engineer 10 working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways. The permittee shall further notify the Village Engineer not less
than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public ways.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 156.158  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.



   All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with
the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities.
The Village Engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the
work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure
compliance with such requirements.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 156.159  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and
approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made
available for inspection by the Village Engineer or his representatives at
all times when construction work is occurring.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 156.160  SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.



   If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by
depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the
permittee shall cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a
registered Illinois  land  surveyor.  The  permittee shall relocate any
facilities which are not located in compliance with permit requirements.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.161  NONCOMPLYING WORK.



   Upon order of the Village Engineer, all work which does not comply with
the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this chapter, shall be removed.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.162  COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as
to minimize disruption of the village ways and other public and private
property. All construction work authorized by a permit within village ways,
including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of
issuance.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.163  AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.



   Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall
furnish the village with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and
certified to the village as accurately depicting the location of all
telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.164  RESTORATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly
repair any and all public and provide property improvements, fixtures,
structures and facilities in the public ways or otherwise damaged during the
course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its
condition before the start of construction.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.165  LANDSCAPE RESTORATION.



   (A)   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or
disturbed as a result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair
or replacement of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done
pursuant to a franchise, license, permit replaced or restored as nearly as
may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.



   (B)   All restoration work within the public ways shall be done is
accordance with landscape plans approved by the Village Engineer.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



§ 115.166  CONSTRUCTION SURETY.



   Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide
a performance bond, as provided in § 115.130.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.167  EXCEPTIONS.



   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all
telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



§ 115.168  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the
license or franchise grantee, are responsible for performance of and
compliance with all provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 115.999



CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW



§ 115.180  CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW ADOPTED.



   The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501 are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering
services within the village boundaries. Any amendment to the Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of
this subchapter shall be incorporated into this subchapter by reference and
shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
villages's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
subchapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the village.



(Ord. 2009-012, passed 12-2-09)



§ 115.181  ENFORCEMENT.



   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce
all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and
Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents
within the village.



(Ord. 2009-012, passed 12-2-09)



§ 115.182  CUSTOMER CREDITS.



   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for
violations as provided for in the provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the
credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.



(Ord. 2009-012, passed 12-2-09)



CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES



§ 115.195  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICE.   As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION.   The Illinois Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES.   All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or
video service area within the Village.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges;



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment.;



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including but not limited to activation,
installation and repair charges;



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order
and service termination charges;



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments;



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement;



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject
to division (i) below;



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities
or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business; and



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi);



         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments
that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service;



         (c)    Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services or the provision of
directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in
accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or orders;



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from fee purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service;



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a municipality, state, federal or
any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or
similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the fee affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of
evading the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER.   A person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE.   The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.   The amount paid under this subchapter and ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to the village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE.   Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public internet.



(Ord. 2010-001, passed 1-20-10)



§ 115.196  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the village.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder's gross revenues.



   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at
least ten days prior to the date on which fee holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the village.



   (D)   Holder's liability.  The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt of the ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The
ordinance adopting this subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to
the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21- 401(b)(6) to the village.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
division (B) of this section.



(Ord. 2010-001, passed 1-20-10)



§ 115.197  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 2010-001, passed 1-20-10)



§ 115.198  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a
holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including
any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder
with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



(Ord. 2010-001, passed 1-20-10)



§ 115.199  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall
comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service
or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books
and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the village and
cable operators terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by
the village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act (
ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.). No acceptance of amounts remitted
should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the municipality's submission of an
invoice for the sum.



(Ord. 2010-001, passed 1-20-10)



§ 115.200  LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments that are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by this municipality pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act (ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.).



(Ord. 2010-001, passe 1-20-10)



§ 115.999  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting
or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(Ord. 96-15, passed 4-3-96)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS



      133.   WEAPONS CONTROL



      134.   ABATEMENT OF CRIMINAL NUISANCES



      135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



      136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Parental Responsibility



   130.01   Policy of supervision



   130.02   Definitions



   130.03   Failure to exercise parental responsibility prohibited



   130.04   Presumption



   130.05   Possession of alcoholic beverages



   130.06   Presence in vehicle or on premises



   130.07   Unlawful possession of weapons



   130.08   Court appearance of parents



 



   130.99   Penalty



PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY



§ 130.01  POLICY OF SUPERVISION.



   It is the policy of the village to permit the Village Prosecutor to use
the provisions of the "Unified Code of Corrections", as amended, of the
state, pertaining to supervision in order to further the ends of justice,
restitution, and purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 76-25, passed 10-20-76; Am. Ord. 95-08, passed 4-19-95)



§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR/BEVERAGES.  Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other
liquid containing more than .5% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for
beverage purposes.



   GUARDIAN.  See LEGAL GUARDIAN.



   LEGAL GUARDIAN.  A person appointed, or given custody, of a minor by a
circuit court of this state but it does not include a person appointed
guardian, or given custody of a minor under the "Juvenile Court Act".



   PARENT.  A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.



   RECKLESSLY.  Acting in a manner or under circumstances such as evince
disregard of, or indifference to, consequences involving danger to the
property, life or safety of others.



   UNDERAGE PERSON/MINOR.  Any person who has not yet attained the age of
18 years.



   UNEMANCIPATED MINOR.  A person under the age of 18 years still under
the care and custody of his or her parents.



   UNSUPERVISED.  A lack of visual or oral oversight coupled with lack of
sufficient proximity to obtain control over the item or minor.



   WILFUL.  Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion
of the will.



(Ord. 76-25, passed 10-20-76; Am. Ord. 95-08, passed 4-19-95)



§ 130.03  FAILURE TO EXERCISE PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian, to
knowingly or wilfully cause, aid, encourage or to fail to exercise proper
responsibility by allowing or permitting any unemancipated minor to violate
or attempt to violate any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or to
knowingly or wilfully act in such a manner as to directly tend or cause a
minor to violate or attempt to violate any federal or state law or municipal
ordinance.



   (B)   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who has
custody of such minor shall be liable for any fine, condition, or
restitutions or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for a violation of
any provision of the Village Municipal Code; provided, the minor has not paid
the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the
court; and further provided, that the parent or guardian has been served with
summons or notice to appear in the original cause as provided by law.



(Ord. 76-25, passed 10-20-76; Am. Ord. 95-08, passed 4- 19-95) Penalty, see
§ 130.99



§ 130.04  PRESUMPTION.



   A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have allowed or
permitted said minor to have committed a violation of a village ordinance or
state statute under all of the following conditions:



   (A)   Said minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of
any ordinance or state statute as described in § 130.03; or has been charged
with the violation of any ordinance or state statute as described in §
130.03 (except if found to be not guilty); or has incurred nonjudicial
sanctions from any peace officer, or conservator of the peace resulting from
an admission of guilt to an offense of an ordinance or state statute as
described in § 130.03; and



   (B)   Said parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service in
substantially the following form:



   LEGAL NOTICE



   TO:     (Parents' Names)



   FROM:  Village of Orland Hills



   You are hereby notified that   (minor's name) has been involved with a
violation of an ordinance, state statute or federal law              
                                                   
                                                   
                                         



   If said minor is again involved with a violation of one of the
above-type ordinances, state statutes  or federal law you may be found
guilty of the offense of Parental Irresponsibility.  Conviction for said
offense can result in a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750.  You
are hereby notified that you must exercise proper parental responsibility
over said minor by controlling his unlawful conduct.



   (C)   Said minor, within two years of the receipt of said notice by
the parent or legal guardian, has been either adjudicated to have committed,
has been charged with the violation (except if found to be not guilty), or
has admitted to have committed any violation of any ordinance or state
statute.



(Ord. 76-25, passed 10-20-76; Am. Ord. 95-08, passed 4-19-95; Am. Ord.
2015-003, passed 3-18-15)



§ 130.05  POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years, may purchase, receive,
accept, have in his possession or control, or consume any alcoholic beverages.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer, permit or
allow the violation of the provisions of this section in any motor vehicle,
conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other
area of which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal
processor, or occupier thereof.



   (C)   Nothing contained herein shall be applicable to persons under
the age of 21 years:



      (1)   Participating in a religious ceremony; or



      (2)   Acting at the direction of a law enforcement officer.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any
person under the age of 18 years of which he or she is the parent or guardian
to violate any provisions of this section.



   (E)   No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony
or service, or acting at the direction of a law enforcement officer.



(Ord. 95-08, passed 4-19-95)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  PRESENCE IN VEHICLE OR ON PREMISES.



   (A)   Presumption of knowledge.  Whenever a person is present
within any motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed,
yard, premises, or other area of which such person is the owner, lessee,
permittee, bailee, legal processor, or occupier thereof at the time that a
violation of the provisions of this section occurs therein, it shall be prima
facie evidence that such person had knowledge of such violation.



   (B)   Unlawful assembly by minors.  It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age or 21 years to remain in any motor vehicle, conveyance,
vessel, house, apartment, room, hotel rooms, shed, yard, premises, or other
area when said person knows, or reasonably should know, that on one or more
other persons under the age of 21 years located in such motor vehicle,
conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, hotel rooms, shed, yard,
premises, or other areas are:



      (1)   In possession of any cannabis or controlled substance
prohibited by state law; or



      (2)   In possession of any alcoholic beverages, except that a
person under the age of 21 years may be in the possession of or consume
alcoholic beverages in the performance of a bona fide religious service or
ceremony.



   (C)   Responsibility of owner or occupant of any premises for
unlawful assembly by minors.  It shall be unlawful for any person who has
ownership or control of any premises to knowingly suffer, permit, or allow
two or more persons under the age of 21 years to assemble or be assembled on
such premises:



      (1)   In possession of any cannabis or controlled substance
prohibited by state statute; or



      (2)   In possession of any alcoholic beverages, except that a
person under the age of 21 years may be in possession of or consume alcoholic
beverages in the performance of a bona fide religious service or ceremony.



(Ord. 95-08, passed 4-19-95)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF WEAPONS.



   (A)   It is declared unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to be in possession of any of the following items:



      (1)   Bowie, switchblade, ballistic knives, throwing stars, or
other edged weapons as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5 § 24-1(1);



      (2)   Metallic knuckles or numchucks;



      (3)   Slingshots;



      (4)   Arrows designed for firing from a bow or crossbow
device, except when such person is engaged in lawful hunting, supervised
target shooting, or otherwise legal transportation of such device;



      (5)   Stun gun or taser;



      (6)   Any device or attachment of any kind designed, used, or
intended for use in silencing the report of a firearm;



      (7)   Machine gun as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5 § 24-1;



      (8)   Any bomb, bomb-shell, grenade, bottle, or container
containing an explosive of over one- quarter ounce for like purposes, such
as, but not limited to, black powder bombs, molotov cocktails, pipebombs, or
artillery projectiles;



      (9)   Firearms, or the ammunition therefore, as defined by
ILCS Ch. 430, Act 65 § 1.1, except when such person is engaged in lawful
hunting, supervised target shooting, or the otherwise legal transportation of
such device; or



      (10)   Fireworks, as defined in ILCS Ch. 425, Act 30 § 2.



   (B)   Parental responsibility.  It is unlawful for any parent or
legal guardian to permit any person under the age of 18 years to be in, or
come to, the unsupervised possession of any items listed in division (A) of
this section.



(Ord. 95-08, passed 4-19-95)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  COURT APPEARANCE OF PARENTS.



   (A)   It is the policy of the village that a parent or legal
guardian of a minor be notified and required to appear in court whenever that
minor is charged with a violation of an ordinance or state statute which
requires the minor's appearance in court.  To this end, it is hereby
directed that a notice in substantially the following form be sent to the
parents or legal guardians of the minor:



   LEGAL NOTICE



   TO:    (Parents' Names)



   FROM:  Village of Orland Hills



You are hereby notified that   (minor's name)  has been charged with an
offense which is a violation of a Village ordinance or State statute and
which requires the appearance of said minor in Court.  You are further
notified that one of the parents of said minor must appear in Court before
the case will be tried or be disposed.



If you fail to appear, the Village Prosecutor has been directed to have
issued a subpoena to bring you into Court.  Failure to obey a subpoena can
result in contempt of Court, with a fine or imprisonment as the penalty.



   (B)   The Village Prosecutor is hereby directed to have subpoenas
issued whenever a parent or legal guardian of a minor does not appear in
court after the first two times said case has been before the court.



(Ord. 76-25, passed 10-20-76; Am. Ord. 95-08, passed 4-19-95)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 and not more
than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 76-25, passed 10-20-76; Am. Ord. 80-07, passed - -80; Am. Ord. 95-08,
passed 4- 19-95; Am. Ord. 2015-003, passed 3-18-15)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



Section



   131.01   Disorderly conduct



   131.02   Fighting



   131.03   Disturbing assemblages



   131.04   Unlawful assemblages



   131.05   False alarms



   131.06   Curfew for minors



   131.07   Public intoxication



   131.08   Public parks and tot lots



   131.09   School day curfew



   131.10   Resisting a peace officer



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct
or of any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace.  The causing or
making of any unnecessary loud noise, shouting, or yelling shall be
considered disorderly conduct.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 1) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 131.99



§ 131.02  FIGHTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, to
fight, or to commit any assault or battery in any public place in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 5) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 131.99



§ 131.03  DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 7) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 131.99



§ 131.04  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES.



   It shall be unlawful to collect, gather, or be a member of any
disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purpose.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 15) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 131.99



§ 131.05  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   Each person, firm, or corporation holding a permit for the
operation or maintenance of an automatic protection device or signaling
device shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted by the device
which they operate or maintain.  The Chief of Police or his designee shall
maintain a record of all false alarms so transmitted.



   (B)   Warning; charges.



      (1)   The village shall issue a warning for the first non-bona
fide alarm in any one calendar month period transmitted by any automatic
protection device or signaling device.



      (2)   The village shall charge a fee of $25 for the second
non-bona fide alarm in excess of one in any one calendar month period
transmitted by an automatic protection device or signaling device.  Such
charges shall be remitted forthwith to the village by the business or
homeowner upon receipt of a statement for such charges.



      (3)   The village shall charge a fee of $50 for any non-bona
fide alarm in excess of two in any one calendar month period transmitted by
any automatic protection device or signaling device.  Such charges shall be
remitted forthwith to the village by the business or homeowner upon receipt
of a statement for such charges.



   (C)   Purpose of enforcement; exemptions.



      (1)   The purpose of the false alarm ordinance enforcement is
to reduce the number of false alarms, to improve alarm reliability and reduce
jeopardy to officers, fire service personnel, and citizens.



      (2)   False alarm includes but is not limited to:



         (a)   Mechanical failure.



         (b)   Malfunction



         (c)   Improper installation, maintenance, or servicing
of the alarm system;



         (d)   Negligent (accidental) set-offs.



         (e)   Other causes not related to actual/attempted entry
or unlawful act.



      (3)   The following are not considered a false alarm:



         (a)   Criminal activity, fire, or medical emergency.



         (b)   Earthquakes, unusually high winds, flooding,
lightning, or other acts of God which could affect the alarm system.



         (c)   Telephone line malfunction, verified by the
electric company.



         (d)   Electrical service interruption verified by the
electric company or responding officers.



         (e)   Prior notification to the Village Police
Department for maintenance or testing.



         (f)   "Malicious false alarms" transmitted without
knowledge or consent is not the responsibility of the residence or business.



      (4)   A grace period of 30 days will be afforded to businesses
and residences after installation.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 6) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
91-17, passed 7-24-91; Am. Ord. 94-14, passed 6-15-94) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.06  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person under 18 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, highway or
public way within the corporate limits of the village at the following times
unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible person at least 18 years of age approved by the parent or legal
guardian, or unless engaged in a business or occupation and only to the
extent of the commute to and from such business or occupation:



      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday;



      (2)   Between 11:00 p.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday;



      (3)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Monday and 6:00 a.m.
Tuesday;



      (4)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Tuesday and 6:00 a.m.
Wednesday;



      (5)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Wednesday and 6:00 a.m.
Thursday;



      (6)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Thursday and 6:00 a.m.
Friday; and



      (7)   Between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible approved by the parent or legal guardian to knowingly permit a
person in his custody or control to violate any of the provisions of this
section.



(Ord. 72-12, passed 10-7-72; Am. Ord. 78-12, passed 11-22-78; Am. Ord. 88-36,
passed 11-23-88; Am. Ord. 89-03, passed 1-11-89; Am. Ord. 94-35, passed
11-16-94; Am. Ord. 2010-007, passed 7-7-10) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.07  PUBLIC INTOXICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition
in or on any street, alley, or other public place in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 2) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3- 65)



§ 131.08  PUBLIC PARKS AND TOT LOTS.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following village property
is designated as a public park:



      (1)   Kelly Park at 16675 Haven Avenue.



      (2)   Kelly Park - Lake Lorin at 9150 W. 167th Street.



      (3)   Storm Detention area located at 170th Street and 94th
Avenue.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the following property is
designated as a tot lot:



      (1)   Kelly Park Playground at 167th Street and Haven Avenue.



      (2)   Playground at 17000 Redwood Court.



      (3)   Playground at 167th Place and 90th Avenue.



      (4)   Playground at 162nd Street and Hawthorne Lane.



      (5)   Playground at 161st Street & Elm Place.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, a school day is defined as
weekday when either School District 135, 140 or 230 has regularly scheduled
classes.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any minor child under the age of 18
to be in a public park before 10:00 a.m. on any school day except when
attended by a parent, guardian or other person having legal custody.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any minor child, between the ages of
13 and 18, to be in any tot lot at any time except under the following
conditions:



      (1)   When attended by a parent, guardian or other person
having legal custody; or



      (2)   When attending to a minor under the age of 13 on behalf
of that minor's parent, guardian or other person having legal custody.



(Ord. 95-25, passed 10-4-95) Penalty, see § 131.99(C)



§ 131.09  SCHOOL DAY CURFEW.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following terms are defined
as follows:



   CHILD.  An individual between the ages of seven and 16.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, common
areas of schools, shopping centers, parking lots, parks, playgrounds,
transportation facilities, theaters, restaurants, shops, bowling alleys,
taverns, cafes, arcades, and similar areas that are open to the use of the
public.  As a type of public place, a street is a way or place, of whatever
nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of
vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian
travel.  STREET includes that legal right of way, including but not 
limited to  the cartway of traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether
paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal
right of way of a street.



   SCHOOL DAY.  A weekday when either School District 135, 140 or 230, or
any parochial and/or private school which is attended by any minor child
residing in the Village of Orland Hills, has regularly scheduled classes.



   VALID CAUSE FOR ABSENCE.  Illness, observance of a religious holiday,
death in the immediate family, family emergency, and such other situations
beyond the control of the student as determined by the Boards of Education in
School Districts 135, 140 or 230, or the governing boards of any private or
parochial school which is attended by any minor child residing in the Village
of Orland Hills, or such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern
to the parent or legal guardian for the safety or health of the student.



   (B)   Other than provided for in the Illinois School Code, ILCS Ch.
105, Act 5 § 1-1 et seq., it shall be unlawful for any child to be present
at, in or upon any public place on a school day during hours when classes are
in session.



   (C)   The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the
operation of this section:



      (1)   When a child is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian and has a valid cause for absence from school; and



      (2)   When a child is accompanied by an adult authorized by a
parent or legal guardian of such child to take said parent's or legal
guardian's place in accompanying said child and has a valid cause for absence
from school.



(Ord. 96-12, passed 2-7-96)  Penalty, see § 131.99(D)



§ 131.10  RESISTING A PEACE OFFICER.



   Any person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by one
known to the person to be a peace officer or correctional institution
employee of any authorized act within his or her official capacity, as
defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1, and adopted and incorporated fully
herein by reference, commits the offense of resisting a peace officer and
shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any provision
of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $750 for
each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that
a violation occurs or continues.



(‘65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 20) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
72-12, passed 10-7-72; Am. Ord. 78-12, passed 11-22-78; Am. Ord. 88-36,
passed 11-23-88; Am. Ord. 89-03, passed 1-11-89;  Am. Ord. 91-17, passed
7-24-91; Am. Ord. 95-25, passed 10-4-95; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 2-7-96; Am.
Ord. 2015-003, passed 3-18-15; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-3-16)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS



Section



   132.01   Indecent conduct



   132.02   Profanity



   132.03   Possession of a controlled substance



   132.04   Possession of drug paraphernalia



   132.05   Gambling



   132.06   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  INDECENT CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent or immoral
act; or to appear in any public place in clothes properly belonging to the
opposite sex, or not properly or decently garbed.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 4) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6- 3-65) Penalty, see
§ 132.99



§ 132.02  PROFANITY.



   It shall be unlawful to use profanity in any street, alley, or other
public place in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 3) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 132.99



§ 132.03  POSSESSION OF A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.



   Any person who knowingly possesses a controlled or counterfeit
substance, as well as "look-a-like" substances, as described in the Illinois
Controlled Substance Act, and defined and specifically enumerated in ILCS Ch.
720, Act 570, § 402, adopted and incorporated fully herein by reference,
commits the offense of possession of a controlled substance and shall be in
violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   Any person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing
cannabis or a controlled substance for that use, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 600, § 3.5 and adopted and incorporated fully herein by reference,
commits the offense of possession of drug paraphernalia and shall be in
violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.05  GAMBLING.



   (A) Any person who partakes in any games of chance either “live” or
electronically for money or other thing of value, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, § 28-1 and adopted and incorporated fully herein by reference,
commits the offense of gambling.



   (B)   Video gaming conducted pursuant to the Video Gaming Act, ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq., is expressly permitted by this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06; Am. Ord. 2012-010, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty,
see § 132.99



§ 132.06  CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR.



   Any parent, legal guardian or person having the custody of a child
under the age of 18 years, who knowingly or willingly commits a federal or
state law or municipal ordinance in the presence of a minor, or causes, aids
or encourages any boy or girl to violate, regardless of where the act
occurred, any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or to be or to
become a dependent and neglected child as defined by state law, or commits
acts which directly tend to render any such child so delinquent, as
enumerated and defined by state law, commits the offense of contributing to
the delinquency of a minor and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically
provided shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $750 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



(‘65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 20) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
2006-021, passed 8-16-06; Am. Ord. 2015-003, passed 3-18-15)



CHAPTER 133:  WEAPONS CONTROL



Section



   133.01   Discharge of firearms



   133.02   Carrying concealed weapons



   133.03   Throwing missiles or debris



   133.04   Laser pointers



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge any rifle, firearm, or airgun in the
village; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor
to any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his person or
property.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 10) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 133.99



§ 133.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the village in
violation of the laws of this state.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 9) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 133.99



§ 133.03  THROWING MISSILES OR DEBRIS.



   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any missile on any
street, alley, or other public place; and it shall be unlawful to throw or
deposit any glass, nails, tacks, or other similar articles, on any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place in the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 13) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 133.99



§ 133.04  LASER POINTERS.



   (A)   Possession by Minors Prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for
any person under the age of 18 to possess a laser pointer except in the
residence of that person.



   (B)   A Sale to Minors Prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell a laser pointer to any person under the age of 18.



   (C)   Use Outside of Building Prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates on any person, animal, object or place located outside of the
building where the person using the laser pointer is located.



   (D)   Illumination of Persons Prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates on any person.



   (E)   Illumination of Vehicle Operators Prohibited.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the
laser beam illuminates the operator of a motor vehicle.



   (F)   Illumination of Law Enforcement.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates a uniformed law enforcement officer.



   (G)   Use in Public Places Prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for
any person located on the public right-of-way, street, alley, public park, or
private parking lot accessible to the public to use a laser pointer.



   (H)   Definition.  For the purposes of this section, a LASER
POINTER is any device which contains a small diode laser that emits an
intense beam of light, including but not limited to Class 2 lasers, Class 3a
lasers, Class 3b lasers, and Class 4 lasers.



(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-20-99)



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically
provided shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $750 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



(‘65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 20) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
99-03, passed 1-20-99; Am. Ord. 2015-003, passed 3-18-15)



CHAPTER 134:  ABATEMENT OF CRIMINAL NUISANCES



Section



   134.01   Definitions



   134.02   Prohibition of criminal public nuisances; abatement thereof



   134.03   Pre-abatement procedure



   134.04   Judicial abatement procedure



   134.05   Abatement remedy; penalty



§ 134.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
set forth below:



   CRIMINAL PUBLIC NUISANCES.  Any real property within the village,
together with the buildings, structures, or improvements located thereon, in
or on which any three or more of the criminal offenses set forth below have
occurred within any one year period, shall constitute a criminal public
nuisance. The criminal offense which may be considered in determining whether
or not a criminal public nuisance exists shall be as follows;



      (1)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 9
(Homicide) of the Criminal Code of 1961,  ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 9-1 et.
seq.;



      (2)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 10
(Kidnaping and related offenses) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, §§ 10-1 et seq.;



      (3)   Any offenses defined and prohibited by Section 11-4
(Prostitution), Section 11-16 (Pandering), Section 11-20 (Obscenity), Section
11-20.1 (Child Pornography), or Section 11-21 (Harmful Material to Minors) of
the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-14, 11-15, 11-17,
11-20, 11-20.1, and 11-21;



      (4)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 12 (Bodily
Harm) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 12 et seq.;



      (5)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 16 (Theft
and Related Offenses) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§
16-1 et seq.;



      (6)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 20-2
(Possession of Explosives or Incendiary Devices) of the Criminal Code of
1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-2 et. seq.;



      (7)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 24 (Deadly
Weapons) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1 et
seq., together with any violation of § 133.01 of this Code;



      (8)   Any offenses defined and prohibited by Article 25 (Mob
Action) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 25-1 et seq.;



      (9)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Section 26-2
(Disorderly Conduct) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§
26-1 et seq.;



      (10)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 18
(Gambling) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-1 et
seq.;



      (11)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 31
(Interference with Public Officers) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, §§ 31-1 et seq.;



      (12)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Section 6-16
(Prohibited Sales and Possession) or Section 6-20 (Purchase or Acceptance of
Gift of Liquor by Persons Under Age 21) of the Liquor Control Act of 1934,
ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 6-16 and 6-20.



      (13)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq.;



      (14)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Cannabis
Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (15)   Any inchoate offense defined and prohibited by Article
8 (Inchoate Offenses) of the Criminal Code of 1961, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§
8-1 et seq., which is relative to the commission of any of the aforesaid
principal offenses.



   OCCUPANT. Any person in actual or constructive possession of any real
property within the village, or any of the buildings, structures, fixtures or
improvements located thereon.



   OWNER.  Any person having any legal or equitable interest whatsoever
in any real property within the corporate limits of the village, together
with the buildings, structures, improvements located thereon or who, by any
means whatsoever, has the ability, authority or right to regulate, restrain,
control, direct or affect the conduct of persons present on any such property.



   PERMIT.  To allow, approve, consent to, acquiesce in, agree to,
suffer, or fail to prevent through inaction.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, limited
liability company, unincorporated association or any other group, enterprise
or entity capable of owning, using or occupying property.



   PROPERTY.  Any real property, together with any buildings, structures
or improvements located or affixed thereto.



(Ord. 2001-014, passed 6-20-01)



§ 134.02  PROHIBITION OF CRIMINAL PUBLIC NUISANCES; ABATEMENT THEREOF.



   No person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently shall
permit any property within the village to become, exist or to be used as a
criminal public nuisance, and any criminal public nuisance found to exist
within the village shall be subject to abatement in accordance with this
chapter.



(Ord. 2001-014, passed 6-20-01.)



§ 134.03  PRE-ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   Whenever the Chief of Police receives two or more police reports of any
law enforcement agency lawfully exercising jurisdiction on the village, which
reports described the commission of any acts or conduct within the same one
year period at, in or on the same property which would constitute any two or
more of the offenses set forth in the definition of criminal public nuisance,
the Chief of Police may take the following action:



   (A)   Notify by registered mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service, the owners and the occupants of the property that the
property may be in danger of becoming a criminal public nuisance. The notice
shall describe the acts or conduct which have occurred on the property that
could serve as part of the basis for determining that the property
constitutes a criminal public nuisance, and request that the owners and
occupants contact the Chief of Police within 14 days of the date of the
letter to discuss potential courses of action which will prevent and deter
the property from becoming a criminal public nuisance.



   (B)   After complying with the notification procedure described in
division (A), if the Chief of Police receives an additional police report
relating the commission of any act or conduct described in § 134.01 within
one year of the acts or conduct with respect to which a notification was
issued, in the event that the Chief of Police determines that such acts or
conduct constitute one or more of the said offenses, then the Chief of Police
shall, by registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service,
and, in addition to either of the foregoing, by posting on the property
itself, provide the owners and occupants of the property in question with a
second notice, which notice shall inform the owners and occupants that the
property in question has become and is in fact a criminal public nuisance,
describe all of the acts and conduct forming the basis for the determination
that the property in question is a criminal public nuisance, and request that
the owners and occupants of the property contact the Chief of Police within
14 days of the date of the notice to determine and implement a course of
action which will result in the abatement of the property as a criminal
public nuisance.



   (C)   Proof that the notices required hereunder were sent or given
in the manner required shall be deemed proof that the owners or occupants of
the property of which the notices related received such notices.



(Ord. 2001-014, passed 6-20-01)



§ 134.04  JUDICIAL ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   In the event that the course of conduct agreed to by the Chief of
Police and the owners and occupants of the property to which a notice has
been directed has not been implemented within 30 days of the date of said
notice to voluntarily abate the criminal public nuisance in question, the
Village Attorney shall initiate legal proceedings to abate the criminal
public nuisance, and to seek the penalties and remedies provided in this
chapter.



(Ord. 2001-014, passed 6-20-01)



§ 134.05  ABATEMENT REMEDY; PENALTY.



   In the event that the village establishes in any judicial action
instituted in accordance with this chapter, that property within the village
constitutes a criminal public nuisance, the court may, in addition to any
other remedies provided by this chapter, enter an order restraining the
owners and/or occupants from using the property for any purpose for a period
of up to one year, which order may further provide that the owners and
occupants shall have the right to use the property during a period of time
specified in the order if the owners and/or occupants post a bond or other
security payable to the village and approved by the court in an amount
between $1,000 and $50,000, which bond or security shall be forfeited and
paid over to the village in the event that any offense set forth above in §
134.01 is committed upon property within the period of time set forth in the
court order. Any owner or occupant of any property determined to constitute a
criminal public nuisance shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 per day for each day on which the property constituted a
criminal public nuisance.



(Ord. 2001-014, passed 6-20-01)



CHAPTER 135:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   135.01   Battery



   135.02   Assault



   135.03   Identity theft



 



   135.99   Penalty



§ 135.01  BATTERY.



   Any person who intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification
and by any means, causes bodily harm or makes physical contact in a provoking
or insulting nature, with an individual, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§ 12-3 and adopted and incorporated fully herein by reference, commits a
battery and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.02  ASSAULT.



   Any person who, without lawful authority, engages in conduct which
places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery, as defined
in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-1 and adopted and incorporated fully herein by
reference, commits an assault and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.03  IDENTITY THEFT.



   Any person who knowingly uses personal identifying information or
personal identification documentation of another person for any purpose
enumerated in state law, as defined by state law, commits the offense of
identity theft and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 135.99



Cross-reference:



   Village identity theft prevention policy, see §§ 39.55 through 39.62



§ 135.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically
provided shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $750 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06; Am. Ord. 2015-003, passed 3-18-15)



CHAPTER 136:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   136.01   Theft



   136.02   Retail theft



   136.03   Criminal damage to property



   136.04   Criminal trespass to vehicle



   136.05   Criminal trespass to real property



 



   136.99   Penalty



§ 136.01  THEFT.



   Any person who knowingly obtains, either by threat or deception,
control over property of another, as fully defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
16-1, and adopted and incorporated fully herein by reference, commits the
offense of theft and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.02  RETAIL THEFT.



   Any person who takes possession of, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred, including alteration, or removal of any label, price
tag, marketing, or indicia of value, any merchandise displayed, held, stored
or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention
of retaining such merchandise or depriving the merchant of the possession,
use or benefit of such merchandise, without paying the full retail value of
such merchandise, as defined by state law, commits the offense of retail
theft and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.03  CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   Any person who knowingly damages any property of another without his or
her consent, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1 and adopted and
incorporated fully herein by reference, commits the offense of criminal
damage to property and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.04  CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLE.



   Any person who knowingly and without authority enters any part of or
operates any vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or snowmobile, as defined in ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-2 and adopted and incorporated fully herein by
reference, commits the offense of criminal trespass to vehicles and shall be
in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.05  CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO REAL PROPERTY.



   Any person who knowingly and without authority enters or remains within
or on a building or enters or remains upon the land of another, after
receiving prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such
entry is forbidden, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3 and adopted
and incorporated fully herein by reference, commits the offense of criminal
trespass to real property and shall be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically
provided shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $750 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 2006-021, passed 8-16-06; Am. Ord. 2015-003, passed 3-18-15)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



         APPENDIX:   FEE SCHEDULE



      151.   DISH-TYPE SATELLITE AND MICROWAVE DISH-TYPE ANTENNAS



      152.   FENCES



      153.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS; FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN




         APPENDIX A:   DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS FOR THE VILLAGE





         APPENDIX B:   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAPS FOR
UNINCORPORATED COOK COUNTY




      154.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY



      155.   SIGNS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES



         APPENDIX:   TABLE OF BASIC AND AUXILIARY DESIGN ELEMENTS



      156.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS




         APPENDIX A:   PROJECT IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES





         APPENDIX B:   CONSTRUCTION OF PORTLAND CEMENT SIDEWALKS;
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS





         APPENDIX C:   CONSTRUCTION OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
DRIVEWAY APRONS; STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS





         APPENDIX D:   STORM WATER DETENTION; STANDARD
SPECIFICATIONS





         APPENDIX E:   STREET LIGHTING; STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS




      157.   SWIMMING POOLS



      158.   TRAILER COACH PARKS



      159.   ZONING CODE



         APPENDIX:   ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS; GENERAL PLAN
STANDARDS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Location of structure; survey of property



   150.002   Reserved



   150.003   Single-family and multiple-family structures; minimum
requirements



   150.004   Gutters and downspouts



   150.005   Shed type structures; requirements



   150.006   Foundations, concrete floors and slabs



   150.007   Room additions



   150.008   Reserved



   150.009   Encroachments on public rights-of-way



   150.010   Elevator safety



Building Code



   150.020.1   International Building Code adoption by reference



   150.020.2   Sprinkler systems



   150.021   Interpretation



   150.022   Permit required; application



   150.023   Permit fees; inspections



   150.024   Certificate of occupancy; issuance



   150.025   Work standards



   150.026   Work stop order



   150.027   Building Inspector; duties



International Property Maintenance Code



   150.035   International Property Maintenance Code adoption by
reference



Accessibility Code



   150.045   Adoption by reference



Erosion and Sediment Control



   150.055   General principles



   150.056   On-site control measures



   150.057   Stormwater conveyance channels



   150.058   Channel protection



   150.059   Additional requirements



   150.060   Plan requirements



   150.061   Extended construction shutdown period



   150.062   Final site stabilization



Plumbing Regulations



   150.075   Plumbing Code adopted by reference



   150.076   Overhead plumbing



   150.077   Compliance required



   150.078   Acceptable materials



One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code



   150.085.1   One-and Two Family Dwelling Code adoption by reference



   150.085.2   Sprinkler systems



National Electrical Code



   150.105   National Electrical Code adoption by reference



   150.106   Extension of electrical wiring; fee



   150.107   Registered electrical contractor required



   150.108   Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. approval



   150.109   Service entrance capacity and equipment



   150.110   Service entrance panels



   150.111   Raceways or conduits



   150.112   Aluminum wiring



   150.113   Plans and specifications



Residential Garages



   150.125   Standards for construction



Building Contractors



   150.140   Definitions



   150.141   License required



   150.142   Application



   150.143   Bond



   150.144   Issuance; license period



   150.145   Fee



   150.146   Duties of licensees



   150.147   Inspection; enforcement



   150.148   Revocation



Driveway Construction



   150.160   Permit required; application



   150.161   Concrete driveways



   150.162   Asphalt driveways



   150.163   Specifications and dimensions



   150.164   Subgrade preparation



   150.165   Granular base



   150.166   Cold weather concreting



   150.167   Curing



   150.168   Safety standards



   150.169   Inspections



   150.170   Core sample tests



   150.171   Driveway and off-street parking and loading facilities



Additional Building Construction Standards



   150.180   Light switches



   150.181   Sill plates



   150.182   Sump pumps



   150.183   Crawl spaces



   150.184   Flexible duct work



   150.185   Addresses



   150.186   Emergency windows



   150.187   Time limits



   150.188   Reserved



   150.189   Electrical wiring conduit



   150.190   Concrete flatwork



   150.191   Residential seasonal rooms, concrete patios, deck roofs
and room additions



Administration



   150.200   Basic plan review system



   150.201   Temporary occupancy permit; issuance



   150.999   Penalty



   Appendix:  Fee schedule



Cross-reference:



   Hearing proceedings and enforcement of building, housing and zoning
ordinance violations, see §§ 39.30 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  LOCATION OF STRUCTURE; SURVEY OF PROPERTY.



   There shall be on each structure built, a survey of the property after
the foundation has been poured to verify the location of the structure on the
property.  No further construction will be performed on that structure until
a survey plat has been submitted to and accepted by the village authorities.



(Ord. 83-03, passed  -  -83)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.002 RESERVED.



§ 150.003  SINGLE-FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   THREE-INCH NATURAL STONE VENEER.  A natural stone, having a nominal
thickness of three inches, used in a building as a facing or veneer. Limited
to the common classifications of sandstone, limestone, marble, granite, dark
igneous rock, quartzite or gneiss.



   (B)   Single family standards.



      (1)   It shall be required that all new single- family
structures be constructed with all exterior walls having 100% face brick
and/or a natural stone veneer. The face brick and/or stone veneer shall be of
uniform texture and color.



   (2)   Exceptions.



         (a)   Those walls above the first story not facing a
public street, right-of-way, or facility. The first story above grade shall
be defined as having an exposure of face brick and/or a natural stone veneer
at least three feet in height.



         (b)   Those walls above the first story backing onto a
detention or retention facility where there is an opposing structure,
existing or intended.



         (c)   Those walls above the first story which are
cantilevered at least 12 inches beyond the face of the wall beneath it.



         (d)   Those walls facing a public street, right-of-way,
or facility located above a first story room which projects at least six
feet, from that second story walk.



         (e)   Accent areas where the total area does not exceed
50 square feet per structure.



         (f)   The rear and side exterior basement walls of a
three step ranch, located below the bedroom level will be exempt from the
three foot height requirement, as indicated in division (A) above.



   (C)   Multi-family wall standards.  It shall be required, that all
new multi-family structures be constructed with the exterior walls being
solid masonry and having an exterior face of entirely face brick and/or a
natural stone veneer. Such face brick and/or stone veneer will have a uniform
texture and color.



   (D)   Multi-family horizontal separation standards.  It shall be
required that all floor ceiling assemblies in multi-family structures be
constructed with pre-cast concrete units, having a minimum two-hour fire
rating. In addition all roof-ceiling assemblies in multi-family structure
shall be constructed having a minimum two- hour fire rating.



   (E)   Multi-family vertical separation standards.



      (1)   It shall be required in multi-family structures that all
tenant separation walls, walls separating units or units to hallways or other
common spaces, be of masonry construction, tight to the underside of the roof
deck and having a minimum two- hour fire rating.



      (2)   In addition no exposed or painted masonry shall be
permitted in the dwelling units. On any masonry wall which is furred, the
space created by the furring shall be fire stopped with noncombustible
material at the floors, ceilings, and roofs. The fire stopping shall be the
full width of the furring or stud and extend the full height and/or length of
the wall, floor or roof assemblies, it is adjacent to.



(Ord. 90-09, passed 3-6-90)



§ 150.004  GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS.



   All buildings whether homes, commercial establishments, warehouses, or
the like shall henceforth be required to have gutters and downspouts and
approved by the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 81-13, passed  -  -81)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.005  SHED TYPE STRUCTURES; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Requirements of structure.



      (1)  No one wall shall exceed 15 feet in length with the total
square footage of floor not to exceed 120 feet in area.



      (2)   The uppermost part of the roof shall not exceed ten feet
in height.



      (3)   The walls of the structure may not be attached to an
existing wall.



      (4)   No common walls shall exist between the shed and
principle building.



      (5)   The shed may be located any distance from the principle
building, provided that ample light and air to the principle buildings are
not restricted.



   (B)   Approval; inspections; fee for permit.



      (1)   The shed must be anchored securely to the ground and be
approved by the Building Commissioner.



      (2)   An inspection is required prior to construction of the
shed entitled a preliminary inspection and a final inspection is also
required after the shed's completion.



      (3)   The fee for a building permit shall be $40.



   (C)   Restrictions.  The shed shall not be used for the parking or
storage of any licensed motor vehicle with the exception of motor driven lawn
maintenance equipment under ten horsepower.



(Ord. 78-09, passed 10-25-78; Am. Ord. 98-14, passed 7-1-98; Am. Ord.
2002-015, passed 9-4-02)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.006  FOUNDATIONS, CONCRETE FLOORS, AND SLABS.



   (A)   Floating mat foundations. 



      (1)   A floating mat type foundation shall be defined as a
slab with or without a foundation wall that does not rest on adequate bearing
soil, but by its design will remain somewhat permanent with or without
periodic adjustments.



      (2)   In no instance will floating mat type foundations be
permitted for use on any type of primary structure, or for any structure
having gas, water or sewer lines serving it. Use of a floating mat slab is
subject to the review and approval of the Building Commissioner, and is
intended to be used only when no other design method is feasible.



   (B)   Capped foundations.



      (1)   CAPPED FOUNDATIONS shall be defined as construction
where a concrete slab, in a separate pour, is placed on top of foundation
walls.



      (2)   In no instance will capped foundations be permitted for
use on any type of primary residential structure.



   (C)   Monolithic slabs and foundations.



      (1)   MONOLITHIC SLABS and FOUNDATIONS shall be defined as a
single poured foundation wall and slab or as a slab with a grade beam.



      (2)   Monolithic slabs and foundations shall only be
permitted, for residential use, when use on a detached accessory structure.



   (D)   Isolation slabs.



      (1)   ISOLATION SLABS shall be defined as a concrete slab or
floor surrounded by a foundation wall.



      (2)   Isolation slabs will be permitted, for use in the
construction of a primary residential structure or additions, at any
elevation in comparison to the exterior grade elevation.



      (3)   The AVERAGE EXTERIOR GRADE ELEVATION shall be defined as
the elevation of the final grade measured, at a point one foot perpendicular
to the outside foundation wall and then the average elevation of that
measurement surrounding the slab, on the exterior of the building.



      (4)   Attached garages, at any elevation, may also be
constructed using an isolation slab.



   (E)   Restrictions.  Wherever slabs or slab type construction or
floors are permitted the following restrictions will apply:



      (1)   No warm air heating ducts, return air ducts or cooling
ducts may be permitted below or in the slab.



      (2)   When the area adjacent to the slab is a heated space,
the entire slab or foundation wall above grade and two feet below grade will
be insulated. All insulation must have a minimum insulation "R" value of 5.0.
All materials used shall be designed for use as foundation insulation.
Interior to exterior insulation installations, shall overlap a minimum of 12
inches.



      (3)   Isolation slabs must be constructed using a minimum
¼-inch expansion joint around the entire perimeter of the slab and adjacent
to all columns, walls, or other similar units penetrating the slab.



      (4)   All slabs used as a base of a floor or as a finished
floor, in a habitable space or used in a primary structure, other than an
attached garage space will have:



         (a)   A minimum thickness of four inches;



         (b)   Been installed over a granular base having a
uniform and minimum depth of four inches;



         (c)   A membrane waterproofing directly under the slab,
equal to or better than a four-mil polyethylene film, and having a maximum
permeance of 0.20 perms. Where joints exists each joint shall be lapped a
minimum of four inches.



      (5)   Where interior bearing walls or partitions rest on the
slab. the construction of the slab will required that the slab be thickened
to a minimum ten-inch depth, 20-inches wide. Continuous reinforcement bars (
minimum #4 bars ) shall be used, in construction with acceptable engineering
standards.



      (6)   All slabs will require that a minimum 10 ga., welded
wire mesh, or an equal be used in the construction.



      (7)   No floor slab shall be placed in water or on a soft wet
subgrade. Subgrades below the exterior grade elevation must be pumped dry at
last 24 hours before pouring concrete.



      (8)   All subgrades must be level, thoroughly compacted and
free of all vegetation.



(Ord. 89-23, passed 7-26-89)



§ 150.007  ROOM ADDITIONS.



   Room additions will not be considered new construction for purposes of
this section.



(Ord. 81-09, passed  -  -81)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Cross-reference:



   Residential seasonal rooms, concrete patios, deck roofs and room
additions, see § 150.191



§ 150.008  RESERVED.



§ 150.009  ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA.  That area lying between
the project right-of-way limits and the platted street limits within which
the village, by concurrence in the establishment of the project right-of-way
lines, will permit the state to enter to perform all necessary construction
operations.



      (2)   ENCROACHMENT.  Any building, fence, sign, or any other
structure or object of any kind (with the exception of utilities and public
road signs), which is placed, located, or maintained in, on, under, or over
any portion of the project right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no
project right-of-way line has been established.



      (3)   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT.  Any existing awning,
marquee, advertising sign, or similar overhanging structure supported from a
building immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there
is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the
free and safe flow of traffic on the highway; the permissive retention of
overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs
supported from poles constructed outside the project right-of-way line and
not confined by adjacent buildings.



      (4)   PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Those areas within the project
right-of-way lines established by the village, state, and the United States
Bureau of Public Roads which will be free of encroachments except as
hereinafter defined.



      (5)   ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Those areas existing or acquired
by dedication or by fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired
by temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
erect or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any
encroachment, except as provided in division (D) of this section, within the
limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project
right-of-way lines have been established.



   (C)   Project right-of-way lines have been established at the
following locations:



   NO ENCROACHMENT



   (D)   Revocable permits have been issued by the            
for the temporary retention of the following permissible encroachments:



   NO ENCROACHMENTS



(Ord. 70-9, passed  - -70)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.010  ELEVATOR SAFETY.



   The village hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference the
following: The Illinois Elevator Safety Program Agreement between the
Illinois Office of the State Fire Marshal and the Village of Orland Hills in
conformity with Section 140 of the Illinois Elevator Safety Act (ILCS Ch.
225, Act 312, § 140) and the administrative rules adopted at 41 Ill. Adm.
Code 1000.



(Ord. 2012-018, passed 10-17-12; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 1-18-17)



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.020.1  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village hereby adopts the 2015 International Code Council's (ICC)
I-Codes, including Building, Residential, Fire, Mechanical, Fuel Gas, Energy
Conservation, Private Sewage Disposal, Performance, Property Maintenance,
Zoning and Existing Building Code; and the 2017 National Electrical Code of
the National Fire Protection Association.



('65 Code Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 5)  (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
79-07, passed 3-28-79; Am. Ord. 81-01, passed 2-25-81; Am. Ord. 85-16, passed
12-12-85; Am. Ord, 90-50, passed 1-24-90; Am. Ord. 92-04, passed 1-22-92; Am.
Ord. 92-55, passed 11-11-92; Am. Ord. 95-04, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 95-06,
passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 99-09, passed 3-3-99; Am. Ord. 2005-011, passed
6-15-05; Am. Ord. 2010-013, passed 12-15-10; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed
1-18-17)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.020.2  SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   Automatic sprinkler systems and electrically supervised fire alarm
systems are not required in single family detached dwellings.



(Ord. 2017-002, passed 1-18-17)



§ 150.021  INTERPRETATION.



   Wherever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must
be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of, the Building
Commissioner or any other officer of the village, this shall not be construed
to give such officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations or
standards shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
ordinance or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or
discriminating manner.



('65 Code, Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 8)  (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 150.022  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct any building or structure in
the village where the cost of such construction exceeds $100 or to alter or
remodel any building or structure so as to change the bearing walls, beams,
supports, or the roof thereof, without having first secured a permit
therefor, or in violation of the terms of such permit, or in violation of the
terms of this subchapter.  Such permits when issued shall be issued only to
contractors that have been duly licensed by the village, and shall expire
unless construction is in accordance with said permit and commenced within
six months from the date of issuance of said permit.  Said building permits
shall be displayed on the prominent place on the premises where construction
is in progress and shall be attached to the building or some other structure
at all times. 



('65 Code, Ch. 21, Art. I, § 1)



   (B)   (1)   No building permit shall be issued, except for
single-family detached dwellings and their related accessory structures and
other construction with a cost of construction above $10,000, unless the
plans and specifications accompanying such permit are signed and sealed. 
This signature and seal must be made by either an Illinois Registered
Architect or Structural Engineer, as established by the Illinois
Architectural and Structural Engineers Act.



      (2)   (a)   The permit application plans and specifications
shall also specify a final grading plan of each lot certified by a licensed
engineer for which a building permit is being applied for a new principal
building.  Said lot grading plan is to be designed as per the master
subdivision grading plan and if there is no master subdivision grading plan
then as per the existing grading system and said plan shall not adversely
effect drainage to or from adjoining properties or the drainage system.



         (b)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any new building, the person to whom the building permit has
been issued shall submit a statement, certified by a licensed engineer, that
the final grade of said lot meets the grading plan as specified in the permit
application, plan and specifications, and grading plan.



      (3)   (a)   Each permit application for an accessory
building, structure, building addition, regrading, filling or other
alteration of the ground or building footprint shall include a grading plan
for the entire lot.  The grading plan shall show existing and after project
drainage flows.  The grading plan shall be reviewed by the Building
Commissioner or designee to ensure that the project will not adversely affect
drainage to or from adjoining properties or the drainage system.



         (b)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, the Building Commissioner or designee shall inspect the site to
ensure that it conforms to the grading plan submitted for permit.  The
Building Commissioner may disapprove a building permit and require a licensed
engineer's drainage design plan if drainage on the lot, adjoining properties
or the drainage system appear to be a problem and may deny a certificate of
occupancy if the final grading adversely affects lot drainage, adjoining
property drainage or the drainage system.



   (C)   All applications for building permits shall be submitted to
the Building Commissioner who shall approve or disapprove the permit.



('65 Code, Ch. 21,Art. 1, § 3)



(Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord. 75-13, passed 7-2-75; Am. Ord. 88-11,
passed 4-27-88; Am. Ord. 95-44, passed 12-5-95)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.023  PERMIT FEES; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   COMMERCIAL TYPE CONSTRUCTION.  Shall relate to but will
not be limited to business uses, mercantile uses, office uses, institutional
uses, schools, municipal buildings and other similar uses.



      (2)   MANUFACTURING TYPE CONSTRUCTION.  Shall relate to
factories, industrial uses, storage, utility building and other similar uses.



      (3)   MISCELLANEOUS TYPE I.  Typical single-family accessory
structures, site improvements and structural improvements.  Such
construction shall include but will not be limited to:  decks, driveways,
electrical serviced revisions, fences, garages, interior structural changes
(including partitions), patios, room additions, sheds, private sidewalks,
swimming pools, other similar construction and necessary repairs.  Allowable
repairs shall be caused by accidents, acts of God or deterioration and such
repairs must be identical to the original pre-existing conditions, provided
the work is still in compliance with the codes. Allowable improvements and
repairs are for single family residences only.  Such work being constructed
by the property owner, who is also the resident on the site.



      (4)   MISCELLANEOUS TYPE II.  Similar construction to that
listed as Miscellaneous Type I, except that the installation or construction
is not being completed entirely or at all by the property owner, who is also
the resident on the site.



      (5)   MISCELLANEOUS TYPE III.  Typical accessory structures,
site improvements and structural improvements, other than those associated
with single- family residences.  Such construction shall include but will
not be limited to:  decks, driveways, electrical service revisions, fences,
garages, interior structural changes (including partitions) for existing
tenants, patios, sheds, private sidewalks, other similar construction, signs
of all types, and construction trailers.



      (6)   MISCELLANEOUS TYPE IV.  Tenant improvements, swimming
pools for commercial, multi- family or public use, parking lots, parking lot
expansion, tennis courts, public improvements when not associated with a
development, utility line repairs or expansions, and site grading.



   (B)   Fees and bonds.  Each application for a permit and/or review
shall require a fee or fees to be paid prior to the issuance of a permit upon
the completion of a preliminary review or upon the withdrawal of the such
application.  All fees shall be computed according to the fee schedule
listed in the Appendix following this chapter.



   (C)   Inspections.  The number of inspections and type(s) shall be
determined by the Building Commissioner.  No work, installation or
construction may proceed, until the proper inspection has been completed.



   (D)   School fees.  The school fees shall only be charged and
collected for those school districts in which the residence is located.



   (E)   Permit deadlines. 



      (1)   A permit application shall be considered expired, if
after 15 calendar days after a written notification if forwarded to the
applicant, the permit is not paid for and issued.



      (2)   If a permit application is withdrawn or reflected or
expires pursuant to division (1) above costs for all services rendered up to
that time shall be computed in accordance with the fee schedule in the
Appendix and charged to the applicant.  Such payment shall be due 30 days
next.



      (3)   If the applicant or his representative fails to respond
within 60 days to a written request for information in connection with the
permit application, said application shall be considered withdrawn in which
event the provisions of division (2) above shall apply.



      (4)   A rejected or expired application shall require the
applicant to reapply and shall offer no relief from being charged additional
fees or from complying with a new standards or additional requirement that
may have been adopted since the submission of the first application.



(Ord. 90-18, passed 3-28-90; Am. Ord. 91-37, passed 12-19-91)



§ 150.024  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; ISSUANCE.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected,
altered, or repaired after the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued
unless such building or structure was erected, altered, or repaired in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



('65 Code, Ch. 21, Art. I, § 9)  (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 150.025  WORK STANDARDS.



   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the applicable trade. The
provisions of the relevant building code, as adopted by reference,
accordingly, shall be considered standard and acceptable practice for all
matters not specifically covered in this subchapter.



('65 Code, Ch. 21, Art. I, § 10)  (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
99-09, passed 3-3-99; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.026  WORK STOP ORDER.



   (A)   Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions
of this subchapter, or in variance with the terms of any permit issued for
such work, the Building Inspector may order all work on this job stopped
until such violation or variance is eliminated and any work or installation
made in violation of this subchapter corrected.  Such stop order, if oral,
shall be followed by a written order within 24 hours (excluding Saturday,
Sunday, or holidays).



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to do or perform any work in violation of
such stop order, except as may be necessary to prevent injury or damage to
persons or property.



   (C)   Such stop order may be revoked by the Village President and
the Board of Trustees voting jointly.



('65 Code, Ch. 21, Art. I, § 7)  (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
71-5, passed 6-5-71)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.027  BUILDING INSPECTOR; DUTIES.



   There is hereby created the position of Building Inspector, who shall
be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to see to the
enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to buildings or zoning and
to inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered, as
frequently as may be necessary to insure compliance with the village
ordinances.



   (B)   The Building Inspector shall act as ex officio Electrical
Inspector, and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties connected
with that office.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall act as ex officio Plumbing
Inspector and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties connected
with that office.



('65 Code, Ch. 21, Art. I, § 6)  (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 150.035  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village hereby adopts the 2015 International Code Council's (ICC)
I-Codes, including Building, Residential, Fire, Mechanical, Fuel Gas, Energy
Conservation, Private Sewage Disposal,  Performance, Property Maintenance,
Zoning and Existing Building Code; and the 2017 National Electrical Code of
the National Fire Protection Association.



(Ord. 76-05, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 84-03, passed  - - ; Am. Ord.
92-04, passed 1-22-92; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 99-09, passed
3-3-99; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06;
Am. Ord. 2010-013, passed 12-15- 10; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 1-18-17) 
Penalty, see § 150.999



ACCESSIBILITY CODE



§ 150.045  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village hereby adopts the 1997 Illinois Accessibility Code and the
1991 Americans with Disability Act as the Accessibility Code of the village.



(Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)



EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



§ 150.055  GENERAL PRINCIPLES.



   (A)   The requirements of this section shall affect all construction
projects that involve disturbing any land area in the village that is 1,000
square feet or more in size, including constructing or improving single
family homes.



   (B)   Development should be related to the topography and soils of
the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep
slopes, where high cut and fills may be required, should be avoided and
natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.



   (C)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected.



   (D)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any
one time.



   (E)   Prior to site clearing and grading, sediment basins or traps,
filter barriers, diversions and other appropriate control measures shall be
installed.



   (F)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and
functional as soon as practical during development. Native vegetation is
preferred for developments near or adjacent to high quality natural areas,
wetlands and streams.



   (G)   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to
other land uses shall be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior
to development.



   (H)   All waste generated as a result of site development shall be
properly disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site
by either wind or water.



   (I)   Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in
accordance with the "Illinois Urban Manual" (2002) or latest edition.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



§ 150.056  ON-SITE CONTROL MEASURES.



   The on-site control measures shall be designed based on the size of the
disturbed areas as follows:



   (A)   For disturbed areas draining less than one acre, filter
barriers (including filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control
measures) shall be constructed to control all off-site runoff as specified in
referenced handbooks. Vegetated filter strips with a minimum width of 25 feet
may be used as an alternative where runoff in sheet flow is expected.



   (B)   For disturbed areas draining more than one acre but less than
five acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be
constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area in conjunction with
other filter barriers.



   (C)   For disturbed areas draining more than five acres, a sediment
basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope
point of the disturbed area in conjunction with other filter barriers.



   (D)   Sediment basin and trap design shall provide for both
detention storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be for
equal volumes of "wet" detention storage and "dry" detention storage. Each
shall be sized for the two-year, 24-hour runoff from the site. The release
rate shall be that rate required to achieve a minimum detention time of ten
hours. The outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry
detention storage.



   (E)   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated
sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the construction
period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated
in one year. A sediment removal schedule is required for construction periods
exceeding one year.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



§ 150.057  STORMWATER CONVEYANCE CHANNELS.



   Stormwater conveyance channels, ditches, swales, and diversions, shall
convey a ten-year frequency storm without erosion. All channels shall be
stabilized within 48 hours, consistent with the following standards:



   (A)   For grades up to 4%, seeding in combination with mulch or
erosion blankets shall be placed along the channel sides with sod or erosion
blanket applied to the bottom.



   (B)   For grades of 4% to 8%, sod shall be used.



   (C)   For grades greater than 8%, use rock or rip- rap, or reduce
the grade using drop structures.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



§ 150.058  CHANNEL PROTECTION.



   (A)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be
preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels.



   (B)   Land disturbance activities in stream channels and
construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized.



   (C)   Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where
necessary, to minimize erosion. Temporary crossings shall be constructed of
non-erosive materials such as rip-rap or gravel.



   (D)   The temporary stream crossing shall be completely removed and
the stream restored to its preconstruction condition within 48 hours after
completion of construction, incorporating appropriate native vegetation.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



§ 150.059  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment
traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications.



   (B)   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be
protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent.



   (C)   Each site shall have graveled entrance roads, access drives
and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private
road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not flushing) before
the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment disposal
area.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



§ 150.060  PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   An erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following:



   (A)   Proposed sequencing schedule, including dates, for:



      (1)   Stripping;



      (2)   Installation of temporary on-site control measures and
perimeter controls;



      (3)   Clearing and grading;



      (4)   Construction;



      (5)   Installation of storm drainage and paving; and



      (6)   Final grading, removal of temporary measures and
landscaping.



   (B)   Location, standard details and design specifics of sediment
basins and traps. The design specifics should include outlet details and the
drainage area to each measure.



   (C)   Location and description of all control measures, including
seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation,
expected seeding dates, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures and types of non-vegetative
stabilization measures.



   (D)   Description of dust and traffic control measures and location
and specifications for construction entrances.



   (E)   Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization
measures.



   (F)   Volumes, locations and methods of stabilization for off-site
fill or borrow.



   (G)   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including a
maintenance schedule.



   (H)   Description of permanent stabilization measures.



   (I)   Identification (name, address and telephone) of the person(s)
or entity responsible for maintenance during and after construction.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



§ 150.061  EXTENDED CONSTRUCTION SHUTDOWN PERIOD.



   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent
measures within seven calendar days following the end of active disturbance
or redisturbance. The condition of the construction site for the winter shut
down period shall address proper sediment and erosion control early in the
fall growing season. Stabilization measures include seeding, mulching,
sodding or erosion control blankets.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



§ 150.062  FINAL SITE STABILIZATION.



   All temporary control measures shall be disposed of within thirty days
after permanent soil stabilization measures have been installed. Trapped
sediment and other disturbed soils resulting from the temporary measures
shall be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.



(Ord. 2004-008, passed 6-16-04)



PLUMBING REGULATIONS



§ 150.075  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Village hereby adopts the 2004 Illinois Plumbing Code as the
plumbing code of the Village.



(Am. Ord. 92-04, passed 1-22-92; Am. Ord. 99-09, passed 3-3-99; Am. Ord.
2005-011, passed 6-15-05)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.076  OVERHEAD PLUMBING.



   All new buildings hereafter constructed with basements, floors, rooms,
or occupancy areas below ground level at the building site and served by a
public or private sewer system, shall have overhead plumbing.  (Ord. 71-2,
passed - - 71)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.077  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the
plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the village; provided that
water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings subject
to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 67-0-003, passed 3-4-67) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.078  ACCEPTABLE MATERIALS.



   (A)   The permitted materials and uses, listed in the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code will be hereby restricted as follows:



      (1)   Type “M” copper shall be the minimum type of copper
allowed, when the intended use is a heating line.  Materials other than
copper are not acceptable, except as noted in division (B) of this section.



      (2)   Type “K” copper shall be the minimum type of copper
allowed, when the intended use is for potable water distribution, below grade
or in concrete.  Materials other than copper are not acceptable, except as
noted in division (B) of this section.



      (3)   Type “L” copper shall be the minimum type of copper
allowed, when the intended use if for potable water distribution, above
grade.  Materials other than copper are not acceptable, except as noted in
division (B) of this section.



      (4)   P.V.C. Schedule 40, D.W.V. copper and service weight
cast iron shall be the minimum types of materials allowed when the intended
use is for waste, drain and/or vent lines above ground.  Materials other
than those listed in this division are not acceptable, except as noted in
division (B) of this section.



      (5)   All copper shall be installed with a lead- free solder. 



      (6)   Service weight cast iron shall be the minimum type
allowed, when the intended use is for waste, drain and/or vent lines, below
grade or in concrete, on commercial interior type construction. Materials
other than cast iron are not acceptable, except as noted in division (B)
below.



   (B)   Unusual circumstances.  Unusual or unique circumstances
and/or applications may allow other materials to be used which shall be
approved by the Building Commissioner and the Plumbing Inspector and is a
permitted material for the intended use by the state Plumbing Code.



(Ord. 89-28, passed 10-11-89; Am. Ord. 2005-011, passed 6-15-05)



ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE



§ 150.085.1  ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village hereby adopts the 2015 International Code Council's (ICC)
I-Codes, including Building, Residential, Fire, Mechanical, Fuel Gas, Energy
Conservation, Private Sewage Disposal,  Performance, Property Maintenance,
Zoning and Existing Building Code; and the 2017 National Electrical Code of
the National Fire Protection Association.



(Ord. 76-3, passed 1-21-76; Am. Ord. 81-02, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 92-04,
passed 1-22-92; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed
9-20-06; Am. Ord. 2010-013, passed 121-15- 10; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed
1-18-17)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.085.2  SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   Automatic sprinkler systems and electrically supervised fire alarm
systems are not required in single family detached dwellings.



(Ord. 2017-002, passed 1-18-17)



NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE



§ 150.105  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village hereby adopts the 2017 National Electrical Code of the
National Fire Protection Association.



(Ord. 72-07, passed 4-15-72; Am. Ord. 75-12, passed 7-2-75; Am. Ord. 79-20,
passed 11-28-79; Am. Ord. 92-04, passed 1-22-92; Am. Ord. 99-09, passed
3-3-99; Am. Ord. 2005-011, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 2010-013, passed 12-15-
10; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 1-18-17)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.106  EXTENSION OF ELECTRICAL WIRING; FEE.



   Fee for the extension of electrical wiring except in construction of a
new building shall be $10 minimum which includes the $2 inspection fee.



(Ord. 79-20, passed 11-28-79)



§ 150.107  REGISTERED ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR REQUIRED.



   All electrical work coming under the scope of this subchapter shall be
performed or installed only by a qualified electrical contractor who is
registered or licensed under the state statutes. (Exception: A homeowner
performing extension of existing wiring.)



(Ord. 79-20, passed 11-28-79)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.108  UNDERWRITERS LABORATORIES, INC. APPROVAL.



   All materials, devices, conductors, enclosures, conduits, major
household appliances, lighting fixtures, or any other electrical current
consuming device to be permitted, shall bear the seal of approval or the
listing of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. or an equal agency.



(Ord. 79-20, passed 11-28-79)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.109  SERVICE ENTRANCE CAPACITY AND EQUIPMENT.



   The minimum service capacity approved for any new or existing dwelling
occupancy shall be a three-wire, 120/240 volt solid neutral 100 amp service
with 200-amp service switch.  Service entrance 90B panels shall have a
minimum of 30 circuit positions.



(Ord. 79-20, passed 11-28-79)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.110  SERVICE ENTRANCE PANELS.



   Service entrance panels shall be a minimum 100 amp and not less than 16
circuit positions and main breaker.



(Ord. 81-10, passed  -  -  )  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.111  RACEWAYS OR CONDUITS.



   (A)   New work.  For all new work, wiring shall be installed in a
rigid conduit, electrical metallic tubing, or surface metal raceways, except
that it shall be permissible to use a section of BX where flexible connection
are necessary, not exceeding two feet in length and approved UL listed
underground cable.



   (B)   Old work.  Metallic armored cable (BX) may be used for
extensions to existing wiring from a metal clad or full metallic system in
lengths not to exceed six feet.



(Ord. 79-20, passed 11-28-79)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.112  ALUMINUM WIRING.



   The use of aluminum wiring is prohibited with the exception of an
electrical utility company.



(Ord. 81-10, passed  -  -  )  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.113  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Where construction or alteration work is required for
single-family occupancies, the applicants shall submit a wiring layout
showing:



      (1)   Number, location, and type of outlets.



      (2)   Size of wire and conduit to be used.



      (3)   Number of circuits and their ampere rating.



      (4)   Location of service entrance equipment.



      (5)   Location of major appliances.



      (6)   Size of existing old service.



   (B)  Where construction or alteration work is to be done in other than
single-family dwelling occupancies, the applicant shall submit with the
application for permit, a complete wiring plan for approval. This plan shall
indicate:



      (l)   Size of service conductors.



      (2)   The type and location of all outlets.



      (3)  Sizes of all motors and power consuming equipment, for
example, all current consuming devices which shall make up the total
connected loan.



      (4)   Sizes of conductors for branch circuits and feeders to
be installed.



      (5)   The location of all panel boards and cabinets.



      (6)   The number and ampere rating of the circuits shall be
indicated.



(Ord. 79-20, passed 11-28-79)



RESIDENTIAL GARAGES



§ 150.125  STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION.



   The following requirements shall be applicable to all residential
garages:



   (A)   The maximum size of a garage shall be 576 square feet. The
size of the garage shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls (studs) or post supporting the roof.



   (B)   A minimum six-inch soffit or overhang will be constructed over
each wall of the garage.



   (C)   The maximum height of any detached garage shall be thirteen
feet. The height shall be measured from the average grade to the highest
point or ridge of the garage, excluding cupolas, air vents, or other similar
structures.



   (D)   Trenched foundations shall be a minimum of eight inches in
width and belled (at a 45° angle) to twice the wall thickness at the bottom
of the trench. The trench shall be a minimum of 42 inches below grade and
must be thoroughly cleaned.



   (E)   Formed foundations shall have a minimum wall thickness of
eight inches for framed construction and ten inches for masonry veneer
construction. Footing shall have a minimum depth equal to the wall thickness
and a width equal to twice the wall thickness. The base of the footing shall
be a minimum be 42 inches below grade.



   (F)   Monolithic slabs (slab and grade beam) shall have a minimum
four-inch thick concrete slab, with a minimum ten-inch thickened outer edge a
width of twenty inches around the perimeter of the slab.  Grade beam
construction shall only be permitted on detached framed garages.  A minimum
of two #4 reinforcement bars shall be placed continuous at a point 4 inches
above the bottom of the grade beam, around the entire perimeter of the grade
beam.



   (G)   All slopes shall have a granular base with a minimum thickness
of five inches.



   (H)   The top of the concrete slab shall be a minimum of six inches
above the finished grade.



   (I)   Wire mesh (10 ga. 6x6 wwf) will be used in all garage slabs.



   (J)   Sill plates shall be wolmanized wood, or other specific wood
classified as a rot resistant.



   (K)   Top plates shall be a minimum double two by four.



   (L)   Wall studs shall be a minimum two by four, 24-inch on center.



   (M)   All corner post will be a minimum full length double two by
four.



   (N)   Anchor bolts shall be a minimum 15 inches in length and
one-half inch in diameter located at a maximum spacing of eight feet, with a
minimum of two bolts for each sill plate over four feet in length and one
bolt for walls less than four feet in length.



   (O)   Wind bracing shall be placed on each corner.



   (P)   Rafter ties shall be a minimum two by six, 48 inches on
center. Rafter ties shall be placed at the level of the top plate and may not
be spliced.



   (Q)   A single two by six shall be placed above and perpendicular to
the rafter ties running the full span of the garage.



   (R)   Roof sheathing shall be of a type, thickness, and exposure
that has been approved by an acceptable testing agency for the use intended.



   (S)   Roofing shall be either Class A fiberglass shingles or 235
lbs. asphalt shingles applied over 15 pound felt.



   (T)   A minimum of two air vents at least one square foot in area,
shall be installed not more than two feet from the ridge or continuous ridge
vent shall be used.



   (U)   Continuous gutters, and downspouts discharging onto splash
blocks or other impervious areas shall be installed.



   (V)   At least one exterior service door a minimum two feet, eight
inches in width shall be installed.



   (W)   All roofs will be defined to support a minimum snow load of
thirty pounds per square foot.



   (X)   Headers shall be designed and constructed to support the
intended loads and to meet good engineering practices.



   (Y)   A minimum of two wall outlets, equipped with
ground-fault-interrupter protection shall be located on opposite walls of the
garage.



   (Z)   At least one ceiling fixture shall be installed, switched
three-way or four-way at each service door and at the overhead door.



   (AA)   One ceiling outlet, located a minimum of 18 inches from where
a automatic door opener would be located, will be installed for each overhead
door.



   (BB)   Detached garages will have installed at least one exterior
light, switched three-way at the garage and at the principal structure.



   (CC) The electrical service to the garage shall be placed in conduit 18
inches in depth. All wiring shall be type THHN or equivalent.



   (DD) Attic spaces will have an interior access panel a minimum 22
inches by 30 inches, with a light. Access panels will have the same rating as
the ceiling that they are in.



   (EE)   For homes constructed prior to Ordinance 87-11 being
effective (where the first story above grade must be entirely face brick),
attached garages located to the side of or behind the principal structure
will be constructed of a similar material as those existing wall faces
parallel to the wall being constructed. If the garage is located in front of
the primary structure then those walls facing the street and those walls
adjacent to the access way for the main entrance will be entirely face brick.



   (FF)   No garage shall be constructed without having a paved
driveway.



   (GG) Attached garages will be constructed having a minimum one-hour
wall and/or ceiling separating the garage and all living spaces. Doors in a
one-hour rated wall shall either be 1¾ inch solid wood or "B" label. All
interior service doors will be equipped with self- closers.



   (HH) Attached garages that have an interior entrance to a living space
or basement will have a six- inch high curb or step separating the two
spaces. The garage slab is required to be at the lower elevation.



   (II)   No permanent house heating units or other fuel burning
applicants shall be permitted in the garage space.



   (JJ)   Access to rooms directly adjacent to the garage having
appliances with open flames or pilot lights will not be permitted.



   (KK)   Access to a room used for sleeping purposes from a garage
will not be permitted.



   (LL)   Hot air duct openings shall be a minimum of four feet above
the garage floor and equipped with a fusible link fire damper.



   (MM)   No portion of any detached garage shall be within ten feet of
any portion of any principal structure. No portion of any garage shall
encroach upon or overhang an easement. No portion of any detached garage,
shall be within three feet of any interior side property line, except for
eaves or overhangs, including gutters, not exceeding a two foot projection.
No portion of any attached garage shall be within five feet of an interior
side property line, except for eaves or overhangs, including gutters, not
exceeding a two-foot projection.



(Ord. 90-39, passed 7-11-90)



BUILDING CONTRACTORS



§ 150.140  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR.



      (1)   Any person engaged in the business of constructing,
altering, or repairing buildings or other structures or sidewalk or street
pavements, including but not limited to, general building contractors, cement
or concrete contractors, masonry contractors, carpentry contractors, heating
contractors, roofing contractors, underground water and sewer contractors,
and subcontractors; provided, that this subchapter shall not be construed as
requiring a license for the operation of the business of plumbing contractor
or the business of electrical contractor by a person who has registered as
such pursuant to the provisions of ordinances relating to electrical
contractors.



      (2)   Any person who engages in the construction, repair, or
alteration of any building, structure, or street or sidewalk pavement within
the municipality, for which a building permit is required, is presumed to be
a contractor and must be licensed hereunder unless such presumption is
rebutted.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation,
trust, or other legal entity.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73)



§ 150.141  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall be a contractor within the municipality without first
having obtained a license therefor as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.142  APPLICATION.



   Applications for license shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk
upon forms furnished thereby.  Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, applicant's address, number of individual persons to be operating
under such license, type of license requested, and a statement that the
applicant agrees to comply with this and all other ordinances relating to or
regulating the activities engaged in this chapter.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73)



§ 150.143  BOND. 



   Each applicant shall, before receiving a license as provided in this
subchapter, deposit with the Village Clerk a bond in the penal sum of $30,000
for a general contractor and $10,000 for subcontractors, with surety to be
approved by the corporate authorities to indemnify, keep, and save harmless
the municipality against any loss, cost, damage, judgment, or liability of
any kind whatsoever which the municipality may suffer or be put to, or which
may accrue against, be charged to, or be recovered from the municipality or
any of its officials by reason of any act or thing done or neglected to be
done under or by virtue of the authority given in such license. Further
conditioned, the applicant shall well and faithfully observe all of the
provisions of this subchapter and other ordinances and other regulations of
the municipality relating to the activities engaged in under or by virtue of
the authority given in such license.  Such bond shall extend over the
license period.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73; Am. Ord. 77-07, passed 5-4-77)



§ 150.144  ISSUANCE; LICENSE PERIOD.



   The Village Clerk shall issue a license upon proper application and
compliance with this subchapter and payment of the prescribed fee, as
provided in § 150.145.  All licenses shall expire 12 months from date of
issuance.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73; Am. Ord. 77-07, passed 5-4-77; Am. Ord. 2002-15,
passed 9-4-02)



§ 150.145  FEE.



Editor's note:  For annual fee rates for contractors, see § 110.07(E).



§ 150.146  DUTIES OF LICENSEES.



   It shall be the duty of all contractors licensed hereunder to comply
with all ordinances relating to or regulating the activities engaged in this
subchapter and, in addition thereto, to at least once each week remove or
cause to be removed from the site of contractors' activities all trash,
refuse, and waste materials.  Contractors shall at all times keep the site
of activities in an orderly condition, free from standing water, unguarded
dangerous implements, and health and safety hazards, and contractors shall
not obstruct traffic on streets or sidewalks or permit dirt or waste
materials to fall or be carried onto such public ways.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.147  INSPECTION; ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this subchapter are declared to be of a regulatory
nature; and it shall at all times be the duty of the Police Department, the
Health Department, the Fire Department, and the Building Department to
regularly inspect the site of those contractors' activities to see that the
same are being conducted and operated in accordance with the requirements of
all laws and ordinances applicable thereto.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73)



§ 150.148  REVOCATION.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked by the Village President for any violation of any provision herein;
and such revocation shall be in addition to any fine imposed. No person whose
license has been revoked as herein provided shall be eligible for a new
license during the license period.  The President may reinstate revoke
licensed during the license period without payment of additional fee.



(Ord. 73-20, passed 10-2-73)



DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION



§ 150.160  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall hereafter construct,
build, establish, or maintain any driveway without first having obtained a
written permit to do so from the Building Department.



   (B)   Application for permit must be made in writing upon forms
furnished by the Building Department.  Said application shall contain the
name and address of the person, firm, or corporation making application, the
name of the contractor or person who is constructing said driveway, and the
proposed location and dimensions of the said driveway, including the street
address and lot and block number.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77; Am. Ord. 83-15, passed 9-14-83) Penalty, see §
150.999 



§ 150.161  CONCRETE DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   Concrete driveways shall be of a quality as hereinafter stated:



      (1)   Concrete mix shall be designed using the following data:



         (a)   Minimum compressive strength of 3500 psi at 28
days;



         (b)   Minimum of six sacks of cement per cubic yard;



         (c)   Maximum size aggregate of one inch.



      (2)   Concrete driveways shall be a minimum thickness of four
inches.



      (3)   Ten-gauge steel mesh is to be required in all concrete
driveways in the village.



   (B)   Expansion joints shall be placed at the junction of the
driveway apron and the sidewalk and at the junction of the driveway apron and
the curb.



Such expansion joints shall be ½-inch thick pre-molded filler strips with
the top of the strip placed ¼-inch below the surface of the driveway apron.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.162  ASPHALT DRIVEWAYS.



   All driveways constructed of asphalt are to be a finished dimension of
2-½ inches compressed thickness.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.163  SPECIFICATIONS AND DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   All driveways constructed, built, established, or maintained
in the village are to be constructed of either asphalt or concrete, and must
be a minimum width of ten feet throughout any point, except where a currently
existing permanent structure, foundation, or part of a residence would
portent such a minimum width at a specified portion.  In no case shall any
driveway be less than seven feet in width at any point.



   (B)   All driveways are to be solid pour throughout and extend to
the rear building line or to the beginning of a detached garage apron,
whichever is longer.  A flare at the curb shall be required and in no
instance shall the radius at the curb corners be less than three feet.



   (C)   Rib driveways are forbidden.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77; Am. Ord. 88-13, passed 5-11-88) Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.164  SUBGRADE PREPARATION.



   Whenever a fill condition exists, all topsoil and unsuitable material
shall be removed; and the subgrade shall be tamped or rolled until thoroughly
compacted before placing the granular base.  Fill shall be placed in
six-inch layers to the proper subgrade elevation.  Side slopes of fill
material shall not exceed one foot vertical to three feet horizontal.  Where
a cut condition exists, all topsoil, unsuitable material, and subgrade shall
be removed to the proper elevation all allowing sufficient width to
accommodate the forms.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.165  GRANULAR BASE.



   A granular base of five-inch minimum thickness shall be placed on the
prepared subgrade.  The base shall extend the full width of the driveway. 
Aggregate gradation shall conform to gradation CA6 of the Illinois Division
of Highways standard specifications.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.166  COLD WEATHER CONCRETING.



   After the first seasonal frost, concrete shall be protected from
freezing in accordance with "Recommended Practice for Cold-Weather
Concreting" (ACI 306).  The contractor shall be responsible for all concrete
damaged by low temperatures and any concrete so damaged shall be removed and
replaced by him at his expense.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.167  CURING.



   Driveways must be cured by one of the following methods and must remain
in place for not less than six days:



   (A)   Apply specified curing compound with brush, roller, or spray
at the rate of one gallon for every 250 square feet of surface.



   (B)   Place burlap on the finished surface, saturate with water, and
cover with an impermeable covering.



   (C)   Place polyethylene sheeting as soon as the concrete has
hardened sufficiently to prevent marring of the surface.  Wet the surface of
the concrete immediately before the sheeting is placed.  The edges of the
sheeting shall be weighted securely with a continuous windrow of earth or any
other means satisfactory to the village to provide an air-tight cover.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.168  SAFETY STANDARDS.



   No driveway, whether maintained for commercial or private use shall be
so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp depression, or other
obstruction in the sidewalk.  The grade shall be as near as possible to that
of the adjoining sidewalk.  It shall be unlawful for the surface finish of
any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk to be constructed of such
materials as to render it slippery or hazardous for pedestrians or to have
the grade of the sidewalk other than level.



(Ord. 77-23, passed 11-23-77) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.169  INSPECTIONS.



   An inspection prior to the final lift of bituminous concrete to check
the subgrade and proper base preparation  is  to  be performed in
accordance with §§ 150.163 through 150.165.



(Ord. 83-15, passed 9-14-83)



§ 150.170  CORE SAMPLE TESTS.



   In the event a discrepancy exists, the village has the option to
perform a core sample test to insure the proper subgrade and thickness of the
driveway are properly completed.  The expense of such tests and any
subsequent repairs are to be borne by the developer.  A reinspection fee for
each reinspection shall also be borne by the developer.



(Ord. 83-15, passed 9-14-83)



§ 150.171  DRIVEWAY AND OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.



   The village reserves the right to set standards for the construction of
driveways within commercial or industrial developments. Such standards may
vary with each such development with reference to the type of vehicular
traffic and weight of equipment to be anticipated for use on such
development. 



(Ord. 83-15, passed 9-14-83)



ADDITIONAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



§ 150.180  LIGHT SWITCHES.



   (A)   That every room (excluding closets) of every structure shall
have at least one light switch controlling a light fixture or outlet in that
room.



   (B)   Every room (excluding closets) or hallway of every primary
residential structure shall be equipped with a light switch.



   (C)   When a room or hallway has more than one entrance each entry
shall be equipped with a wall switch. All switches for any particular room
will control the same outlet or fixtures three-way or four-way switches will
be required.



   (D)   Where lamps are customarily used, control of an electrical
wall outlet is permitted. All other rooms and hallways must be constructed
with a permanent wall or ceiling fixture.



   (E)   All switches must be located within 18 inches (18") of the
handle side of the door. Where no door exists the switch may be located on
either side of the jamb but no further than 18 inches (18"), from the jamb.



   (F)   All switches must be located between 48 and 52 inches above
the finished floor level.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.181  SILL PLATES.



   All sill plates installed within six inches of the proposed final grade
shall either be treated to resist rotting or be of a species normally
classified as rot resistant.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88)



§ 150.182  SUMP PUMPS.



   Sump pumps will normally be required to discharge into the side or rear
yard, above grade within ten feet of the foundation line. Where it appears to
have a lesser impact, an alternate point of discharge may be indicated by the
Building Commissioner or Inspector.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88)



§ 150.183  CRAWL SPACES.



   (A)   All crawl spaces will be conducted with a minimum height of 36
inches between the top of the slab and the bottom of all beams or joist.



   (B)   All crawl spaces shall have a interior access panel a minimum
of 24 inches by 24 inches. A larger panel may be required if permanently
mounted appliances are located within the crawl space.



   (C)   Every crawl space shall be equipped with at least one outlet
(GFI protected) and light fixture. The control for the light fixture shall be
located within 12 inches of the access panel.



   (D)   All crawl spaces shall be constructed with a minimum slab
thickness of two inches.



   (E)   Where the crawl space is the lowest level of the structure,
the slab shall be pitch to eliminate the accumulation of standing water and
shall run into a sump pit. The sump shall discharge to the exterior, above
grade and within ten feet of the foundation.



   (F)   Where the crawl space is not the lowest level. The slab shall
either be pitched to a sump pit as described in division (E) above or to a
floor drain that is connected to the perimeter drain tile of the lower level.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.184  FLEXIBLE DUCT WORK.



   (A)   The use of flexible duct work shall not be permitted where the
accumulation of debris or moisture is possible.



   (B)   When such duct work is easily accessible and where the
cleaning is possible without the use of special tool or knowledge the use may
be permitted.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88)



§ 150.185  ADDRESSES.



   (A)   Every primary structure shall be identified with the address
of street number. Either numerals or words spelling out the numbers shall be
acceptable.



   (B)   The height of the numbers or words shall be a minimum of three
inches and shall be of a contrasting color to the surface they are applied to.



   (C)   The identification must be visible from the street and located
either directly above the entry door or the overhead door of an attached
garage. When neither location is visible from the street, a location on the
front face of the structure six feet to ten feet above grade on the driveway
side of the structure will be required.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88)



§ 150.186  EMERGENCY WINDOWS.



   (A)   Bedrooms.



      (1)   Every bedroom or every room intended as a sleeping area
shall have at least one window with a net clear opening of 5.7 square feet.
The minimum width shall be no less than 20 inches and the minimum height
shall be no less than 24 inches. Where windows are provided for a means of
egress they shall be installed with a sill height of no more than 44 inches
above the finished floor.



      (2)   Exception.



         (a)   Where a door leading directly outside is installed
in the room.



         (b)   Grade floor windows may have a net clear opening
of five square feet.



   (B)   Basements.



      (1)   Every basement is required to have an emergency escape
window. If the basement is separated by z partition or if walls are
constructed then each space, not including washrooms closets or utility
rooms, shall be required to have an emergency escape window.



      (2)   Each required window shall have a minimum clear width of
24 inches and a minimum height of 30 inches. Where windows are provided for a
means of egress they shall be installed with a sill height of not more than
44 inches above the finished floor.



      (3)   Exception.  Where a door from the space leading
directly outside is available then such window will not be required.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.187  TIME LIMITS.



   (A)   All permits will have a specific time limit for completion and
approval, based on the following schedule. Failure to complete the work end
receive approval will cause the forfeiture of all fees and bond money to the
village. Completion of the work will require a new permit to be approved.



      (1)   Fences, pools, patios, private sidewalks, and other
similar structures are allowed three months.



      (2)   Decks, sheds, garages, interior alterations and similar
structures are allowed six months.



      (3)   Room additions and all primary structures are allowed
one year.



   (B)   Extensions may be granted by the Building Commissioner, when
significant progress has been observed. Extensions may not exceed the
original time limit permitted. Refer to the Orland Hills Building Permit Fee
Schedule for the charge of an extension.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see Ch. 150, Appendix



§ 150.188  RESERVED.



§ 150.189  ELECTRICAL WIRING CONDUIT.



   All electrical wiring shall be installed in either rigid metal conduit
or electronic metallic tubing. All low voltage wiring, not including
telephone, cable or other utility link located in a concealed space or wall
in a structure shall be installed in rigid metal conduit or electronic
metallic tubing.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.190  CONCRETE FLATWORK.



   (A)   Except as otherwise required all concrete flatwork shall have
a minimum thickness of four inches.



   (B)   All concrete shall be placed on a granular base of at least
four inches. Where a deeper base is required, granular fill may be used.
Lifts may not exceed eight inches in depth and each lift must be compacted.



   (C)   All concrete exposed to the weather must have a minimum cement
content of six bags per cubic yard.



   (D)   All interior concrete shall have a minimum cement content of
five bags per cubic yard.



   (E)   All interior slabs shall be constructed using a six-mil vapor
barrier, and a four-inch granular base.



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88) Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.191  RESIDENTIAL SEASONAL ROOMS, CONCRETE PATIOS, DECK ROOFS AND ROOM
ADDITIONS.



   (A)   A seasonal room attached to a single family detached residence
shall be used as a seasonal room only and shall comply with the following
stipulations:



      (1)   Fifty percent of the wall and or space shall be covered
by screening material, or glass.



      (2)   Roof structures shall be designed to support live, dead,
snow and wind loads pursuant to adopted Building Code requirements, per §
150.020.1.



      (3)   Screen room structures may be of post and beam
construction type pursuant adopted Building Code requirements, per §
150.020.1.



      (4)   Screen room structures shall not be built on floating
concrete slabs or floating wood decks.



      (5)   All exposed wood to be sealed from the weather elements
or pressure treated or naturally durable wood such as Redwood or Cedar.



      (6)   Gutters and downspouts with splash blocks are required.



      (7)   There shall be no encroachment into the side yard
setback requirements of the Zoning Code, Chapter 159 of this code of
ordinances.



      (8)   Any rear yard encroachment shall not require a zoning
variance.



      (9)   Electric is required and shall comply with adopted
Electrical Code requirements, per § 150.105, and all outlets shall be of
G.F.I. protection type.



      (10)   When the underside of the roof is enclosed with a
ceiling, the attic air space shall be properly ventilated pursuant to adopted
Building Code requirements, per § 150.020.1.



   (B)   A roof installed over existing and proposed single family
concrete patio slabs or wooden decks shall comply with the following
stipulations:



      (1)   Roof structures shall be designed to support live, dead,
snow and wind loads pursuant to adopted Building Code requirements, per §
150.020.1.



      (2)   Roof columns shall be supported on concrete piers
footings in virgin ground with a minimum of 8" x 42" concrete pier below
grade and columns secured to the concrete piers.



      (3)   Roof structures may be of post and beam type
construction with wall area being 50% open. Not to be covered, screened
and/or enclosed with any type of material.



      (4)   All exposed wood to be sealed from the weather elements
or pressure treated or naturally durable woods such as Redwood or Cedar.



      (5)   Gutters and downspouts with splash blocks are required.



      (6)   There shall be no encroachment into the side yard
setback requirement.



      (7)   Any rear encroachment shall not require a zoning
variance.



      (8)   Electric is not required, however if installed it shall
comply with adopted Electrical Code requirements, per § 150.105, and all
outlets shall be of G.F.I. protection type.



      (9)   When the underside of the roof is enclosed with a
ceiling, the attic air space shall be properly ventilated pursuant to adopted
Building Code requirements, per § 150.020.1.



   (C)   Rooms attached to a residence that have screens, windows
and/or sliding glass doors and/or exterior doors shall be classified as a
room addition to the main structure and shall be required to adhere to this
chapter and the Zoning Code, Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances,
requirements for same, except as previously stated.



(Ord. 2002-017, passed 10-16-02; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 150.200  BASIC PLAN REVIEW SYSTEM.



   (A)   Requirements.  All plan reviews for construction in the
village shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner, who will be required
to initiate all phases of the basic plan review.  This procedure will be as
follows:



      (1)   Submission of plans which shall conform to the village
ordinances;



      (2)   Plans for one- and two-family dwellings will be reviewed
for applicable adopted Code compliance by the Building Commissioner, whenever
possible; otherwise plans may be sent for review to an outside entity; and



      (3)   Plans to be sent to the Village Engineer for review upon
receipt of plans by the Building Commissioner.  After all the above steps
have been completed, an additional review shall be made.  Any corrections or
notations made will be set forth by the Building Commissioner prior to
approval.  The Building Commissioner will notify the Developer as to the
changes.



   (B)   Fees.



      (1)   The schedule of fees for the reviews as set forth in
division (A) of this section are contained in the Appendix: Fee Schedule.



      (2)   A Village Engineer fee will also be required on one- and
two-family dwellings, unless the Village Engineer has previously established
grading and top of foundation requirements for the lot involved.  Said fee
shall be at the Village Engineer's hourly rate plus a $20 handling fee.



      (3)   Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings: The
village will charge a fee for review by the village’s current reviewer
equal to the amount of the invoice received plus a $20 handling fee plus a
fee for village review as contained in the Appendix: Fee Schedule.



   (C)   Additional review.  If any additional review of previously
approved plans is requested by the developer, any additional costs for such
review shall be incurred by the developer prior to the plan being approved.



(Ord. 78-02, passed 4-12-78; Am. Ord. 81-16, passed - -81; Am. Ord. 83-06,
passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 84-04, passed  -  -84; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed
9-4-02; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)



§ 150.201  TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMIT; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMIT.  A permit which may be issued by the
Village Building Commissioner.  The permit allows occupancy of a building
noting that not all relevant code sections have been met, including grading
and landscaping provisions.



   (B)   Duration.



      (1)   A temporary occupancy permit shall be valid for 90 days
from date of issuance.  The request for a temporary occupancy permit must be
accompanied by the appropriate fee and a cash escrow or certificate of
deposit to the village in the amount of twice the amount of the Building
Commissioner's estimate of the cost necessary to bring all irregularities
into compliance with codes and municipal ordinances.  In no case shall this
escrow or certificate be less than $300.  In the event that an escrow amount
is required by another agency, evidence of that escrowed amount will be
credited toward the minimum escrow amount required by the village.



      (2)   A temporary occupancy permit may be renewed at the
developer or owner's request, but only one such renewal will be allowed. 
The renewal shall also be valid for 90 days, but must be made prior to the
expiration of the original permit.  If the original permit expires, no
renewal shall be granted.  The request for renewal must be accompanied by
the appropriate fee.



   (C)   Fee.  Each temporary occupancy permit or renewal of a
temporary occupancy permit shall only be issued upon payment of a
non-refundable fee of $50 for processing by the village.



   (D)   Review.  The Building Commissioner will review each temporary
occupancy permit prior to the expiration date and conduct an inspection if no
request for renewal is made.  Expiration of the permit, whether original or
renewal, without correction of the necessary areas of noncompliance with the
appropriate codes and ordinances shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.



(Ord. 87-03, passed 2-11-87)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any or all of the
provisions of this chapter for which another penalty has not been provided
shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500 for each offense.  Each day or
portion of a day thereof shall be deemed a separate offense in the event such
violation continues.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§
150.003, 150.020.1, 150.023, 150.078, or 150.160 through 150.171 shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.  Each day that
a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 



(Ord. 90-18, passed 3-28-90; Am. Ord. 92-55, passed 11-11-92)



   (C)   Anyone violating any of the provisions of § 150.076 shall
forfeit, upon conviction, to the village not less than $50 or more than $500
for each violation, plus the costs of the action.  Each day that such
violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate punishable offense.



(Ord. 71-2, passed - - 71; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)



   (D)   A violation of § 150.125 is punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 for each violation. Each day that the violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate punishable offense. 



(Ord. 90-39, passed 7-11-89; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)



   (E)   (1)   A violation of § 150.141 is punishable by a minimum
fine of $500 up to a maximum fine of $1,000.  Each day that the violation
continues shall be deemed a separate punishable offense.



      (2)   In the event that a renewed temporary occupancy permit
expires without the necessary corrections being performed, the escrow amount
or certificate of deposit becomes the property of the village.  The village
may use the escrow amount to insure that the structure is brought into
compliance with the appropriate codes and ordinances, but no part of the
escrow will be refunded.  In addition to the forfeiture of the escrowed
amount, the fines as noted in division (E)(1) above may also be imposed.



(Ord. 87-03, passed 2-11-87)



   (F)   A violation of §§ 150.180 through 150.187, 150.189, and
150.190 is punishable by a fine of $50 for each violation.  Each day that
the violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate punishable offense. 



(Ord. 88-44, passed 12-28-88; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)



   (G)   Any person in violation of §§ 150.035, 150.045, 150.075,
150.085.1, 150.105 through 150.187, 150.189, and 150.190 is punishable by a
fine of $50 for each violation.  Each day that the violation continues shall
be deemed to be a separate punishable offense. 



(Am. Ord. 92-04, passed 1-22-92; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06)



APPENDIX:  FEE SCHEDULE



 



1(A). PRELIMINARY REVIEW:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I & II
 
$35


 
 
All others, hourly rate
 
90


1(B). CODE COMPLIANCE:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I & II
 
$35


 
 
Residential - single family
 
300


 
 
Commercial (per 5,000 sq. ft.) & multi- family residential (per 12 units or
less)
 
$450=$37.50 per unit


 
 
 
 
 


2. INITIAL APPLICATION & SUBMISSION FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$150


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
150


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
60


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings (per 12 units or less)
 
200


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
50


 
 
Commercial; primary structure (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
350


 
 
Surcharge: Special Service Provisions
 
3.00/sf


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structure
 
250


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
125


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
30


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
50


 
 
Multi-family; additions
 
125


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
125


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
125


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
30


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
30


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
30


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
60


 
 
Demolition; accessory structure
 
60


 
 
Demolition; primary structures
 
125


 
 
Moving of Buildings; no use of R.O.W.
 
250


 
 
Moving of Buildings; use of R.O.W.
 
250


 
 
Reviews of unique or questionable designs or workmanship or areas of concern,
including elevators, food service equipment, engineering and other similar
issues, which are made by a consultant or an outside agency, will be billed
back to the applicant of the permit.


 
 
 
 
 


3. INITIAL PLAN REVIEW FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$900


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
900


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
900


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings (per 12 units or less)
 
$900


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
900


 
 
Commercial; primary structure (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
900


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
600


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structures
 
700


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
600


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
125


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
900


 
 
Multi-Family; additions
 
900


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
900


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
900


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I 
 
20


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
20


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
50


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
90


 
 
Demolition; accessory structures
 
60


 
 
Demolition; primary structures 
 
125


 
 
Moving of Buildings; no use of R.O.W.
 
125


 
 
Moving of Buildings; use of R.O.W.
 
250


 
 
Reviews for unique or questionable designs or workmanship or areas of
concern, including elevators, food service equipment, engineering and other
similar issues, which are made by a consultant or an outside agency, will be
billed back to the applicant of the permit.


4. SUBSEQUENT APPLICATION & SUBMISSION FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$25


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
25


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
15


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings (per 12 units or less)
 
$25=$2.08 per unit


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
15


 
 
Commercial; primary structures (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
125


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
60


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structures
 
125


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
60


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
25


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
25


 
 
Multi-Family; additions
 
25


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
125


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
125


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
20


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
20


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
25


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
30


 
 
Demolition; accessory structures
 
25


 
 
Demolition; primary structures
 
50


 
 
Moving of Building; no use of R.O.W.
 
$20


 
 
Moving of Building; use of R.O.W.
 
50


 
 
 
 
 


5. SUBSEQUENT PLAN REVIEW FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
A. Compliance of conditions; 12% of the initial review fee.
 
 


 
 
B. Where changes and/or revisions are requested, prior to the work actually
being started, 30% of the initial review fee.
 
 


 
 
C. Where changes and/or revisions are requested, after the work has been
started, and where there is additional work being proposed, or where plans
are identified differently then the previous submission; 60% of the original
review fee.
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


6. PERMIT FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$400


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
400


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
250


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings (per 12 units or less)
 
$250= $20.83 per unit


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
250


 
 
Commercial; primary structure (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
500


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
250


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structures
 
550


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
250


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
60


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
125


 
 
Multi-Family; additions
 
125


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
350


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
350


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
15


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
20


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
25


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
30


 
 
Demolition; accessory structures
 
20


 
 
Demolition; primary structures
 
25


 
 
Moving of Buildings; no use of R.O.W.
 
20


 
 
Moving of Buildings; use of R.O.W.
 
30


 
 
 
 
 


7.A. INITIAL INSPECTION FEES (per inspection)
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$65


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
65


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings (per 12 units or less)
 
$65


 
 
Commercial; primary structure (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
65


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structures
 
65


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
65


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
65


 
 
Multi-Family; additions
 
65


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
65


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
65


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
65


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
65


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
65


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
65


 
 
Demolition, accessory structures
 
65


 
 
Demolition, primary structures
 
65


 
 
Moving of Buildings, no use of R.O.W
 
65


 
 
Moving of Buildings, use of R.O.W
 
65


 
 
Sign inspection
 
65


 
 
RPZ inspection
 
65


7.B. ADDITIONAL INSPECTION FEES (per building inspection and reinspection.)
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$125


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
125


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings  (per 12 units or less)
 
125


 
 
Commercial; primary structure (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
125


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structures
 
125


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
125


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
125


 
 
Multi-Family; additions
 
125


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
125


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
125


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
125


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
125


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
125


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
125


 
 
Demolition; accessory structures
 
125


 
 
Demolition; primary structures
 
125


 
 
Moving of Buildings; no use of R.O.W.
 
125


 
 
Moving of Buildings; use of R.O.W.
 
125


 
 
Sign inspection
 
125


 
 
RPZ inspection
 
125


 
 
Billboard inspection
 
$1.00 per sq. ft. of display area


7.C. Inspections requested for and completed on weekdays (not holidays) other
than during normal working hours or on a Saturday will be charged at twice
the indicated rate.  Inspections requested for and completed on Sundays and
observed holidays will be charged at the three times the indicated rate.
 
 
 
 


7.D. Inspections for multi-unit structures will be charged on a unit-by-unit
basis, on a separate charge for each separate common space.
 
 
 
 


7.E. Inspections for unique or questionable designs or workmanship or areas
of concern, including elevators, food service equipment, engineering and
other similar issues, which are made by a consultant or an outside agency,
will be billed back to the applicant of the permit.
 
 
 
 


7.F. Canceled, postponed, or rescheduled inspections may be charged an
additional fee, equal to one-half the indicated rate normally charged, for
each inspection.
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


8. OCCUPANCY FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$1,250


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
1,250


 
 
   additional  charge per unit
 
1,250


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings (per 12 units or less)
 
$1,250=$85 per unit


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
1,250


 
 
Commercial; primary structures (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
1,250


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
1,250


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structures
 
1,250


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
1,250


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
60


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
125


 
 
Multi-Family; additions
 
125


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
600


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
600


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
10


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
10


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
15


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
60


 
 
Demolition; accessory structures
 
10


 
 
Demolition; primary structures
 
25


 
 
Moving of Buildings; no use of R.O.W.
 
125


 
 
Moving of Buildings; use of R.O.W.
 
125


 
 
 
 
 


9. TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$90


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
60


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
90


 
 
Commercial; primary structure (per 5,000 sq. ft.) & multi-family residential
(per 12 units or less)
 
$250= $20.83 per unit


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
250


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
60


 
 
Single-Family Attached; additions
 
60


 
 
Multi-Family; additions
 
60


 
 
Commercial; additions
 
175


 
 
Manufacturing; additions
 
175


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
60


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
60


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
60


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
90


 
 
Moving of Buildings, no use of R.O.W.
 
90


 
 
Moving of Buildings, use of R.O.W.
 
90


 
 
 
 
 


10.  SUBSEQUENT ADDITIONAL FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Each building permit application for a new primary residential structure
(either single-family or multi-family) shall, at the time the permit is
issued, pay the following fees. The fees shall be computed per dwelling unit.


 
 
Village of Orland Hills - residential (per 12 units or less)
 
$1,000=$83.33 per unit


 
 
Elementary School District
 
375


 
 
High School District
 
125


 
 
Environmental Park Maintenance
 
500


 
 
Wetland Maintenance
 
125


 
 
Each building permit application for a new primary nonresidential structure
shall, at the time a building permit is issued, pay the following fees. The
fees shall be computed per tenant space.


 
 
Village of Orland Hills - non-residential (per 5,000 sq. ft.)
 
$1,055


 
 
Note: School fees shall only be charged for the public school districts
servicing the location of the residence. Recreation land donations and fees
are in addition to those fees indicated above.


 
 
 
 
 


11. MUNICIPAL PROPERTY PROTECTION BONDS:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings
 
$6,000


 
 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings
 
1,250


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
600


 
 
Multi-Family Dwellings
 
$6,000


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
600


 
 
Commercial; primary structure
 
12,250


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
1,250


 
 
Manufacturing; primary structures
 
12,250


 
 
   additional charge per unit
 
1,200


 
 
Single-Family Detached; additions
 
600


 
 
Miscellaneous Type I
 
125


 
 
Miscellaneous Type II
 
600


 
 
Miscellaneous Type III
 
1,250


 
 
Miscellaneous Type IV
 
6,000


 
 
Tenant Improvements
 
1,250


 
 
Moving of Buildings
 
12,250


 
 
Any contractor or applicant may elect to post a M.P.P. Bond in an amount
equal to five times the bond indicated. This bond will cover all of his
permits, until the end of the current fiscal year. Any developer may elect to
post a M.P.P. Bond in an amount equal to five times the bond indicated. This
bond will cover all of his permits in a particular subdivision, until the end
of the current fiscal year. The purpose of the bond is to insure protection
against damage for all existing public property.


 
 
 
 
 


12. STOP WORK ORDER FEES:
 
 
 
 


 
 
Where a stop work order has been posted or issued, an additional fee will be
charged.
 
$125


 
 
 
 
 


13. WORK WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION:
 
 
 
 


 
 
The fee shall be not less than $100 nor more than $500.


 
 
 
 
 


14. MISCELLANEOUS:
 
 
 
 


 
 
A. A $25 handling fee shall be added to all invoices submitted to the village
by any outside consultant to the village.


 
 
B. At no time shall the total permit fee be less than 2% of the total cost of
the project including all land, material, labor, architectural and
engineering fees.




 



(Ord. 90-18, passed 3-28-90 ; Am. Ord. 91-37, passed 12-19-91; Am. Ord.
93-37, passed 6-16-93; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord. 2003-012,
passed 6-4-03; Am. Ord. 2006-022, passed 9-20-06; Am. Ord. 2011-002, passed
3-16-11; Am. Ord. 2017-003, passed 2-1-17) Penalty, see § 150.999



CHAPTER 151:  DISH-TYPE SATELLITE AND MICROWAVE DISH-TYPE ANTENNAS



Section



   151.01   Definitions



   151.02   Permit required



   151.03   Location



   151.04   Additional requirements



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISH.  That part of a satellite or microwave signal receiving antenna
characteristically shaped like a saucer or dish or part thereof.



   DISH-TYPE SATELLITE AND DISH-TYPE MICROWAVE SIGNAL-RECEIVING
ANTENNAS.  Also referred to as EARTH STATIONS or GROUND STATIONS or WIRELESS
CABLE or WIRELESS BEAM shall mean one, or a combination or two or more for
the following:



      (1)   A signal-receiving device (antenna, dish antenna, or
dish-type antenna), the purpose of which is to receive communication or other
signals from satellites in the earth's orbit or other extraterrestrial
sources or microwave wireless beam.



      (2)   A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the
focal point of the receiving component and the purpose of which is to
magnify, store, transfer, or transmit electronic or light signals.



      (3)   A coaxial cable the purpose of which is to carry or
transmit said signals to a receiver.



   GROUND ROD.  A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth to serve
as an electronic conductor through which electrical current may safely pass
and dissipate.



   LINE OF SIGHT.  The protected visual alignment of the ground station
to the satellite.



   RECEIVER.  A television set, monitor or radio receiver.



(Ord. 89-31, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 95-07, passed 4-10-95)



§ 151.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to erect, install, enlarge or alter any dish-type
satellite or dish-type microwave signal- receiving antennas, earth stations
or portion thereof, regardless of size, height or location, without first
filing an application with the Building Official in writing and obtaining the
required permit therefor.  Said permit shall have a fee of $100 for a
maximum 12 feet in height.



(Ord. 89-31, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 95-07, passed 4-10-95)  Penalty, see
§ 151.99



§ 151.03  LOCATION.



   (A)   No dish-type satellite or dish-type microwave signal-receiving
antennas or earth station shall be located in any front or side yard, but
must be located to the rear of principal structure, or in the required rear
yard.



   (B)   The required line of site can not be obtained from the
locations indicated in division (A) above then a variance from the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission may be sought.



   (C)   No dish-type satellite or dish-type microwave signal-receiving
antennas or earth station or portion thereof shall be located within five
feet of a property line or encroach into or overhang an easement.



   (D)   No dish-type satellite or dish-type microwave signal-receiving
antennas or earth stations shall be installed or constructed atop any
single-family residence or any accessory structure.  Except when said
dish-type satellite or dish-type microwave signal receiving antennas are nine
square feet or less in area with a maximum height of 12 feet, antenna
installation to be on a tripod stand and to be designed to comply with
Chapter 150 Building Code Regulations of the village without the use of guy
wires, then said antenna shall be allowed to be constructed atop a
single-family residence.



(Ord. 89-31, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 95-07,
passed 4-10-95)



§ 151.04  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All exterior wiring shall be installed at a minimum depth of
18 inches below grade.



   (B)   All dish-type satellite or dish-type microwave
signal-receiving antennas or earth station shall be designed to withstand a
wind force of 75 miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires and
an impact pressure of 25 pounds per square foot.



   (C)   A dish-type satellite or dish-type microwave signal-receiving
antenna or earth station, when mounted on a roof top, shall not exceed a
height of 12 feet, measured from the point of installation to the highest
point of the dish, normal operating conditions. Ground mounted dishes shall
not exceed a height of 12 feet measured from grade to the highest point of
the dish under normal operating conditions. When not in use the dish shall be
set and maintained at a height of 12 feet or less.



   (D)   No advertisement shall be permitted on any dish-type satellite
or dish-type microwave signal- receiving antennas or earth station, beyond
any manufacturers identification.



   (E)   All roof top units shall be equipped with a weather proof,
G.F.C.I. electrical outlet for service and maintenance and to be grounded as
per Chapter 150, Building Code Regulations.



(Ord. 89-31, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 95-07, passed 4-10-95)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone found violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.  Each day that
said violation continues shall be deemed a separate and punishable offense.



(Ord. 89-31, passed 11-22-89)



CHAPTER 152:  FENCES



Section



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Permit required; application; fee



   152.03   Construction requirements; restrictions



   152.04   Obstructions



   152.05   Authority to review all fence variances



 



   152.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



Swimming pools, see §§ 157.07 and 157.23



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL RUN.  A completely enclosed fence for the exercising or
containment of an animal.



   BARRIER.  Any obstacles or obstruction, natural or otherwise, erected
to bar passage.



   BARRIER AREA.  That area derived by multiplying the length times the
height measured at the topmost member



   BARRIER HEIGHT.  The height of the barrier shall be measured to the
topmost member including any ornamental member located on the top of the
fence.



   CORNER BARRIER. Any open barrier extending in one or two directions
parallel to said property lines, driveways, or sidewalks, not exceeding five
feet in either direction.



   CORNER SIDE LOT LINE. On corner lots, one side of the lot shall be
defined as being a front lot line, the other lot line, adjacent to a street,
shall be the comer side lot line.



   FENCE. A structure or growth not otherwise a part of any building or
structure, which encloses or partially encloses any parcel of land.



   FRONTAGE.  That portion of a lot between the front building set-back
line and the street right-of-way. Every lot shall have only one front line
and shall be the narrowest side of the lot line which adjoins a street. Where
such lot lines are not obviously evident, the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission shall determine the front lot line.



   OPEN BARRIER. A barrier in which the openings between the materials of
which the barriers is constructed represents more than 70% of the total
barrier area.



   PRIVACY FENCE.  A barrier of at least five feet but not more than six
feet in height, which is constructed of an acceptable, non-transparent
material, as determined by the Building Commissioner, which is created and
maintained for the purpose of substantially obscuring the premises from
ordinary view of persons passing by.



(Ord. 77-22, passed 10-12-77; Am. Ord. 82-07, passed  - -82; Am. Ord. 96-17,
passed 3-20-96)



§ 152.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or trust owning or occupying
land or premises within the village, nor shall other persons or contractors
construct upon said premises any fence, barrier, or other structure without
having first obtained a permit from the village.



   (B)   All applications for fence or barrier permits shall be made to
the Building Department and shall include such information as will be
sufficient to show compliance with this chapter.



   (C)   Working without a permit or not requesting the required
inspections shall be charged an additional fee. This fee shall be computed to
an amount that is equal to twice the initial application and permit fee
and/or an amount that is equal to twice the initial inspection fees.



   (D)   The fee for a fence, barrier, or other structure shall be as
per village fee schedule.



(Ord. 77-22, passed 10-12-77; Am. Ord. 80-12, passed  - -80; Am. Ord 82-07,
passed  - -82; Am. Ord. 96-17, passed 3-20-96)  Penalty, see § 152.99.



§ 152.03  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Any fence or barrier shall be constructed of harmonious
material to be designated at the time of application; provided, that no
barrier or fence may be constructed or maintained which is composed in whole
or part of any dangerous or hazardous material or containing any wire which
is charged with electric current to better protect the health and safety of
the people.



   (B)   Any type of chain link fence or barrier shall be constructed
with the sharp points pointed down.



   (C)   Any fence or barrier that is determined by the Building
Commissioner to have different types of sides, shall be constructed so the
attractive side faces away from the property on which the fence or barrier is
constructed in order to maintain a stable residential community which is
aesthetically pleasing.



   (D)   All fences or barriers shall be maintained in a safe, neat and
attractive condition, free from rot or deterioration and shall not be leaning.



   (E)   No fence shall be built in the property front yard frontage
setback requirement.



   (F)   A barrier or fence shall be constructed in such a fashion so
that all portions of such barrier or fence shall be located within the
owner's property and shall be a minimum of three inches from the owner's
property line.  The installer shall be responsible for maintaining the
minimum setback of three inches. A barrier or fence may be erected or
maintained upon an public utility or drainage easement provided that the
owner agrees in writing at the time of permit application that the utility
company and/or village not be refused the right to use of the said easements,
and that if the barrier or fence or any portion thereof is required to be
removed for such utility company's or village's use of the easement, the cost
of such removal and replacement of the barrier or fence shall be at the
expense of the owner. No fence or barrier shall be constructed in such a
manner as to impede or alter the natural surface water drainage of the
property upon which the fence or barrier is constructed or any adjoining
property. The bottom of the fence shall be a minimum of three inches above
the drainage area.



   (G)   No more than four corner barriers on a lot is permitted. Front
or corner side yards shall have only open type barriers.  Front yard or
corner side yard open barriers shall be a maximum of 30 inches in height and
shall not exceed five feet in either direction. Rear yard barriers shall be a
maximum of six feet in height.



   (H)   If the Building Commissioner considers a fence or barrier to
be a public safety hazard, either prior to, during, or after construction he
may stop the building of the fence and submit his recommendations to the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission who may declare such fence or
barrier to be a public nuisance and direct removal of such fence or barrier
as may be permitted by law.



   (I)   No fences may be placed in the landscaping easement that may
interfere with village approved landscaping, berms, or drainage. The Building
Department will make a determination as to whether or not a fence can be
installed in the easement. Any growth or previous plantings in the easements
must remain intact unless deemed necessary for removal by the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission.



   (J)   Only open chain link fences may be constructed in that area
designated as the corner side property starting from the rear foundation on
the principle building extending to the corner side lot line and continuing
to extend to the rear lot line. No garden patches, hedges, or growth areas
win be allowed to grow in that area between the comer side property line and
the building setback line. Said open chain link fence shall be a maximum
height of four feet.



   (K)   Animal runs shall not be allowed in front or side yards and
the perimeter of such animal run shall not be closer than five feet from the
adjoining property lines. On comer lots, no animal run shall be in that area
between the corner side lot line and the building setback line. Said animal
runs shall have an area not to exceed 100 square feet and not more than six
feet in height.



   (L)   When the owner's fence is to be attached to a neighbor's
fence, written permission shall be attained and submitted with the permit
application.



   (M)   A rear yard fence or barrier shall be a maximum height of six
feet. Alterations to the existing grade level preceding the use of a fence
for the purpose of altering the height of the fence shall not be permitted.



   (N)   (1)   Every fence to be erected within the village shall be
designed and constructed to resist and withstand a wind pressure of at least
20 pounds per square feet of the gross proposed area of the fence, less any
openings from any angle of approach.



      (2)   All fence posts used in the construction of a fence
shall be buried in the ground to a depth of at least 42 inches. Said posts
shall be set in concrete.  A post hole inspection is required.



      (3)   All fence parts and anchors made of wood or other
organic materials shall be treated with a chemical treatment to protect them
from deterioration when they are placed in or upon the ground.



   (O)   Chicken wire, square welded mesh wire, barbed wire, temporary
snow fence, solid concrete block, and sharp-edged material along the top or
sides are considered non-suitable construction material for purposes of this
chapter.



   (P)   Double fencing is prohibited; only one fence may be erected to
separate two lots.



   (Q)   Garbage and trash areas shall have a fence enclosure of six
feet in height for properties that are zoned R-4, R-5, R-6, B-1, B-2, 0-1,
and —1.



   (R)   The Building Commissioner shall judge each cause by the same
standards and not be unreasonable in his opinion and construction of this
chapter.



(Ord. 77-22, passed 10-12-77; Am. Ord. 80-12, passed  - -80; Am. Ord. 82-07,
passed  - -82; Am. Ord. 83-19, passed - -83; Am. Ord. 92-16, passed 6-10-92;
Am. Ord. 96-17, passed 3-20-96; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02) Penalty,
see § 152.99.



§ 152.04  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   No obstruction of any nature shall be allowed in the public dedicated
right-of-way except for those trees allowed by the village. No obstruction
will be permitted which will obscure the view of any person driving along the
street of the village and approaching an intersection or exiting from a
driveway.



(Ord. 82-07, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 96-17, passed 3-20-96)  Penalty, see §
152.99.



§ 152.05  AUTHORITY TO REVIEW ALL FENCE



VARIANCES.



   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall have the
authority to hear appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the Building Commissioner/ Inspector charged with
enforcement of the chapter, or hear applications for variances from this
chapter. The process shall be held in accordance with policies and procedures
of the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission as regulated by the
village zoning code.



(Ord. 92-22, passed 7-8-92; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 96-17,
passed 3-20-96)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, or trust violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in a sum not less than $25
nor more than $500 for each offense. Each day of violation shall be deemed a
separate offense.



(Ord. 82-07, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 96-17, passed 3-20-96)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOOD HAZARD AREAS; FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN



Section



   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   How to use this chapter



   153.04   Duties of the enforcement official(s)



   153.05   Base flood elevation



   153.06   Occupation and use of flood fringe areas



   153.07   Occupation and use of identified floodways



   153.08   Occupation and use of SFHA where floodways are not
identified



   153.09   Permitting requirements applicable to all flood plain areas



   153.10   Other development requirements



   153.11   Variances



   153.12   Disclaimer of liability



   153.13   Violations



   153.14   Abrogation and greater restrictions



Flood Protection Plan



   153.25   Adoption of official plan; provisions



Flood Prevention Strategy



   153.40   Purpose



   153.41   Flood hazard



   153.42   Flood safety and protection measures



   153.43   Current public information activities



   153.44   Goals



   153.45   Recommended public information activities



   153.46   Monitoring and evaluation



   153.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:Designated Floodways for the Village



   Appendix B:Designated Floodway Maps for Unincorporated Cook County



§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers  granted  to 
this village  by  Illinois  Compiled Statutes including, but not
necessarily limited to, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-8, and
11-31-2.  The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this village's
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential
losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:



   (A)   To meet the requirements of ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5 § 18g, "An
Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the
State of Illinois" approved June 10, 1911, as amended.



   (B)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others or creating unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;



   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings
from flood damage:



   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;



   (E)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations; and



   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.



   (G)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended.



   (H)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of
land and water resources;



   (I)   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and flood plains and to protect water quality and aquatic
habitats;



   (J)   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in
order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce
soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted.



   ACT.  An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and
streams of the State of Illinois," ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5 § 5 et seq.



   APPLICANT.  Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.



   APPROPRIATE USE.  Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are
permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that
will be allowed are as specified in § 153.07(D).



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any
location is as defined in § 153.05.



   BUILDING.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank,
a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days, unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway
use.



   CHANNEL.  Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or
artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert,
gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite
bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows,
either perennially or intermittently.



   CHANNEL MODIFICATION.  Alteration of a channel by changing the
physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification
includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody
vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or
dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a
severe form of channel modification typically involving relocation of the
existing channel (e.g., straightening).



   COMPENSATORY STORAGE.  An artificially excavated, hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of
natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed
within the flood plain. The uncompensated loss of natural flood plain storage
can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows.



   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. 
Preconstruction approval by DWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval,
pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an
appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map
can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built
plans.



   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR).  A letter which indicates
that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown
on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once
the as-built plans are submitted and approved.



   CONTROL STRUCTURE.  A structure designed to control the rate of flow
that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.



   CRITICAL FACILITIES.



      (1)   Buildings or facilities that produce, use, or store
highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;



      (2)   Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain
occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during
a flood;



      (3)   Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment
storage facilities, and emergency operations, centers that are needed for
flood response activities before, during and after a flood;



      (4)   Public and private utility facilities that are vital to
maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and
after a flood.



   DAM.  All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with
their abutments and appurtenant works, if any constructed for the purpose of
storing or diverting water or creating a pool.  Underground water storage
tanks are not included.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to real estate, including:



      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a
building or any addition to a building;



      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for
more than 180 days.  If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on
site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use.



      (3)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of
roads, bridges storage of equipment or materials, or similar projects;



      (4)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;



      (5)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;



      (6)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams,
or culverts; channel modification,



filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other non-agricultural
alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or
liquid waste;



      (7)   Any other activity of man that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive
vegetation removal.



   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing or re- surfacing of roads when there in no
increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.



   DWR.  Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water
Resources.



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building
has been elevated.



   EROSION.  The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water
or wave action.



   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS.  Organizations which are exempt from this
chapter per the Ill. Compiled Stat. including state, federal or local units
of government.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads is completed before
April 1, 1990.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANU- FACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 



   FEMA.  Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44
CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not
include any later editions or amendments.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  A period of years, based on a statistical analysis,
during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the flood plain outside of the
regulatory floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM).  A map prepared by FEMA that depicts
the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways. The
Flood Insurance Rate Map for the village shall be the Cook County Flood
Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000, and such
amendments and revisions to it that may be published by FEMA.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  That land typically adjacent to a body of water with
ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation. Flood plains may also include detached Special
Flood Hazard Areas, ponding areas, and the like. The flood plain is also
known as the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The flood plains are those
lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation
by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHA's of the village are
generally identified as such on the November 6, 2000 Cook County Flood
Insurance Rate Map (and such amendments and revisions to it that may be
published by FEMA) as Zone A, AE, AO, and/or AH.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE).  The elevation of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood plus two feet of freeboard at any given location in
the SFHA. For purposes of basement construction, the FPE shall be the
elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot of
freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and other contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed
and constructed of to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.



   FREEBOARD.  An increment of elevation added to the base flood
elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations,
unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as
those caused by ice or debris jams.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district
preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;



      (3)   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic
Places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; and



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.



   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULA- TIONS.  Engineering analysis which
determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or FIRM.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  Letter that revises base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBA or FIRM.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOMES does not include a recreational
vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MITIGATION.  Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize
the negative effects which flood plain development activities might have on
the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include
compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel
restoration.



   NATURAL.  When used in reference to channels means those channels
formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made
by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its flood plain
is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared,
mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials
typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or
cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified
channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel
meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may
be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and
revegetation.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  Manufactured home park or
subdivision foe which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
December 19, 1990.



   NGVD.  National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surface set
by the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all
existing adjustments in 1929.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM).  The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.



   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT.  A flood control project which will be
operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damage to existing
buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of
the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing,
in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are
not public agencies.



   PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS.  All streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR.  A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under The Illinois Land Surveyors Act (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§
1-49).



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.  An engineer registered in the State
of Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Act (ILCS Ch. 225,
Act 325, § 1-49).



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by DWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated
future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more
than a 10% increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are designated
for Tinley Creek, Marley Creek, and Tributary D to Marley Creek on the
November 6, 2000 Cook County Flood Insurance Rate Map and such amendments and
revisions to it that may be published by FEMA. To locate the regulatory
floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be
scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan, using
reference marks common to both maps.



   REPAIR, REMODELING or MAINTENANCE.  Development activities which do
not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.



   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY.  A retention facility stores stormwater
runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage
of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.



   RIVERINE SFHA.  Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on- stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.



   RUNOFF.  The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the
land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels
or conduits.



   SEDIMENTATION.  The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other
materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  Any base flood area subject to
flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other
identified channel or ponding area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V,
M, or E.



   STRUCTURE.  The results of a man-made change to the land constructed
on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or
placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a
manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days, unless they are
fully licensed and ready for highway use..



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure either, before the improvement or repair is started, or if the
structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. This term includes structures which were damaged whereby the cost
of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its pre- damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the
market value before the damage occurred, regardless of the actual repair work
performed.  For the purposes of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any to wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.  The term does
not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure
to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or
(2) any alteration of a "Historic Structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "Historic
Structure".



   TRANSITION SECTION.  Reaches of the stream or floodway where water
flows from a narrow cross- section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 200-20,
passed 11-1-00; Am. Ord. 2001-010, passed 6-6-01)



§ 153.03  HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for fulfilling
all of the duties listed in § 153.04.



   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the Building Commissioner first
should use the criteria listed in § 153.05, Base Flood Elevations, to
determine whether the development site is located within a flood plain. Once
it has been determined that a site is located within a flood plain, the
Building Commissioner must determine whether the development site is within a
flood fringe, a regulatory floodway, or within a SFHA or flood plain on which
no floodway has been identified.  If the site is within a flood fringe, the
Building Commissioner shall require that the minimum requirements of §
153.06 be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Village Engineer shall
require that the minimum requirements of § 153.07 be met.  If the site is
located within a SFHA or flood plain for which no detailed study has been
completed and approved, the Village Engineer shall require that the minimum
requirements of Section § 153.08 be met.



   (C)   In addition, the general requirements of § 153.09 shall be
met for all developments meeting the requirements of §§ 153.06, 153.07, or
153.08.  The Building Commissioner shall assure that all subdivision
proposals shall meet the requirements of § 153.10.



   (D)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Building
Commissioner shall review the requirements of § 153.11 to make sure they are
met. In addition, the Building Commissioner shall complete all notification
requirements.



   (E)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as
required in this chapter, the Building Commissioner may take any and all
actions as outlined in § 153.13.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89)



§ 153.04  DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S).



   The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the
following:



   (A)   Determining the flood plain designation. Check all new
development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard
area (SFHA). If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a flood plain on which a detailed study has not been
conducted which drains more than one square mile.



   (B)   Professional engineer review. If the development site is
within a floodway or in a flood plain on which a detailed study has not been
conducted which drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be
referred to a registered professional engineer (P.E.) under the employ or
contract of the village for review to ensure that the development meets the
requirements of § 153.07. In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall
state in writing that the development meets the requirements of § 153.07.



   (C)   Dam safety requirements. Ensure that a DWR Dam Safety permit
has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required if
the proposed development activity includes construction of a dam as defined
in § 153.02. Regulated dams  may include weirs, restrictive culvert, or
impoundment structures.



   (D)   Other permit requirements.  Ensure that any and required
federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a
flood plain development permit.



   (E)   Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that all  development
activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements or this chapter and issue a flood plain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this
community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.



   (F)   Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before,
during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and
to ensure they comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   (G)   Elevation and floodproofing certificates. Maintain in the
permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
flood (including basement) or a residential or non-residential building or
the elevation to which a non-residential building has been floodproofed,
using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to § 153.09 for
public inspection and provide copies of same.



   (H)   Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection
and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps,
copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation,
conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map
amendment and "as-built" elevation and flood proofing or elevation and
floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this
chapter.



   (I)   State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been
granted by the Illinois Division of Water Resources for all development
projects subject to §§ 153.07 and 153.08 of this chapter, unless
enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village.  Upon
acceptance of this chapter by DWR and FEMA, responsibility is hereby
delegated to the village as per 92 Ill. Adm. Code 708 for construction in the
regulatory floodway and flood plain when floodways have not been defined in
§§ 153.07 and 153.08 of this chapter.  However, the following review
approvals are not delegated to the village and shall require review or
permits from DWR:



      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per
the Illinois Compiled Statutes;



      (2)   Department of transportation projects, dams or
impoundment structures as defined in § 153.02 and all other state, federal
or local unit of government projects, including projects of the village and
county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of § 153.07(I);



      (3)   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or
culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, per § 153.07(E)(5);



      (4)   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to §
153.07(E)(4);



      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in § 153.07(E)(1), (2) and (8);



      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;



      (7)   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway
locations; and,



      (8)   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.



   (J)   Cooperation with other agencies. Cooperate with state and
federal flood plain management agencies



to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to
improve the administration of this chapter. Submit data to DWR and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for proposed revisions of a regulatory
map. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program. 
Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of any proposed amendments to
this chapter.



   (K)   Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject,
however, to the review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any ordinance changes.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 153.05  BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance
study for the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the
Illinois State Water Survey's Flood Plain  Information  Repository.  When
a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the
detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to DWR and FEMA.



   (A)   The base flood elevation for the SFHA's shall be as delineated
on the 100-year flood profiles in the Cook County Flood Insurance Study
prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000, and such amendments and
revisions to it that may be published by FEMA.



   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
SFHA delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or
depth) delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the village.



   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the flood insurance rate
map of the village shall be according to the best existing data available in
the Illinois State Water Survey Flood Plain Information Repository. When no
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined
from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as
HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a
hydrologic model, such as HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in
various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for
estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated
future land use conditions in the watershed as determined from adopted local
and regional land use plans. Along any watercourses draining more than one
square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to DWR for approval; once
approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain
Information Repository for filing. For a non-riverine SFHA, the base flood
elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus three feet, unless
calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by the Illinois State
Water Survey.



   (D)   The base flood elevations for the stormwater detention areas
located in the southeast corner of the village shall be as delineated on the
flood and top of foundation map prepared by Robinson Engineering, Ltd. and
dated February 13, 1998.



   (E)   The base flood elevations for the area in Pepperwood
Subdivision north of Lots 282 and 305 in Phase 5 shall be 707.4 feet. The
base flood elevations for the area in Pepperwood Subdivision south of and
including Lots 282 and 305 in Phase 5 shall be 703.8 feet.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91; Am. Ord. 2000-20, passed 11-1-00; Am. Ord. 2001-010,
passed 6-6-01)



§ 153.06  OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.



   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation and compensatory storage and other provisions of this
chapter are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems.  Developments located within the
flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the
requirements of § 153.09.



   (A)   Development permit. No person, firm, corporation, or
governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in
the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the Building
Commissioner.



      (1)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a
form provided by the Building Commissioner. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in mean sea
level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on
the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements
of § 153.09.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the
Building Commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.  Any development located on
land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as
of the sites first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA
and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.  The
Building Official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.



      (3)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of
the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion
control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall
also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures,
and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post- construction
maintenance.



      (4)   The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local state and federal
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit
unless all other local, state and federal permits have been obtained.



   (B)   Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood
fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.



      (1)   Use of fill.  If fill is being used to elevate the site
above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant
shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from
FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the flood plain.



      (2)   Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a flood
plain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by
the authorized fill  or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically
equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to
1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the
case of streams and water- courses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.  All flood plain storage lost
below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year
flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely
and openly to the watercourse.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91)



§ 153.07  OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.



   This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway.  Only
those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this
section.  All floodway  modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the
requirements of § 153.09.



   (A)   Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or
governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in
a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the Building
Commissioner.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building  Commissioner. The application shall include the
following information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



      (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;



      (4)   Description of proposed activity;



      (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;



      (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



      (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject
property if different from the applicant;



      (8)   Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;



      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or
other authorized officer shall sign the application form;



      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall
sign the application form; and



      (11)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer
shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A
disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each
beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective
interests therein.



      (12)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:



         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity,
name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the
site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment)
datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access
roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water),
regulatory floodway limit, flood plain limit, specifications and dimensions
of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of
cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale.



         (c)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation,
100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical);



         (d)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance;



         (e)   A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to
reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.



      (13)   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or
approval letters that may be required for this type of development.



      (14)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of §
153.07(D).



      (15)   If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project,
the application will not be considered complete until DWR has indicated
conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change.  No structures
may be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.



      (16)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale  showing property line dimensions and
existing ground elevations and all changes in made resulting from any
proposed excavation or filling, and flood plain and floodway limits; sealed
by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of § 153.09.



      (17)   If the proposed project involves a channel
modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:



         (a)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the
proposed work;



         (b)   A discussion of the feasibility of using
alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed
work;



         (c)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the
impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of
the body of water affected;



         (d)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the
impacts each feasible alternative identified in § 153.07(E)(4)(a) would have
on the physical and biological;



         (e)   Analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of
the body of water affected.



   (C)   Review.  The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal
permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The
Building Commissioner shall not issue the development permit unless all
required federal and state permits have been obtained. A registered
professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the village, shall
review and approve applications reviewed under this section.



   (D)   Preventing increased damages and a list of appropriate uses.
The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate
uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will
not create damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the
natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction
impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in
this chapter.  Only those Appropriate Uses listed in 92 Ill. Adm. Code 708
will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or
placement of any new structures,  building additions, buildings on stilts,
excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise
non-appropriate uses in the floodways fencing (including landscaping or
planting designed to act as a fence and, storage of materials except as
specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved appropriate
uses are as follows:



      (1)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public
works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding,
erosion,  or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;



      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of or
requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment
facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating,
commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;



      (3)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;



      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities;



      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including
open air pavilions;



      (6)   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non-habitable
accessory structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that
will not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;



      (7)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways,
runways and taxiways any modification thereto;



      (8)   Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth
of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot)
and aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;



      (9)   Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slope toward a watercourse.



      (10)   Floodproofing activities to protect  previously
existing lawful structures, including the construction of watertight window
wells, elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around
residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside
toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten (10) feet away from the
exterior wall of the existing structure, and which are not considered
substantial improvements to the structure.



      (11)   In the case of damaged or replacement buildings,
reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than 50%
of the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and
which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building.



      (12)   Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do
not increase the building's foot print and are value at less than 50% of the
market value of the building.



   (E)   Engineering and mitigation criteria.  Within the regulatory
floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR, the
construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible provided
that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation
criteria and as so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and
data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure
meets the protection requirements of § 153.09.



      (1)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase
flood stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert
crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway
conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up
to end including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective
regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:



         (a)   Regulatory floodway conveyance,



            "K" = 1.486 AR 2/3



             n



where "n" is Manning's roughness factor.  "A" is the effective area of the
cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. 
(See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959)).



         (b)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used both
existing and proposed conditions  unless a recorded maintenance agreement
with a federal, state or local unit or government can assure the proposed
conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative
to a non-vegetative land cover.



         (c)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective regulated, floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless applicant's engineer
can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency.



            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section
to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's
length.



            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to
a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length.



            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a
vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten
feet of stream length shall be used.



            4.   Transition sections shall be provided between
cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the
regulatory flood delineation on adjacent properties.



            5.   All cross-sections used its calculations
shall be local perpendicular to flood flows.



      (2)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase
downstream flooding. Compensatory storage shall provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood structures placed and
the impact of any related flood control projects.  Compensatory storage for
fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of flood
plain storage lost.  Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in
head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.  The
compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed
normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All
regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the proposed flood elevation. All regulatory floodway
storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced
above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the
compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to DWR through
determination of flood discharges and water surfaces elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no
reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification,
unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing
structure.



      (3)   Preservation  of floodway velocities so as not to
increase stream erosion or flood heights.  For all appropriate uses, except
bridges or culverts or on stream  structures, the proposed work will not
result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway
velocities or stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream
structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during
normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure sites if
scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or
other design measures.



      (4)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and
roadway approaches. The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks or within exiting vertical extensions of the channel banks such
as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction an increase
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact DWR,
dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or waiver.



         (a)   The engineering analysis of upstream flow stages
must be calculated using the flood study flows and corresponding flood
elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
153.05.  Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic chart
for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the
U.S. DOT/Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways
calculation procedures.



         (b)   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per
§ 153.07(E)(2).



         (c)   Velocity increases must be mitigated per §
153.07(E)(3).



         (d)   If the crossing is proposed over a public water
that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, a Department of
Transportation permit must be received.



         (e)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by
the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile
must be submitted to DWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by §
153.07(D).



         (f)   All excavations for the construction of the
crossing shall be designed per § 153.07(E)(8).



      (5)   Reconstruction or modification of  existing bridges,
culverts, and approach roads.



         (a)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach
reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1
foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood
frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure
is not a source of flood damage.



         (b)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway
approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the
upstream flood plain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility
of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into
consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream
properties.



         (c)   The determination as to whether or not the
existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must
be prepared in accordance with the Department of Transportation Rules, 92
Ill. Adm. Code 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and
submitted to the Division for review and concurrence before a permit is
issued.



      (6)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water. Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must
be obtained from DWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or waiver
for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream
during  normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as defined
in § 153.02 shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Ill. Adm. Code 702
(Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a
modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it
shall be demonstrated that:



         (a)   The impoundment is determined to be in the public
interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional
stormwater detention;



         (b)   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;



         (c)   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to
degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should
include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a
pre-sedimentation basin;



         (d)   A non-point source control plan has been
implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment
runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals,



and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream
watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should
coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control;



         (e)   The project otherwise compiles with the
requirements of § 153.07.



      (7)   Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and
commercial structures. If construction is required beyond the outside
dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the
floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than 10 feet from the
outside of the building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not
be required for floodproofing activities.



      (8)   Excavation in the floodway. When excavation is proposed
in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to
and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate
for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency.



         (a)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a
wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate
of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length;



         (b)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a
narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's
length; and



         (c)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of
stream length shall be used;



         (d)   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland
upstream and downstream of the transition sections.



      (9)   If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:



         (a)   There are no practicable alternatives to the
activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural
conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include
levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of
structures from the flood plain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or
the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt.  Channel
modification is acceptable if the purpose as to restore natural conditions
and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;



         (b)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural
functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no
significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the
replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;



         (c)   The activity has been planned and designed and
will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the
natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the
following criteria:



            1.    The physical characteristics of the modified
channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in
length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been
previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should
be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.



            2.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be
provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed
such that they will prevent erosion.



            3.   One-sided construction of a channel shall be
used when feasible. Removal of stream-side (riparian) vegetation should be
limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading
and stabilization effects of the vegetation.



            4.   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to
that which is essential for construction of the channel.



            5.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a
side slope no steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable
natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred  methods for
bank stabilization.  Where high velocities  or sharp bends necessities the
use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are
preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or
construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable
alternatives.



            6.   All disturbed areas associated with the
modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall
be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of
the vegetative cover.



            7.   If the existing channel contains considerable
bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features,
such features shall be provided in the new channel.  Spawning and nesting
areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be
established, where appropriate.



            8.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the
downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of
downstream water quality.



            9.   New or relocated channels should be built in
the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be
completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel.



            10.   There shall be no increases in stage or
velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency
flood unless necessitated by a public flood-control project or unless such an
increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement- or erosion-control
project.



            11.   Unless the modification is for a public
flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of
floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and



         (d)   The project otherwise complies with the
requirements of § 153.07.



      (10)   Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities
located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by
the applicant.



      (11)   Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all
activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in
which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the
following criteria:



         (a)   The construction area shall be minimized to
preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to
minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the
existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15
days prior to the initiation of improvements.



         (b)   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization
shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil
stabilization shall be provided within 15 days after final grade is reached
on any portion of the site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not
be at final grade, but will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.



         (c)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed
before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent
the movement of eroded sediments off-site or into the channel. Potential
sediment control devices include filter fences, straw- bale fences, check
dams, diversion ditches, and sediment basins.



         (d)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in
width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (See § 153.07(E)(16)). Construction vehicle use of channels shall
be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where
necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels
shall be restabilized immediately.



         (e)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures
shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards
for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also
known as the "Green Book" and "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control" (IEPA, 1987).



      (12)   Public flood control projects. For public flood control
projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met
if the applicant can demonstrate to DWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or
elements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event.



      (13)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.



         (a)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the
regulatory floodway study, referenced in § 153.05, must be used for analysis
of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or
conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence
on the appropriate base conditions data to use.



         (b)   If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at
the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a
downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed
construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the
100-year frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and
conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.



         (c)   If the applicant learns from DWR, local
governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or
culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional
flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or
modified within the next five years, the proposed construction shall be
analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the
existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the
bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.



      (14)   Conditional letter of map revision. If the appropriate
use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the
100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to DWR and to
FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from DWR a
conditional approval of the regulatory  floodway change before a permit is
issued.  However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by
DWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by
FEMA and DWR.  In the case of non- government projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with
the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before DWR approval
can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities
shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by
FEMA and DWR.



      (15)   Professional engineer's supervision. All engineering
analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered
professional engineer.



      (16)   For all activities in the floodway involving
construction within 25 feet of the channel the following criteria shall be
met:



         (a)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be
preserved within at least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the
channel.



         (b)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer
strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip
shall be established upon completion of construction.



         (c)   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred
in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided when
necessary, for stream maintenance purposes.



   After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change
and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision,
construction is necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may
proceed, but no building, or structures or other construction that is not an
appropriate use, may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map
is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The regulatory
floodway map will be reviewed upon acceptance and concurrence by DWR and FEMA
of the "as-built" plans.



   (F)   State review. For those projects listed below located in
regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to DWR for
their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:



      (1)   DWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood
profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to § 153.07(E)(4).



      (2)   DWR will review an engineer's determination that an
existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the
analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to § 153.07(E)(5).



      (3)   DWR will review alternative transition sections and
hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to § 153.07(E)(1),(2) and (8).



      (4)   DWR will review and approve prior to the start of
construction any Department projects, dams (as defined in § 153.02) and all
other state, federal or local units of government projects, including
projects of the municipality or county.



   (G)   Other permits. In addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required from DWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615, Act
5 § 5 et seq. No permit from DWR shall be required if DWR has delegated this
responsibility to the village.



   (H)   Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction,
modification or removal of a dam as defined in § 153.02 per 92 Ill. Adm.
Code 702 ("Rules for Construction of Dams") shall obtain an Illinois Division
of Water Resources Dam Safety permit prior to the start of construction of a
dam. If the Building Commissioner finds a dam that does not have a DWR
permit, the Building Commissioner shall immediately notify the Dam Safety
Section of the Division of Water Resources.  If the Building Commissioner
finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Building
Commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, DWR, Dam Safety
Section in Springfield and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency (ESDA).



   (I)   Activities that do not require a registered professional
engineer's review. The following activities may be permitted without a
registered professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet
the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.



      (1)   Underground and overhead utilities that:



         (a)   Do not result in any increase in existing ground
elevations, or



         (b)   Require the placement of above ground structures
in the floodway, or



         (c)   In the case of underground stream crossings, the
top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the
existing stream bed, and



         (d)   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting
towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as
not to catch debris.



      (2)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:



         (a)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the
existing adjacent natural bank slope, and



         (b)   Do not result in an increase an  ground
elevation, and



         (c)   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at
the outfall location.



      (3)   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding
fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.



      (4)   Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection
that:



         (a)   Does not exceed 1000 feet in length.



         (b)   Does not place materials higher than the existing
top of bank.



         (c)   Places materials so as not to reduce the
cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.



         (d)   Uses vegetative stabilization and gradual side
slopes as the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.
Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use
of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and
gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.



      (5)   Temporary stream crossings in which:



         (a)   The approach roads will be 0.5 foot or less above
natural grade.



         (b)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass
without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above
any drainage tile or outfall invert.



         (c)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be
at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel
shall be non-erosive material, such as riprap or gravel.



         (d)   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or
otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon
removal of construction.



         (e)   The access road and temporary crossings will be
removed within one year after authorization.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 2000-20,
passed 11-1-00)



§ 153.08  OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED.



   In SFHA or flood plains, where no floodways have been identified and no
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by
FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted
unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede
or increase the flow and passage of the floodwater nor significantly increase
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



   (A)   Development permit.



      (1)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not
exempted by state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or flood
plain without first obtaining a development permit from the Building
Commissioner. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Commissioner. The application shall be accompanied
by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and
existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation
or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevator at the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of § 153.09.



      (2)   The application for a development permit shall also
include the following information:



         (a)   A detailed description of the proposed activity,
its purpose, and intended use;



         (b)   Site  location  (including legal  description)
of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating
whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



         (c)   Anticipated dates of initiation  and completion
of activity;



         (d)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided
which include as a minimum:



            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the
activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the
vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929
adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage
and flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and
navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially
navigable body of water), flood plain limit, location and orientation of
cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;



            3.   Cross-section views of the project and
engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including
principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation,
100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical); and



            4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.



         (e)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall
be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of §
153.08(B).



         (f)   Any and all other local, state and federal permits
or approvals that may be required for this type of development.



      (3)   Base elevation.  Based on the best available existing
data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Flood Plain Information
Repository, the Building Commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site
to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.  Should no
elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall
calculate the elevation according to § 153.05(D). Any development located on
land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as
of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the
SFHA, and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The
Building Commissioner shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.



      (4)   Other permits.  The Building Commissioner shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local,
state, and federal permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may
be required for this type of activity. The Building Commissioner shall not
issue the development permit unless all required local, state and federal
permits have been obtained.



   (B)   Preventing increased damages. No development in the SFHA where
a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health,
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions
of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic
habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation
methods as called for in this chapter.



      (1)   Within all riverine SFHA's where the floodway has not
been determined, the following standards shall apply:



         (a)   The developer shall have a registered professional
engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations,
and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of §
153.07(E)(1) through (12) for the entire flood plain as calculated under the
provisions of § 153.05(D). As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that
engineering study to DWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. upon
acceptance of their floodway by the Department, the developer shall then
demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of § 153.07 for the
regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the
definition in § 153.02.



         (b)   A development permit shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit from DWR or written documentation that a
permit is not required from DWR.



         (c)   No permit from DWR shall be required if the
Division has delegated permit responsibility to the village per 92 Ill. Adm.
Code, Part 708 for regulatory floodway, per DWR Statewide Permit entitled
"Construction in Flood Plains with No Designated Floodways in Northeastern
Illinois."



         (d)   Dam safety permits. Any work involving the
construction, modification or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to
impound water as defined in § 153.02 shall obtain an Illinois Division of
Water Resources Dam Safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not
required prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the Building
Commissioner finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the Building
Commissioner shall immediately notify the Dam Safety section of the Division
of Water Resources.  If the Building Commissioner finds a dam  which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the Building Commissioner shall
immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois Emergency Services
and District Agency (ESDA), and the DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield.



         (e)   The following activities may be permitted without
a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood
elevation end regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter:



            1.   Underground and overhead utilities that:



               a.   Do not result in any increase in
existing ground elevations, or



               b.   Require the placement of above ground
structures in the floodway, or



               c.   In the case of underground stream
crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is burled a minimum of three
feet below the existing streambed, and



               d.   In the case of overhead utilities, no
supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a
fashion as not to catch debris.



            2.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:



               a.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of
the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and



               b.   Do not result in an increase in ground
elevation, and



               c.   Are designed so as not to cause stream
bank erosion at the outfall location.



            3.   Construction of shoreline and streambed
protection that:



               a.   Does not exceed 1000 feet in length or
2 cubic yards per lineal foot of streambed.



               b.   Does not place materials higher than
the existing top of bank.



               c.   Places materials so as not to reduce
the cross-sectional area of the stream channel by more than 10%.



               d.   Uses vegetative stabilization and
gradual side slopes as the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion
problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action
necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or
riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete,
construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.



            4.   Temporary stream crossings in which:



               a.   The approach roads will be 0.5 foot or
less above natural grade.



               b.   The crossing all allow stream flow to
pas without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or
above any drainage the or outfall invert.



               c.   The top of the roadway fill in the
channel will be at least 2 feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in
the channel shall be non-erosive material, such as riprap or gravel.



               d.   All disturbed stream banks will be
seeded or otherwise stabilized a soon as possible upon installation and again
upon removal of construction.



               e.   The access road and temporary crossings
will be removed within one year after authorization.



            5.   The construction of light poles, sign posts
and similar structures;



            6.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways,
athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are
built at grade;



            7.   The construction of properly anchored,
unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and
carports built at or below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of
flood waters;



            8.   The placement of properly anchored buildings
not exceeding 70 square feet in size, nor ten feet in any one dimension
(e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds);



            9.   The construction of additions to existing
buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than 20%, which
are located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and
which do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel
to the flow of flood waters;



            10.   Minor maintenance dredging of a stream
channel where:



               a.   The affected length of stream is less
than 1000 feet.



               b.   The work is confined to reestablishing
flows in natural stream channels, or



               c.   The cross-sectional area  of the
dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and
downstream of the site.



         (f)   The flood carrying capacity within an altered or
relocated watercourse shall be maintained.



      (2)   Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a flood
plain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by
the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically
equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to
1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.  In the
case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas to filled or occupied. All flood plain storage lost
below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the
proposed ten- year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the
existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed
ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91)



§ 153.09  PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOOD PLAIN AREAS.



   In  addition to the  requirements found in §§ 153.06, 153.07 and
153.08 for development in flood fringes,  regulatory floodways, and SFHA or
flood plains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE,
A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements shall be
met:



   (A)   Public health standards.



      (1)   Hazardous materials.  No developments in the SFHA shall
include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal
wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or
toxic materials below the FPE.



      (2)   water supply systems. New and replacement water supply
systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may
be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground openings located
below the FPE are watertight.



      (3)   No critical facility, as defined in § 153.02, shall be
allowed in the 500-year floodplain.



   (B)   Carrying capacity and notification. For all projects involving
channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition,
the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the
issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.



   (C)   Protecting buildings. 



      (1)   All buildings located within 100-year flood plain, also
known as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood
protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within regulatory
floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards
included in § 153.07.  This building protection criteria applies to the
following situations:



         (a)   Construction or placement of a new building;



         (b)   A structural alteration to an existing building
that either increases the first floor area by more than 20% or the building's
market value by more than 50%.  This alteration shall be figured
cumulatively, beginning with ant alteration which has taken place subsequent
to August 13, 1990.



         (c)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a
new manufactured home on an existing site. The building protection
requirement does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it
lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



         (d)   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more
than 180 days.



      (2)   This building protection requirement may be met by one
of the following methods.



         (a)   Building land fill.  A residential or
nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land
fill in accordance with the following:



            1.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall
be at or above the flood protection elevation.



            2.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater
than one-foot deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet
beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood
protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten- foot minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour. The fill shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage from
or onto neighboring properties.



         (b)   Elevated buildings.  A residential or
non-residential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:



            1.   The building or improvements shall be
elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is
permanently open to flood water and not subject to damage by hydrostatic
pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent
openings shall be no more than one foot above grade, and consists of a
minimum of two openings. The openings just have a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the base flood elevation.



            2.   The foundation and supporting members shall
be anchored and signed in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice
and floating debris.



            3.   All areas below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The
lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located
at or above the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical
and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service
facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation.



            4.   The areas below the flood protection
elevation may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement.



            5.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in
accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-
Down Act pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code 870.  In addition, all
manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation requirements:



            a.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in
a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or
above the flood protection elevation.



            b.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or
substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
the manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest
floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches
in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations
of equivalent strength, whichever is less.



         (c)   Flood proofed buildings.  Only a non-residential
building may be structurally flood proofed (in lieu of elevation) provided
that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has
been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without in outside source of electricity.  (Levees,
berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the
purpose of this subsection.)



         (d)   Non-conforming structures.  Non- conforming
structures located  in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not
be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A non-conforming structure
damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or man- made disaster may be
restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of its market value before it was
damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91; Am. Ord. 2001-010, passed 6-6-01)



§ 153.10  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the
extent that they are known in all official sections related to land
management, use and development.



   (A)   Review.  New subdivisions, manufactured home parks,
annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA
shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent 
with §§ 153.06, 153.07, 153.08 and 153.09 and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned
unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered
professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act
205 § 2).



   (B)   Base flood standard.  Proposals for new subdivisions,
manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments
(PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions
shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and
floodway delineations. Where this information is not available from an
existing study filed with the Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's
engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation per § 153.05(D) and the floodway delineation per
the definition in § 153.02 and submitting it to the State Water Survey and
DWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data.



   (C)   Public grounds.  Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other
public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve
and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the flood plains
shall be included within parks or other public grounds.



   (D)   Unincorporated areas.  The Board of Trustees shall not
approve any Planned Unit Development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located
outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat as in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91; Am. Ord. 93-01, passed 1-12-93)



§ 153.11  VARIANCES.



   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
regulatory floodway as defined in § 153.02. However, when development
proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the
standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development
proposal, the applicant may apply to the Building Commissioner for a
variance. The Building Commissioner shall review the applicant's request for
variance and the  submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees.



   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that:



      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
SFHA;



      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance
were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health,
safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or
creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief
operations, policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities,
or other public facilities;



      (6)   The provisions of §§ 153.06(B) and 153.08(B) shall
still be met;



      (7)   The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;



      (8)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and to not
represent a general problem; and



      (9)   The granting of the variance will not alter the
essential character of the area involved, including existing stream uses.



   (B)   Notification of risk.  The Building Commissioner shall notify
in applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of § 153.09
that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:



      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts is higher as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of
these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the rack
and liability.



   (C)   Historic sites or buildings.  Variances requested in
connection with restoration of a historic site or historic structure as
defined in § 153.02, historic structures, may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of § 153.11(A) and (B), subject to the
conditions that:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and



      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the
structure being removed as a certified historic structure.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91)



§ 153.12  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the
SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create
liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
Administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91)



§ 153.13  VIOLATIONS.



   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon
due investigation, the Building Commissioner may determine that a violation
of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The Building Commissioner
shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.



   (A)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the
violation:



      (1)   The village may make application to the Circuit Court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other
order at the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter.



      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in § 153.99.



      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or of which a violation occurs or continues.



      (4)   The village may record a notice of violation on the
title to the property.



   (B)   Insurance suspension.  The Building Commissioner shall inform
the owner that any such violation as considered a willful act to increase
flood damages, and therefore may cause coverage by standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.



   (C)   Additional remedies.  Nothing herein shall prevent the
village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violations.  All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or
persons responsible.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91)



§ 153.14  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent  restrictions shall prevail.  This
chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was
adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not
intended to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to
establish initial eligibility for the program.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91)



FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN



§ 153.25  ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL PLAN; PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The flood protection plan is hereby adopted as an official
plan of the village.



   (B)   The Flood Protection Planning Committee is hereby established
as a permanent advisory body. Its members shall be designated by the Village
President, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. They shall serve
one year terms. The Committee's duties shall be designated in the flood
protection plan.



   (C)   Authorization is granted to execute necessary documents with
U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Will South Cook Soil and
Water Conservation District.



   (D)   The Village Administrator is charged with supervising the
implementation of the plan's recommendations within the funding limitations
as provided by the Village Board or other sources.



   (E)   The Village Administrator shall give priority attention to the
following items recommended by the flood protection plan.



      (1)   Conduct an engineering analysis of the entire length of
Tinley Creek to develop an affordable improvement plan.



      (2)   Conduct an engineering analysis on the storm sewer that
drains 93rd Avenue south of 167th Street.



      (3)   Provide flood protection information to residents
through a variety of means.



      (4)   Prepare a watershed management plan that addresses
detention, erosion, and runoff controls in cooperation with neighboring
communities.



      (5)   Develop a formal drainage system maintenance program
with written procedures.



      (6)   Enforce the regulations related to easements,
construction of fences, and stream dumping and pursue violators aggressively.



   (F)   The Village Administrator shall provide periodic progress
reports to the Flood Protection Committee.



   (G)   The Flood Protection Planning Committee shall monitor
implementation of the plan and shall submit a written progress report to the
Board by March 1 each year.  The report shall include the following:



      (1)   A review of the  original plan.



      (2)   A review of any floods that occurred during the previous
calendar year.



      (3)   A review of action items in the original plan, including
how mush was accomplished during the previous year.



      (4)   A discussion of why any action items were not completed
or why implementation is behind schedule.



      (5)   Recommendations for new projects or revised action
items. Such recommendations shall be subject to approval by the Board as
amendments to the adopted plan.



(Res. 95-13, passed 3-15-95; Am. Res. 2007-1022, passed 5-16-07)



FLOOD PREVENTION STRATEGY



§ 153.40  PURPOSE.



   This strategy document has been prepared by the Flood Protection
Planning Committee to identify ongoing public information activities and
recommend new ones to better inform our residents on how they can protect
themselves from flood and drainage problems.



(Res. 98-25, passed 7-1-98)



§ 153.41  FLOOD HAZARD.



   (A)   Orland Hills' drainage system is subject to four flood
problems. These were described in the 1995 Flood Protection Plan:



      (1)   (a) Overbank flooding from Tinley Creek and its
tributary, Highview Ditch: Tinley Creek is the main drainageway through
Orland Hills. When Orland Hills was developed in the 1960's, the channel was
straightened and deepened so it would carry water more efficiently. In one
section, it was rerouted to follow lot lines. Much of the creek's flood
problems can be traced to the alterations made to what was once a natural
drainageway.



         (b)   Property lines run to the middle of the channel.
Most property owners maintain their parts of the channel bank, although some
do not. In some areas weeds and brush have been allowed to grow. Rocks placed
as rip rap on the banks have been moved to the channel bottom, apparently by
children. The worst problem in the channel is the condition of some of the
culverts. They are so small that they act as dams even when clear. Over time,
debris collects in them, rip rap is moved to block them, and they suffer from
wear and tear.



         (c)   All of these factors mean that the carrying
capacity of the channel has been reduced. It takes less water to fill the
channel and cause overbank flooding than it used to. The result has been
street and yard flooding, erosion of the channel banks, and some building
flooding.



      (2)   Overbank flooding from Midlothian Creek headwaters: The
southeast portion of Orland Hills drains into the headwaters of Midlothian
Creek. The mapped 100-year floodplain is substantially on public property,
streets, or back yards. However, the floodplain does fill with water and has
caused nuisance flooding in streets and yards.



      (3)   Underdesigned or obstructed storm sewers: Storm sewers
have been installed in some areas of town to augment the surface drainage
system. Storm sewers won't work if they are underdesigned or when they are
blocked. There are several known examples of blockages. The prime impact of
storm sewer problems is water in the streets and yards.



      (4)   (a) Yard drainage problems: when subdivisions are laid
out for development, a five or ten foot easement or set back is established.
when the lot is built on, there should be no construction in this easement. A
shallow depression or swale is kept along the lot lines. The swale guides
stormwater runoff to the street or storm sewer.



         (b)   Over the years, this drainage system has been
disrupted. Many property owners are not aware of the need to keep their
easements and swales open. They installed sheds, planters, railroad ties or
swimming pools in the easements. They built fences right on their lot lines
to enclose the largest part of their properties.



         (c)   Early homes in Orland Hills, especially homes on
crawl spaces, were built at the original ground level. Later home builders,
especially for tri-levels, added fill around the lots. This provided positive
drainage from the lot, protected the lower areas from drainage problems, and
improved the appearance of the site.



         (d)   Now when it rains, the runoff goes downhill to the
lowest point: the older buildings that did not backflow or raise their lots.
Directing downspouts and sump pump discharge pipes toward the property line
aggravates the water problem that the lower owner receives. Often the first
property developed becomes the recipient of runoff as later builders fill in
their lots.



         (e)   In at least one new area, the back yards were set
aside as detention areas. Property owners have already cut into the berms,
built fences and otherwise modified these detention areas. Not only is 
their future effectiveness in question, but the owners may start complaining
when they see a lot of water staying in their yards, even though that is
where it is supposed to be.



         (f)   Bad yard drainage occurs throughout Orland Hills,
in new subdivisions and in the original town. It can have as much of an
impact as overbank flooding. Sometimes, the result is a nuisance, such as a
soaked backyard. However, either shallow water on the surface or saturated
ground can cause flooding several feet deep on a floor that is below grade.
Some tri-levels in Orland Hills do not have finished lower areas because of
chronic flooding from bad yard drainage.



   (B)   In sum, the village's flood and drainage problems occur
throughout town. They are primarily the result of man-made alterations to, or
a lack of maintenance of the drainage system, usually on the part of the
adjacent property owners. The village has done a lot to improve this system
since 1995. We have initiated a formal drainage maintenance program and
installed larger culverts. We have a better permit enforcement program than
before. We have distributed information and staff talks to residents about
flooding and drainage.



   (C)   As a result of these efforts, the number of complaints has
decreased and residents have become more aware of how problems occur and what
their role should be. Since the bulk of the problem is caused by people
and/or negligence, a public information program directed to residents can go
a long way to prevent and reduce flood problems.



(Res. 98-25, passed 7-1-98)



§ 153.42  FLOOD SAFETY AND PROTECTION MEASURES.



   (A)   Flooding in Orland Hills usually comes quickly during or after
a heavy storm. Flood depths are shallow, but people should take safety
precautions, such as staying out of flooded areas and turning off the
electricity in a flooded house.



   (B)   People can best protect themselves and their properties by
maintaining their yards, drainage swales, ditches and streets, reporting
violations of the dumping regulations, and carrying flood and/or sewer backup
insurance.



   (C)   Other protection measures depend on the type of foundation:



      (1)   Split levels, tri-levels and buildings with basements
can be protected with sump pumps and sewer backup protection measures, such
as overhead sewer lines.



      (2)   Slab foundation buildings subject to shallow flooding
can be protected by dry floodproofing or low barriers.



      (3)   Buildings on crawlspaces can be protected by barriers,
wet floodproofing or elevation.



(Res. 98-25, passed 7-1-98)



§ 153.43  CURRENT PUBLIC INFORMATION ACTIVITIES.



   The village's public information activities were recommended by the
Flood Protection Plan and formalized as part of its Community Rating System
(CRS) program. The following activities are conducted:



   (A)   The Building Department provides map information based on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map and the engineer's GIS version of it.



   (B)   Articles on flooding and flood protection are carried
periodically in the village newsletter. Over the period of a year, 9 of the
10 CRS credited topics are covered:



      (1)   Flood hazard.



      (2)   Flood hazard map.



      (3)   Flood safety.



      (4)   Flood insurance.



      (5)   Property protection.



      (6)   Permit requirements.



      (7)   Substantial improvement regulations.



      (8)   Drainage maintenance.



      (9)   Natural and beneficial floodplain functions.



   (C)   The village has two 12-page booklets, Guide to Flood
Protection and Guide to Basement Flooding. Copies of Guide to Flood
Protection are sent out to all 132 floodplain residents each April. It covers
the same nine topics as the newsletter articles.



   (D)   Copies of Guide to Flood Protection and Guide to Basement
Flooding are on display in the Village Hall for anyone to take.



   (E)   Additional references are on file at the library.



   (F)   The Building Commissioner is advertised as available to talk
to residents who want help with flood, drainage or sewer backup protection.
He talks to five to ten residents each month.



   (G)   The village assisted with a Floodproofing Open House held in
the next community in May 1997. Three faces registered, two of whom had been
flooded in February 1997 and July 1996.



(Res. 98-25, passed 7-1-98)



§ 153.44  GOALS.



   The goals of this Public Information Program Strategy are in order of
importance:



   (A)   Have all residents familiar with the causes of local flood and
drainage problems and the steps they can take to prevent or reduce the
problems.



   (B)   Have all residents familiar with the reasons for and
regulations about dumping and alterations to watercourses and yard swales.



   (C)   Have all residents familiar with basic flood safety and health
precautions.



   (D)   Have all residents familiar with flood and sewer backup
insurance.



(Res. 98-25, passed 7-1-98)



§ 153.45  RECOMMENDED PUBLIC INFORMATION ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   The Village's Public Information Program is based on three
guiding principles:



      (1)   Face to face communication is more effective than
distributing written materials or using electronic media. It allows for
site-specific explanations and examples and it provides feedback on whether
the recipient understands the message.



      (2)   Prevention is better than correction. Flooding and
drainage in the village are currently well managed as long as people realize
how problems are caused  and  they  don't  create  more  problems. 
The more staff contacts there are on flood or drainage issues, the more staff
will find out about potential problems before they are created.



      (3)   The program should focus on one or two simple messages
at a time. It should not overwhelm residents with complicated explanations of
many different aspects about flooding and flood protection.



   (B)   With these guiding principles in mind, the following
activities are recommended:



      (1)   The activities currently being implemented and receiving
CRS credit should be continued. They have proved useful.



      (2)   Each year, the village will identify the major flood
protection message that will be disseminated during staff contacts with
residents.



         (a)   These contacts include, but are not limited to,
applications for building permits, site inspections, inquiries on flood map
information, and resident complaints about water or sewer problems.



         (b)   Village trustees are encouraged to repeat the
message in their contacts with the public.



         (c)   A one-page flyer will be prepared for each
message, to reinforce the verbal message and provide an explanation that
people can take with them. The flyers will be provided to school children,
too.



         (d)   The message will be repeated periodically on the
public access cable TV channel.



      (3)   The message for 1998 is "Don't forget your drainage."



         (a)   The message will advise residents:



            1.   of the causes and effects of not caring for
local drainage,



            2.   how their yard drains,



            3.   to not obstruct the drainage with sheds,
swimming pools, planters, and the like,



            4.   to keep their storm sewer inlets cleared, and



            5.   to call the village if they see a problem.



         (b)   The Building Department puts stickers on permits
to remind the applicant of key permit requirements. Permits for sheds,
swimming pools, and other projects that can alter yard drainage will have a
sticker that reads "There shall be no alteration of any drainage system or
swales on the permit property and/or surrounding properties."



         (c)   The one-page flyer on the message will be included
with building permits and other appropriate village communications to
residents.



      (4)   The message for 1999 will be on protecting basements
from sump pump failure and sewer backup. Messages for future years will be
decided during the February evaluation meeting of the Flood Protection
Planning Committee.



      (5)   At its February evaluation meeting, the Flood Protection
Planning Committee will finalize plans for an annual Spring Flood Awareness
month.



         (a)   During that month, the new flood protection
message will be introduced and repeated through various media, including
cable TV notices and the village newsletter.



         (b)   The annual mailing to floodplain residents will be
done during the month.



         (c)   The Village Hall counter, the library and the
schools will be encouraged to set up displays on flood protection and
distribute the flyer on the year's message.



(Res. 98-25, passed 7-1-98)



§ 153.46  MONITORING AND EVALUATION.



   The Building Commissioner will report on the implementation of the
recommended public information activities to each meeting of the Flood
Protection Planning Committee at its February meeting, the Committee will
evaluate their effectiveness and include its findings and recommendations
with its annual progress report to the Board of Trustees on implementation of
the Flood Protection Plan.



(Res. 98-25, passed 7-1-98)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committee upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89; Am. Ord. 90-56, passed 12-19-90; Am. Ord.
91-31, passed 11-13-91)



APPENDIX A:  DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS FOR THE VILLAGE



 



   ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION DIVISION OF WATER RESOURCES
DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS FOR THE VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILLS



 

WATERWAY
 
COUNTY
 
MAP SOURCE
 
MAP DATE


Tinley Creek
 
Cook
 
F.I.S
 
3/15/82


 
 
 



 



Applicable Panel No. 170172  0001



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89)



APPENDIX B:  DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAPS FOR UNINCORPORATED COOK COUNTY



 



   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAPS FOR UNINCORPORATED COOK COUNTY



 

DATE OF F.I.S.
 
LOCATION
 
PANEL NO.


April 15, 1981
 
Unincorporated
 
70054  0195


 
Cook County
 
(Panel 195 of 245)


April 15, 1981
 
Unincorporated
 
70054  0215


 
Cook County
 
(Panel 215 of 245)



 



(Ord. 89-32, passed 11-22-89)



CHAPTER 154:  CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   154.01   Purpose and scope



   154.02   Definitions



   154.03   Annual registration required



   154.04   Permit required; applications and fees



   154.05   Action on permit applications



   154.06   Effect of permit



   154.07   Revised permit drawings



   154.08   Insurance



   154.09   Indemnification



   154.10   Security



   154.11   Permit suspension and revocation



   154.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status



   154.13   General construction standards



   154.14   Traffic control



   154.15   Location of facilities



   154.16   Construction methods and materials



   154.17   Vegetation control



   154.18   Removal, relocation or modification of utility facilities



   154.19   Cleanup and restoration



   154.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance



   154.21   Variances



   154.22   Enforcement



   154.23   Severability



 



   154.99   Penalty



§ 154.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies
and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
village rights-of-way and the village as a whole.



   (B)   Facilities subject to this chapter.  This chapter applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the
public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   (C)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this chapter.



   (D)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.



      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In
the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (E)   Conflicts with other chapters.  This chapter supersedes all
chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (F)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



   (G)   Sound engineering judgment.  The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO.   American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT.  A person applying for a permit under this chapter.



   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL.  The methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING.  To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CARRIER PIPE.  The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside
Design Guide.



   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.



   CODE. The Code of the Village of Orland Hills.



   CONDUCTOR.  Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER.  The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY.  A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.   The village's Director of Public Works or
his or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.  For the purposes of this chapter, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY.  Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT.  Provision of a protective casing.



   ENGINEER.  The Village Engineer or his or her designee.



   EQUIPMENT.  Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION.  The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE.  Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.



   FACILITY.  All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including
track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video
cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within rights-of-way under this chapter, except those owned by the village.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY.  A facility that is not a crossing facility or
a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD.  Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the village to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the
life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY CODE.  The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§
1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   IDOT.   Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ILCC. Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   JETTING.  Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure
to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE.  The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION.   The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY.  The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY.  A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT.  The removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 154.04 and 154.05.



   PRACTICABLE.  That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE.  The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES.  Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.



   PROMPT.  That which is done within a period of time specified by the
village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY.  A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION.  The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the
village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY shall
not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically
described in the previous two sentences and shall not include village
buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY.  That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to § 154.10.



   SHOULDER.  A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  This term includes, but is not limited to,
messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile
radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include
wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 635, §§ 1 et seq.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right
of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale.



TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the
village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or
hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER.  Means and includes every person engaged
in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH.  A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of
an underground facility.



   UTILITY.  The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.



   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   WATER LINES.  Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING.  Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the village, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name
of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the
right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in § 154.08, in the form of a certificate
of insurance. A telecommunications provider that has registered under this
section shall be deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement under
§ 154.02.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required. 



      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any
village right-of-way which:



         (a)   Changes the location of the facility,



         (b)   Adds a new facility,



         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
chapter), or



         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the
right-of-way, without first filing an application with the village and
obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be
no disruption of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that is
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the
utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in
the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
village:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and
regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in  § 154.08;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 154.10;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter; and



      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities.  In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the
permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the
specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of new electric power, communications or
natural gas distribution system installation, evidence that any Certificate
of Public Convenience and Necessity has been issued by the ILCC that the
applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District other local or state entities with jurisdiction,
have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire
permit application review period and the construction period authorized by
the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application
shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days
after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $1,000. No application
fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that is paying
the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to
this chapter or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act, or by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.05  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
village within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the village shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the village is satisfied that the proposed
work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as practicable.



   (B)   Additional village review of applications of
telecommunications retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The village shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the village fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either of
the following time periods, the telecommunications retailer may commence work
without obtaining a permit under this chapter:



         (a)   Ten days after service of notice to the village by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction or



         (b)   Twenty-five days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 154.04, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject
to the requirements of division (A) above.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.06  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest
created.  A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by
the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.07  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate
from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit
also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with § 154.24.  If the village denies
the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the
facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to
the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.08  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way
or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain
the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named
insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies
listed in divisions (1) and (2) below:



      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations
coverage with limits not less than:



         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to
each person;



         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and



         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability;



      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and
property damage for each accident;



      (3)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and



      (4)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less
than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the village within ten days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement:



         "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may
not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30)
days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village
President of such intent to cancel or not to renew."



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said
notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance.  A utility may self-insure all or a portion
of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A)
above. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A) above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C),
and (D) above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
division (A) above, such as evidence that the utility is a private self
insurer under the Workers' Compensation Act.



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability.
The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of
the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.09  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.10  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's
sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit. The security fund shall serve as security.



      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and



      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable
law.



   (B)   Form.  The permittee shall provide the security fund to the
village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this division shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the village and the permittee;



      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and



      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and
within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the village, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be
performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group
of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken
prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or
phases, the village may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to
each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would
have been required under the provisions of this division for any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals.  The village, upon 14 days advance written
notice clearly stating to exercise withdrawal rights under this division, may
withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has
not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14-day notice period.
Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:



      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or



      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that
the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.



   (E)   Replenishment.  Within 14 days after receipt of written
notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified
in division (C) above.



   (F)   Interest.  The permittee may request that any and all
interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the
permittee by the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the
village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund
below the minimum balance required in division (C) above.



   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a
result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs,
loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited.  The rights reserved to the village with
respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund
shall affect any other right the village may have.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.11  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Village right to revoke permit.  The village may revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter,



      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare; or



      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension.  The village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:



      (1)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no
cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village,
the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of
such correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or



      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing
written proof of such removal to the village within ten  days after receipt
of the written notice of revocation.



      (4)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause
shown, extend the time periods provided in this division.



   (D)   Stop work order.  In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) above.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. 



      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of
division (C) above, the village or its designee may, at the option of the
village:



         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;



         (b)   Upon not less than 20 days notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or



         (c)   After not less than 30 days notice to the
permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the village.



      (2)    The permittee shall be liable in all events to the
village for all costs of removal.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.12  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.



   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village not
less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit.  A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
village's right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.13  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill. Adm. Code § 545);



      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this chapter, the village shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the village shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.14  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOTs Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaqqers.  The utility
is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and
local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers
when performing any work on the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 154.20, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed9-5-07)



§ 154.15  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities.  An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind
the face of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear
zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight  feet (2.4 m) from and parallel
to the right-of-way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way
line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (B)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption.  The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or
drainage facilities.



      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities
shall cross at or as near to a 90º  angle to the centerline as practicable.



      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ILCC's rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)   Markers.  The village may require the utility to
provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility
other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker
shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone
number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal
regulations. (49 C.F.R. 192.707 (1989)).



   (C)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. 
The village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (D)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (E)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands
being traversed.



   (F)   Above ground installation. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:



      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
feasible; and



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable.



   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance
of the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.16  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring.  Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the village from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked
and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported,
braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and
lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting.  Wet boring or jetting
shall not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. 
Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).



         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved shall be
bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair,
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOTs Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the village.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   The utility shall not trench within the drip line
of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the village, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined
by the village.



      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
division is permitted under § 154.021 the following requirements shall apply:



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the village.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately.  Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line.  No above ground
vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if:



            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes
future maintenance or repair and



            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 

TYPE OF FACILITY
 
MINIMUM COVER


Power or communication line
(in general)
 
30 inches (0.8m)


Communication line installed by the plowed method
 
24 inches (0.6m)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches (0.8m)


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance.     Electric power or
communications facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed,
operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm.
Code 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission)
entitled Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines,
and the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities.  Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities.



            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.



            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if:



               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of
"moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to
make the opening for cable installation or



               b.   The installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.



            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines.  Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated
in a village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192
- Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines.  Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer
lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.



      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances.  Ground-mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or
by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the village. With the
approval of the village, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used
in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. All pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the village.



      (3)   Hazardous materials.  The plans submitted by the
utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be
involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the
discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the village when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.



      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in  § 94.03(J).



   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and
physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.).



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.17  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming shall not be
considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required
under this chapter.



      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village
may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



   (B)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village
may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (C)   Chemical use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the village that such spraying is the only practicable method
of vegetation control.



(Ord. 2007-105, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.18  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities
within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary
for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village
improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or
maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the
public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter, or



      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility
within the public rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the
village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
village determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not
direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice
of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.19  CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.



   Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the
utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in
a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces
shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement determined by the village to
be necessary to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project.



(Ord. 2007-105, passed 9-5-07; Am. Ord. 2017-011, passed 7-19-17)



§ 154.20  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility is available.



      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible,
notify the village of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps
have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be
required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is
such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police
shall be notified immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the
village of a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
48 hours after an emergency repair.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.21  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
village as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances.  The village shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The village may authorize
a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the village may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may
or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.22  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.23  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the village 's costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the village.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it.



(Ord. 2007-015, passed 9-5-07)



CHAPTER 155:  SIGNS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Definitions



   155.02   Items of information allowed; visibility



   155.03   Special situations



   155.04   Areas of special control



   155.05   Auxiliary design elements



   155.06   Structural requirements



   155.07   Menu boards



   155.08   Prohibited signs



   155.09   Exempt signs



   155.10   Advertising unlawful business; injury to lawful
advertisement



   155.11   Placing advertising matter in or on motor vehicles



   155.12   Posting bills



Types of Graphics



   155.20   Ground graphics



   155.21   Wall graphics



   155.22   Window and door graphics



   155.23   Temporary graphics



District Regulations



   155.35   Business districts



   155.36   Residential districts



Administration



   155.45   Permit required; application



   155.46   Fees for permits and inspections



   155.47   Amortization



   155.48   Variations



 



   155.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABOVE ROOF GRAPHIC.  A street graphic which is displayed above the
roof.



   APPROVED MATERIALS.  Such materials as approved by the Village
Building Commissioner or his assignees.



   AWNING.  Any structure made of cloth, plastic, metal, or any other
similar material attached to and projecting from a building when the awning
is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the
building when not in use or in a permanent extended rigid position.



   BUSINESS.



      (1)   GENERAL RETAIL.  That category of use which allows for
a broad range of commercial ventures as specified in § 159.057.



      (2)   LIMITED RETAIL.  That category of use which allows for
a narrower range of commercial ventures having a less intense use, as
specified in § 159.056.



   CANOPY.  Any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, plastic,
metal, or any other similar material attached to and projecting from a
building and carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.



   ERECT.  To build, construct, attach, hand place, suspend, or affix. 
This is also to include the painting of any graphic.



   FACING or SURFACE.  The surface or face of a graphic upon, against, or
through which the message is displayed or illustrated.



   GRAPHIC.  The terms GRAPHIC and SIGN are synonymous.



   GROUND GRAPHIC.  Any graphic which is supported by one or more
columns, poles, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and which is not a
direct part of the building.



   ILLUMINATED GRAPHIC.  Any graphic which has characters, letters,
figures, designs, or outline illuminated by electric lights, liquid crystal
displays, light emitting diodes, liquid crystal analog, or any similar
device, or has luminous tubes as part of the sign.  No sign shall have
blinking or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices of the flashing
or intermittent type, except that signs denoting the time, temperature, and
other similar information shall not be considered a flashing sign or
otherwise prohibited.



   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.  Any material which will not ignite at or
below a temperature of 1200° F. and will not continue to burn or glow at or
below that temperature.



   ITEM OF INFORMATION.  Any of the following are considered an item of
information:



      (1)   A syllable of a word;



      (2)   An abbreviation;



      (3)   A number;



      (4)   A symbol, geometric or nongeometric shapes; or



      (5)   A shape of unusual configuration.



   MANUFACTURING.  That category of use which allows for the cleaning,
testing, repairing, fabricating, assembling, or processing of products or
materials, as specified in § 159.071.



   MARQUEE.  Any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from
the wall of a building above an entrance with advertising copy attached
thereto.



   REAL ESTATE SIGNS.  Any sign which includes on either face any of, but
not limited to, the following terminology:  "For Sale", "For Rent", "Open
House", "New House", "Home Inspection", "Visitors Invited", "Installed By",
"Built By", "Constructed By", "By Owner", "Model", and any sign with the name
of a rental agency, broker, contractor, owner, or agent.



   RESIDENTIAL.  That category of use, in which non-transient families,
households, or individuals live, excluding those that are defined as
institutional, as specified in §§ 159.040 through 159.046.



   ROOF GRAPHIC.  A street graphic which is displayed on a surface whose
pitch exceeds 30 degrees from the vertical.



   SIGNABLE AREA.  An area of the wall or facade of the building which is
free of windows and doors or major architectural detail, with a pitch that
does not exceed 30 degrees from the vertical, or is a simulated mansard style
facade.



   STREET GRAPHIC.  Every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof
sign, illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary, pylon, or pole sign,
marquee, awning, and canopy, and any announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration, logo, or insignia used to advertise or
promote the interest of any person when the same is placed out of doors or in
windows facing a street in view of the general public.  These include signs
other than public information signs, but do not include buildings.



   TEMPORARY SIGNS.  As regulated by § 155.23, shall include any sign or
advertising display with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a
limited duration.



   WALL.  A surface whose pitch does not exceed 0 degrees from vertical.



   WALL GRAPHIC.  A street graphic which is displayed on a surface whose
pitch does not exceed 30 degrees from the vertical, or is displayed on a
simulated mansard style facade.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)



§ 155.02  ITEMS OF INFORMATION ALLOWED; VISIBILITY.



   (A)   Each land use is entitled to display street graphics
containing up to ten items of information on each street or highway to which
it has access.  Each allowable surface may contain up to ten items of
information.  However, if the name of the proprietor occupying the building
and the name of the premises contains more than ten items of information the
name of the proprietor and the name of the premises may be displayed once on
each street frontage on any allowable street graphic, provided no other
graphic is displayed on the building or its premises to that frontage.



   (B)   Nationally recognized logos, excluding lettering will be
considered as one item of information.



   (C)   Provided, the items of information allowance authorized by
this section is not exceeded, street graphics may be displayed as ground or
wall graphics within the limitations and restrictions as further provided by
this chapter.



   (D)   All signs, except those exempted in § 155.09, are required to
have the following information visible from ground level, in a minimum of
one-inch high letters:  the date the sign was erected, the permit number of
the sign, the owner or party responsible for the maintenance of the sign, a
phone number for this party, and the voltage of the sign if applicable.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)   Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.03  SPECIAL SITUATIONS.



   (A)   Off-street parking.  One wall graphic may be displayed on the
side or rear of a building adjacent to an off-street parking area if the
off-street parking area is 40 feet or more in width.



   (B)   Multiple frontages.  If a building has frontage on, or access
to, two or more public streets or highways, each side of the building is to
be separately considered for purposes of determining compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the Appendix, Table of Basic and Auxiliary
Design Elements.  Area allowances for street graphics may be utilized only
on the side of the building from which they are calculated.



   (C)   Special advertising signs in business, office, and
manufacturing zoning districts.



      (1)   During grand openings or other special events, one
additional sign adhering to the basic ground and wall restrictions may be
erected on a temporary basis.



      (2)   Special use signs will be temporary in nature and shall
be classified as Type A and Type B signs.



      (3)   (a)   Type A signs shall not exceed 4 four-day
periods per calendar year.



         (b)   Type B signs shall not exceed 1 forty-five-day
period per calendar year.



      (4)   (a)   Type A signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area.



         (b)   Type B signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in
area.



         (c)   Types A and B signs shall have no moving parts,
flashing lights, or illumination.



      (5)   Items of information or advertising shall not exceed ten
items and shall pertain to the grand opening or other special event on the
property or location that the sign is placed on.



   (D)   B-2 special use motor vehicle sales lot signs.



      (1)   Special signs (pole or flag design) will be allowed on
lighting poles in vehicle sales lots.



      (2)   These signs are limited to a maximum size of 15 square
feet each and not more than two double or single face signs per pole,
containing a maximum of five items of information per sign.  The signs shall
have no moving parts or operating flashing lights.



      (3)   Signs shall be attached to the light poles in a safe and
secure manner.  When those signs show deterioration, as determined by the
Building Commissioner, they shall be replaced.



      (4)   Signs being replaced shall be the same size, material,
color, and lettering.  If not, a new permit will be required for those new
signs.



      (5)   Permit fees for B-2 special use motor vehicle sales lot
pole signs shall be $10 for each single face sign and $20 for each double
face sign.



   (E)   Outdoor sales, advertising signs, and promotional devices.



      (1)   Outdoor sales of merchandise prohibited.  Sales of
goods, wares, items, merchandise, or services shall not be permitted outside
of structures located on the premises, except as follows:



         (a)   Zoning districts.  Zoning districts which are
approved for outdoor sales of goods, wares, items, merchandise, or services
that are accessory to indoor establishments and special uses, located on the
same premises.



         (b)   Special outdoor sales.



            1.   Special outdoor sales are defined as
temporary outdoor sales of goods, wares, items, merchandise, or services
which are customarily sold inside the structure located on the property by
the business located on the property.



            2.   Multi-business organizations (shopping
centers or strip centers) shall engage in outdoor sales as a multi-business
organization and not individually.



            3.   The outdoor sale shall not exceed 3 four-day
periods per calendar year.



         (c)   Garage sales and yard sales.



            1.   Garage sales and yard sales are permitted
only in residential districts. The sales shall be limited to the possession
of homes within a radius of 500 feet of the dwelling unit where the garage or
yard sale is being held.



            2.   Permit Required, Fee:  The owner or
occupants of the residence shall apply to the Police Department for a permit
at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to beginning a garage or other like
sale. A permit fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid at the
time of application.



            3.   Number of Permits and Duration of Sale
Restricted:  No more than three (3) permits shall be issued for any
residence during one (1) calendar year and no sale shall be allowed to
continue for more than three (3) consecutive days.



            4.   Types of Items to be Sold:  The items to be
sold at a garage or other like sale shall be items of personal property,
including but not limited to, household goods, clothing and furnishings which
have been used in the dwelling unit located on the premises where the sale is
to be conducted. Sale items purchased for intentional sale or resale may not
be sold at such sale.



            5.   House of Sale:  No garage or other like sale
may commence before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00 a.m.) extend beyond the
hour of six o'clock (6:00 p.m.).



            6.   No sidewalk or public parkway shall be
obstructed as a result of a garage or other like sale.



            7.   Posting of Signs Prohibited: Posting of
garage or other like sale signs on utility poles, parkway trees or other
public property is prohibited. Violation of this prohibition shall be
punishable in accordance with the penalty provisions of this case.



      (2)   Permit required.  A permit shall be required for all
special outdoor sales of goods, wares, items, merchandise, or services and
special advertising signs and promotional devices except for residential
garage and yard sales.



      (3)   Application for issuance of permit.



         (a)   An application form requesting a permit shall be
applied for by the owner/manager of the business and shall identify the
nature of merchandise to be sold, the days and hours of the sale, and outdoor
area where the merchandise is proposed to be sold or such other information
as the Building Commissioner shall require to show full compliance with this
and all other codes and ordinances of the village.



         (b)   Permit approval will be based on the adequacy of
parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of undue
adverse impact or other properties and compliance with all other codes and
ordinances of the village.



      (4)   Special advertising signs and promotional devices.



         (a)   In conjunction with applying for an outdoor sales
permit, applicants may apply for a permit for special advertising signs,
balloons, flags, banners, pennants, and promotional devices to be displayed
at the time of the outdoor sales period on the property where the business is
located.



         (b)   A maximum of ten items of information on special
advertising signs, banners, flags, balloons, pennants, and promotional
devices are allowed.



      (5)   Permit fees.



         (a)   The fees for outdoor sales, signs, balloons,
flags, pennants, banners, and promotional device permits, and inspections
shall be as follows:



 

Promotional Devices
 
Fees




Special outdoor sales
 
$75 per business


Advertising signs
banners/flags
 
$25 - one to ten square feet per item


 
$50 - 11 to 32 square feet per item


Balloons
 
$50 - 10 inches to 30 inches diameter per 12


 
$75 - 31 inches to 60 inches diameter per 12


Pennants
 
$25 - Per 100  lineal feet


Inspections
 
$40 - each inspection classification


 




 



         (b)   Signs, banners, flags, and balloons that are
beyond the sizes above, shall be classified as promotional devices and the
fee shall be $100 each.



   (F)   B-2 Automobile special promotional program uses.



      (1)   Retail automobile dealers, within the corporate limits,
shall be authorized to advertise and hold no more than 14 special promotional
programs per calendar year.  No one special promotional program shall last
more than four days in duration.



      (2)   Each special promotional program may include such things
as:



         (a)   Additional special signage, within reasonable
limitations.



         (b)   Inflatable devices, within acceptable standards.



         (c)   Beacon search lights, during hours of operation
and in reasonable numbers.



         (d)   Special attractions (clowns, jugglers, petting
zoos, animal rides, etc.).



      (3)   Other special promotional program variances may be
granted by the authority of the Building Commissioner and Village
Administrator; without special notice or hearing.  Such variances may
include such things as: duration of the special promotional program, number
of special promotional programs or content of the special promotional program.



      (4)   All special promotional signs, inflatable devices,
beacon search lights and other promotional items or devices installed shall
be designed and constructed in conformance with the provisions for materials,
loads and stresses of the current village adopted edition of the BOCA
National Building Code.



      (5)   Permit fees for B-2 automobile special promotional
program uses shall be:



   Special promotion event:      $100 each event.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 93-06, passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 93-07,
passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 95-43, passed 12-6-95; Am. Ord. 99-21, passed
8-18-99; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.04  AREAS OF SPECIAL CONTROL.



   (A)   It is recognized that the regulations provided in this chapter
cannot sensitively handle all of the street graphic situations in an area as
diverse as that covered by the village.  Therefore the corporate
authorities, by ordinance and following notice and hearing, may designate any
areas of architectural, historical, scenic, or public use areas as areas of
special control.  The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall
prepare a map showing all areas of special control which have been so
designated by the local governing body.



   (B)   An architectural, historical, scenic, or public use area is an
area whose special and unique characteristics or whose natural beauty
requires special street graphic regulations to insure that all street
graphics used within the area are compatible with each other.  Generally, it
is expected that street graphic regulations in these areas will be more
restrictive than those which would otherwise be applicable under this chapter.



   (C)   The Village Board of Trustees may establish by ordinance areas
of special control, and establish special regulations for street graphics
which are either more restrictive or less restrictive than those provided by
this chapter and other Appendix, Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design
Elements, having regard to the character of the area of special control.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 155.05  AUXILIARY DESIGN ELEMENTS.



   (A)   Auxiliary design elements are subject to the limitations
established for each graphic.



      (1)   Awnings, canopies, and marquees are permitted in all
areas.  Any item or items of information displayed on an awning, canopy, or
marquee are debited against the items of information allowance for wall
graphics established by § 155.02(A).



      (2)   Time and temperature devices are permitted  for all
areas, except residential  areas.  They may be on the ground or attached to
the wall, and are subject to the regulations applicable to ground and wall
graphics.



   (B)   The following types of illumination and mechanical movement
for all activities in all areas are subject to the limitations indicated in
this section.



      (1)   Colored light.  White is the only color of external
light which is permitted to illuminate graphics in areas designated as office
or residential, or within 300 feet of such areas;



      (2)   Flashing graphics.  A flashing graphic has a blinking,
fluttering, or intermittent light.  Flashing graphics are not permitted.



      (3)   Message center.  Message centers shall be limited in
their operation to provide a predominantly community oriented message (time,
temperature, weather forecast, community service announcement) at least 65%
of the time the sign is in operation during business hours.  Signs shall not
provide a commercial message more than one hour before opening or one hour
after closing of the establishment.  Items of information being displayed on
the message center, at any one time when combined with the items of
information on the sign, shall not exceed ten.



      (4)   Mechanical movement.  This movement refers to
animation, revolution, movement up and down, or movement sideways.  Graphics
which move mechanically are permitted only for motion picture theaters,
amusements and recreation services, or as permitted in areas of special
control.



      (5)   The light from any illuminated sign or indirectly
illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light
intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surroundings or facing
premises nor adversely affect vision of operators of vehicles moving on
public or private roads, highways, or parking areas.  Said lights shall not
shine on or into residential structures.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)   Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.06  STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the
provisions for materials, loads, and stresses of Articles 9, 10, 11, and 12
of the 1996 BOCA Basic/National Building Code.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 99-09, passed 3-3-99)



§ 155.07  MENU BOARDS.



   A graphic depicting items and prices for food and beverages will be
permitted only under the following conditions:



   (A)   Such graphic must be directly related to and in the immediate
area of a drive-up window for the purchase of food items;



   (B)   The graphic must be adjacent to an electronically operated
remote two-way communication system;



   (C)   A menu board may be either a wall or ground graphic, and will
be excluded from all other calculations of signable area of ground and wall
graphics;



   (D)   A menu board will not exceed 25 square feet in total area;



   (E)   Lettering on a menu board will not exceed two inches in height;



   (F)   Due to the unique character of this type of graphic, the
restrictions concerning items of information as described in § 155.02(A)
will not apply to menu boards; providing that the information listed deals
with a specific listing of food items available and their prices.  Other
types of advertising on a menu board are prohibited.



   (G)   A menu board may not be located closer to any public road or
street than the building setback line.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.08  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are prohibited:



   (A)   Signs that are similar to traffic signs; signs which imitate
an official traffic sign or signal or which contain the words, "stop", "go
slow", "caution", "danger", "warning", or other similar words are
prohibited.  Signs which are of a size, location, movement, content,
coloring, or other manner of illumination which may be confused with, or
construed as a traffic-control device, or which hide from view any traffic
street sign or signal, or which obstruct the view in any direction at a
street or road intersection are prohibited.



   (B)   Pennants or banners.



   (C)   Windblown devices such as spinners and streamers.



   (D)   Signs painted directly onto a wall or roof.



   (E)   Signs advertising off-premise businesses, products or services.



   (F)   Beacon or search lights shall be considered signs within the
provisions of this chapter and are prohibited.



   (G)   Flashing graphics.



   (H)   Projecting signs.  Signs may be placed on the vertical faces
of a marquee or canopy, provided no part of the sign shall project above or
below the vertical face of the marquee or canopy.



   (I)   Roof graphics.



   (J)   Signs encroaching into the public right-of- way.  Any such
sign is subject to confiscation, removal, or destruction by village employees.



   (K)   Miscellaneous signs.  Signs which are attached to utility
poles, trees, and fences, located in the public right-of-way, are prohibited.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 2000-08, passed 1-19-00; Am. Ord.
2000-09B, passed 3-15-00)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.09  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   The following signs are exempt from sections §§ 155.02 (B), 155.45,
155.46, and 155.47.



   (A)   Traffic signs.



   (B)   Municipal signs, including street identification signs.



   (C)   Directional signs without advertising, less than two square
feet.



   (D)   Professional wall signs one square foot or less.



   (E)   Signs required by ordinance or law, such as handicapped
parking, self-service gasoline instructions, and the like.



   (F)   Window and pedestrian door signs.



   (G)   Real estate signs.



   (H)   Political campaign signs.



   (I)   Public information signs.



   (J)   Homeowner identification, not exceeding two square feet.



   (K)   Garage sale signs.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)



§ 155.10  ADVERTISING UNLAWFUL BUSINESS; INJURY TO LAWFUL ADVERTISEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or articles in
the village; and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful
advertisement or notice.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 14) (Ord 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 155.99



§ 155.11  PLACING ADVERTISING MATTER IN OR ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether a
licensed bill poster or not, to distribute handbills, circulars, dodgers,
pamphlets, cards, pictures, or any advertising matter of any kind whatsoever,
by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicles standing or parked in the
public streets of the village.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 18) (Ord 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see
§ 155.99



§ 155.12  POSTING BILLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to post any
bills or advertisement on any public property without the authority of the
Village Board of Trustees; and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or
advertisement on any property without the written consent of the owner
thereof.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 17)  (Ord 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty,
see § 155.99



TYPES OF GRAPHICS



§ 155.20  GROUND GRAPHICS.



   (A)   Any activity may display one or more double- faced ground
graphics of the height indicated in the Appendix, Table of Basic and
Auxiliary Design Elements provided that the total signage area is not
exceeded by the combination of the area of the signs, and provided the edge
of the building or structure in which the activity is conducted meets the
current setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
without a variance.  The height of a ground graphic shall be measured from
the grade at the edge of the right-of-way, nearest to the sign location.



   (B)   Ground graphics are also subject to the following additional
limitations:



      (1)   A ground graphic which is six square feet or more in
area may be displayed only on a frontage of 100 feet or more, and may not be
closer than 100 feet to any ground graphic which is six square feet or more
in size; and



      (2)   No ground graphic will exceed the highest elevation of
the roof or wall of the building or structure for which it advertises.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.21  WALL GRAPHICS.



   (A)   Subject to the requirements of the Appendix, Table of Basic
and Auxiliary Design Elements, any activity may display wall graphics.  Wall
graphics may be attached flat to, or pinned away from the wall, but may not
project from the wall by more than 12 inches.



   (B)   The permitted area of wall graphics is shown by the Appendix,
Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements, which indicates the percentage
of the signable area of the building or structure which may be utilized for
wall graphics.  The signable area shall be determined by choosing one such
area on the building wall or facade below the height limits for wall graphics
established by division (D) (2) of this section, and by then calculating the
number of square feet which are enclosed by an imaginary rectangle or square
which is drawn around this area.  The signable area established on one wall
or facade shall not be credited to another wall or facade.  In no case shall
the sign exceed 10% of the total wall area.



   (C)   In calculating the sign area for comparison to the signable
area of a building, the following provisions also apply:



      (1)   If the graphic is enclosed by box or outline, the total
area of the graphic, including the background, is counted as part of the sign
area.  If the graphic consists of individual letters, the area between the
letters is counted as part of the sign area as if an imaginary rectangle is
drawn around the entire graphic.



      (2)   A graphic may not cover or interrupt major architectural
features.



   (D)   Wall graphics are subject to the following height limitations:



      (1)   Wall graphics placed in the space between windows may
not exceed in height more than two-thirds of the distance between the top of
a window and the sill of the window above, or major architectural details
related thereto.



      (2)   No wall graphic on a single story building may be higher
than the ground graphic permitted for the same activity at the same location
permitted by the Appendix, Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements. 
Wall graphics for multiple story buildings may extend to the top of the wall.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.22  WINDOW AND DOOR GRAPHICS.



   (A)   Window graphics.  Window graphics are permitted in all
areas.  They may not exceed more than 15% of the area of the window in which
they are displayed.  Window graphics are not restricted to ten items of
information allowances established by § 155.02(A).  All window signs must
be maintained in a structurally safe and presentable manner.



   (B)   Door graphics.  Signs may be allowed on a pedestrian door,
but they shall not exceed 15% of the door area.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88) Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.23  TEMPORARY GRAPHICS.



   (A)   Real estate signs.



      (1)   Real estate for sale, rental, or lease signs:  One
temporary real estate for sale, rental, or lease sign located on the real
estate to be sold, rented, or leased, shall be allowed for each lot, parcel,
or tract.  If the lot, parcel, or tract has multiple frontages, one
additional sign shall be allowed on the property, to be placed facing the
additional frontage.  Under no circumstances shall more than two signs be
permitted on the property.



      (2)   For a tract of real estate containing less than one
acre, a sign shall not exceed three square feet in area.



         (a)   The top of the real estate sign shall not exceed
three feet above the existing grade at the point of erection.



         (b)   Real estate signs shall be erected parallel to the
front of any building and shall be placed no more than three feet from the
front foundation wall.



      (3)   For an undeveloped tract of real estate containing one
acre or more the sign may be up to 12 square feet in area for each acre or
part thereof in excess of one.  The maximum allowable sign, however, shall
be 64 square feet, the top of which shall not exceed 12 feet above grade.



      (4)   All such signs are to be removed within five days of the
day a contract for the sale, rental, or lease is entered into.  Sold signs
or signs stating that the premises where rented or leased are prohibited.



   (B)   Subdivision promotion signs.



      (1)   One temporary subdivision promotion sign may be located
on each tract of real estate containing one acre or more.  The sign may be
up to 12 square feet in area for each acre or part thereof in excess of
one.  The maximum allowable sign, however, shall be 64 square feet, the top
of which shall not exceed 12 feet above grade.



      (2)   For real estate tracts of ten acres or more, two
additional temporary subdivision promotion signs, subject to the limitations
of division (A) of this section are allowed.  One sign may be located on
each collector or wider street adjacent to the property; however said signs
may not be located closer than 1,000 feet from each other.



      (3)   All temporary subdivision promotion signs shall be
removed at the time the final building permit for the subdivision is issued
or at a time the Building Commissioner determines an active sales program is
no longer in effect.



   (C)   Construction signs.



      (1)   Signs identifying the architects, engineers,
contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with the construction,
but not including the advertisement of any product, and announcing the
character of building enterprise, or the purpose for which the building is
intended, are permitted up to a maximum area of eight square feet for each
firm, with a total of not more than 32 square feet for each site.  The signs
shall be confined to the site of construction, and shall be removed within 14
days after the beginning of the intended use of the project.



      (2)   Construction vehicles having signage with letters in
excess of five inches in height must be located behind the proposed building
lines, when on a commercial site.



   (D)   Commercial site temporary signs.  While commercial projects
are under construction, one temporary identification sign, such as "coming
soon" or "on this site" will be allowed for each commercial entity.  The
sign size and height limitations for permanent wall or ground signs shall
apply.  The temporary signs shall be removed within 14 days after the
occupancy permit has been issued.



   (E)   Political campaign signs.  Signs announcing candidates
seeking public political office and other data pertinent thereto shall be
permitted up to a total area of 32 square feet for each zoning lot.  Said
signs shall be confined within private property and shall not be less than 15
feet from the nearest edge of the street pavement and 50 feet from the
nearest curb intersection of any street or road.  Said signs shall not be
displayed more than 30 days prior to and seven days after the election for
which intended.  Political campaign signs will not be limited to ten items
of information.



   (F)   Limitations.  Items of information restrictions as described
in § 155.02(A) apply to temporary graphics as do height and size limitations
as provided in the Appendix, Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements,
unless otherwise provided for in this section.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see § 155.99



DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 155.35  BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   (A)   One primary wall or ground graphic conforming to the
provisions established in this chapter shall be allowed.



   (B)   If the property owner desires to have more than one ground
graphic, the total allowable ground sign area for the property in question
shall be reduced by 25% for each sign erected in excess of one.  Ground
signs must be separated by a distance of at least 175 feet.



   (C)   The property owner may have more than one wall graphic, to
allow for the identification of the various establishments occupying the
business district as defined in § 155.01 of this chapter.  Only one wall
graphic per establishment shall be allowed, unless otherwise provided for in
this chapter.



   (D)   No sign shall project into the public right-of- way, nor shall
a sign attached to a building protrude more than 12 inches from the face of
the building.



   (E)   Vehicles other than those identified in § 155.23 (C) (2)
having signage with letters in excess of five inches in height are permitted
only when such signs are not legible from a public thoroughfare, except in
residential districts, where no restrictions apply.  No permitted vehicle
may have more than ten items of information on any one side of the vehicle.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.36  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Street graphics are not permitted in residential districts, except as
provided in this section, or in § 155.23 (A), (B), (C), and (E) and  §
155.04.  Items of information are limited to ten.



   (A)   Single-family residential.



      (1)   Two single-family residential name signs not exceeding
two square feet each in area shall be permitted per single-family dwelling. 
Such signs shall be allowed on mail boxes, but shall otherwise be located at
least six feet from the nearest property line.  Two street number signs not
exceeding two square feet in area shall be allowed in any residential
district.  Such signs shall be allowed on mailboxes and over doorways but
shall otherwise be located at least six feet from the nearest property
line.  Height shall not exceed ten feet.



      (2)   A subdivision may be identified by permanent entranceway
signs not exceeding six feet in height nor 24 square feet in area.  One such
sign may be erected at each vehicular entrance into the subdivision.



   (B)   Multi-family residential.



      (1)   Where any multiple family dwelling is permitted to
maintain a professional rental office, one promotional sign shall be
permitted at each vehicular entrance from a public right-of-way and at each
major public entrance to the dwelling for all offices in the dwelling.  The
signs shall not exceed ten square feet.  Permitted signs shall be located at
least six feet from any property line, and the top of the sign shall not be
over six feet above the ground, whether free-standing or on a building.  The
sign shall include only the name, address, and information phone number.



      (2)   Multi-family complexes may be identified by permanent
entranceway signs, not exceeding six feet in height nor 24 square feet in
area.  One such sign may be erected, on private property, at each vehicular
entrance from a public right-of-way, but no closer than 15 feet to the
nearest right-of-way or property line.



   (C)   Single-family and multiple-family residential.



      (1)   Civic, religious, and quasi-public signs:



         (a)   Name, directional, and informational signs, and
emblems of service clubs, places of worship, civic organizations, and
quasi-public uses shall be permitted on private property if located in
accordance with the building setback requirements of the zoning restrictions
relating to the classification of the property on which the sign is placed. 
Such signs shall not exceed a total area of 32 square feet.



         (b)   Alternately a sign, not to exceed 24 square feet
may be erected in front of the building setback line, but no closer than 15
feet to the nearest right-of-way or property line.  Such sign or signs on a
corner lot may face each street but the total area shall not exceed the
maximum amount herein provided.  The top of each sign shall not exceed six
feet above grade, measured at the sign site.



      (2)   Temporary informational signs for public, charitable, or
religious events.  When any institution is having a public, charitable,
education, or religious event, located entirely within the premises of that
institution, signage may be erected announcing the event.  Signage may not
be displayed for more than 30 days per calendar year.  One temporary sign
announcing such an event, located no less than 15 feet from the property line
and not exceeding 12 square feet in area, is permitted.  The top of the sign
shall be no more than six feet above ground level.



      (3)   Integral signs.  Names of buildings, dates of erection,
monumental citations, commemorative tablets, and the like when carved into
stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other
permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure, shall
be allowed.



      (4)   Signs and displays in conjunction with nationally
recognized holidays and days of commemoration, erected on a temporary basis,
festive in nature  and designed to bring pleasure to the general public may
be allowed.  Such signs shall be allowed no more than 21 days prior to the
event and must be removed within ten days after the holiday.  Items of
information may exceed ten.



      (5)   Public signs.  Signs of a noncommercial nature and in
the public interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the
performance of a public duty, such as directional signs, regulatory signs,
warning signs, and informational signs, are allowed.



      (6)   One sign announcing a garage sale shall be permitted up
to a total area of three square feet for each zoning lot.  Said sign shall
be confined within private property and shall not be less than 15 feet from
the nearest edge of the street pavement and 50 feet from the nearest curb
intersection of any street or road.  Said sign shall not be displayed more
than 30 days prior to and seven days after the event for which intended.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see § 155.99



ADMINISTRATION



§ 155.45  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No street graphic, other than those identified in § 155.09
may be displayed unless application to display the street graphic is made to
the Building Commissioner and he has by permit authorized the display of the
street graphic.  The Building Commissioner will determine the manner in
which application to display a street graphic is made.  He may require that
the application be accompanied by a site plan, drawings, or other suitable
illustrations sufficient to indicate the character of the graphic and of the
surroundings in which it is to be displayed.  He may attach to his approval
certain conditions, considering the character of the street graphic and the
impact the graphic will make on the surroundings in which it is to be
displayed.



   (B)   Each location for which a permit for a street graphic has been
issued under the terms of this chapter shall be subject to an annual
reinspection by the Building Commissioner or his designee.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.46  FEES FOR PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.



   The fees for sign permits and inspections shall be as follows:



 

Types of Sign; Service
 
Fee




Ground signs, nonelectrical
 
$100


Ground signs, electrical
 
125


Wall signs, nonelectrical
 
100


Wall signs, electrical
 
125


Special use signs
 
50


Temporary signs
 
50


Annual reinspections (other than billboard)
 
50


Annual reinspection (billboards)
 
.75/sq. ft. of display area


 




 



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02; Am. Ord.
2003-008, passed 4-16-03; Am. Ord. 2003-012, passed 6-4-03)



§ 155.47  AMORTIZATION.



   (A)   All nonconforming street graphics must be removed, changed, or
altered to conform to the provisions of this chapter according to the
following schedule:



 

Original Cost of Graphic
 
Amortization Period




Less than $100
 
30 days


$100.01 to $500
 
3 months


$500.01 to $1,000
 
8 months


$1,000.01 to $3,000
 
12 months


$3,000.01 to $6,000
 
24 months


More than $6,000
 
36 months


 




 



   (B)   A street graphic is or becomes nonconforming if is not in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the Appendix, Table of
Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements on either of the following dates:



      (1)   The date of original enactment; or



      (2)   Any date on which this chapter or the Appendix, Table of
Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements is amended.



   (C)   The amortization period prescribed in this section shall begin
to run on the date on which the street graphic becomes nonconforming.



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88)



§ 155.48  VARIATIONS.



   (A)   The Village Board may by this chapter, determine and vary the
application of any regulation of Chapter 155 in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter.



   (B)   Application forms shall be furnished by the village and such
application must be made by either the property owner or his authorized agent.



   (C)   No order for a variance, shall be valid for a period of more
than six months unless such a use is established and approved within six
months from the date of the variance approval or unless an extended time
limited is to indicated at the time of the variance approval.



   (D)   Fees for filing of applications shall be as follows:



   Single-family owner occupied residential   $75.00*



   Commercial, all other residential   150.00*



* plus cost of advertising and engineering fees



(Ord. 89-01, passed 1-11-89; Am. Ord. 99-07, passed 2-17-99; Am. Ord.
2002-015, passed 9-4-02)



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided is punishable by a fine of $25.  Each day that
the violation continues may be deemed a separate punishable offense. (Ord.
88-07, passed  - -88)



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 155.03(F), 155.10, 155.11 or 155.12 shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



('65 Code, Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 20) (Ord 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65; Am. Ord.
95-43, passed 12-6-95)



APPENDIX:  TABLE OF BASIC AND AUXILIARY DESIGN ELEMENTS.



   A table of basic and auxiliary design elements for street graphics is
hereby established in division (C) of this appendix.  Except in areas of
special control, no street graphic may be erected, displayed, or
substantially altered or reconstructed except in conformance with the Table
of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements, and other requirements of this
chapter.



   (A)   Application of Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements.



      (1)   The Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements is to
be in full force and effect immediately upon enactment of this chapter.



      (2)   In order to better facilitate the administration of this
chapter and application of the Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements,
the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission, as soon as practicable
following the enactment of this chapter, is authorized and may:



         (a)   Prepare a list of all of the streets and highways
in the Village, indicating whether they are two-lane, four-lane, or six-lane.



         (b)   Prepare a list of the average traffic



speeds on all streets, and highways, indicating whether those speeds are 15
to 25, 30 to 40, 45 to 55, or 60 and above.



         (c)   Prepare a map of the village indicating all areas
of the village which are residential, office, business, or manufacturing. 
The Commission may base its determination on either of the following:



            1.  Land uses as permitted in the zoning map of the
village or as permitted by variance, special exception, or other
administrative action of the zoning agencies; or



            2.  The nature and character of the land uses in
such areas.



   (B)   Characterization of surrounding area.  For the purposes of
applying the Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements, the area
surrounding any business or manufacturing use shall be considered residential
or office wherever there is a residential or office area within 300 feet of
the property line of such business or manufacturing use.  Only that part of
the business or manufacturing area which is within 300 feet of a residential
or office area shall be considered adjacent to a residential or office area.



   (C)   Table of Basic and Auxiliary Design Elements.



 


Manufacturing Surrounded by Business or Manufacturing



Road width
 
2 Lane
 
 
4 Lane
 
 
6 Lane


Speed mph
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65




banners, etc.
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


awning, canopy
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


marquee
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


time & temp.
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


window
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%


movement
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


color
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YEA
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


flood
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


internal
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


indirect
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


tube
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


bare bulb
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flashing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flame
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


surface color
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL


wall area*
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


Manufacturing Surrounded by Office, Residential, or Rurals



Road width
 
2 Lane
 
 
4 Lane
 
 
6 Lane


Speed mph
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65




banners, etc.
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


awning, canopy
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


marquee
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


time & temp.
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


window
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%


movement
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


color
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE


flood
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


internal
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


indirect
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


tube
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


bare bulb
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flashing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flame
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


surface color
 
WHITE = 1; OR 2 MATERIALS
 
 
WHITE = 1; OR 2 MATERIALS
 
 
WHITE = 1; OR 2 MATERIALS


wall area*
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


Business Surrounded by Business or Manufacturing



Road width
 
2 Lane
 
 
4 Lane
 
 
6 Lane


Speed mph
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65




banners, etc.
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


awning, canopy
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


marquee
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


time & temp.
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


window
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%


movement
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


color
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


flood
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


internal
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


indirect
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


tube
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


bare bulb
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flashing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flame
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


surface color
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL


wall area*
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


Business Surrounded by Office, Residential, or Rural



Road width
 
2 Lane
 
 
4 Lane
 
 
6 Lane


Speed mph
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65




banners, etc.
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


awning, canopy
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


marquee
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


time & temp.
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


window
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%


movement
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


color
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE


flood
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


internal
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


indirect
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


tube
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


bare bulb
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flashing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flame
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


surface color
 
WHITE + 1; OR 2 MATERIALS
 
 
WHITE + 1; OR 2 MATERIALS
 
 
WHITE + 1; OR 2 MATERIALS


wall area*
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


Office Surrounded by Business or Manufacturing



Road width
 
2 Lane
 
 
4 Lane
 
 
6 Lane


Speed mph
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65




banners, etc.
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


awning, canopy
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


marquee
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


time & temp.
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


window
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%


movement
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


color
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE


flood
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


internal
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


indirect
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


tube
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


bare bulb
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flashing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flame
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


surface color
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL
 
ALL


wall area*
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


Office Surrounded by Office, Residential, or Rural



Road width
 
2 Lane
 
 
4 Lane
 
 
6 Lane


Speed mph
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65
 
 
15-25
 
30-40
 
45-55
 
60-65




banners, etc.
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


awning, canopy
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


marquee
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


time & temp.
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


window
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%
 
15%


movement
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


color
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE
 
WHITE


flood
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


internal
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


indirect
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


tube
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES
 
YES


bare bulb
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flashing
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


flame
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO
 
NO


surface color
 
WHITE + 1; OR 2 MATERIALS
 
 
WHITE + 1; OR 2 MATERIALS
 
 
WHITE + 1; OR 2 MATERIALS


wall area*
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%
 
20%


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



   *  This is the percentage of the signable area which may be signed.



   ** Single story, for multiple story buildings, see § 155.21(D)(2).



(Ord. 88-07, passed  - -88; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



CHAPTER 156:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   156.01   Purpose



   156.02   Jurisdiction



   156.03   Approvals, interpretations, and exceptions



   156.04   Definitions



   156.05   Character of development



Plan and Plat Procedure; Requirements



   156.20   Procedure for filing



   156.21   Preliminary plan; filing



   156.22   Approval of final plat



   156.23   Agreements



Design Standards



   156.35   Street plan



   156.36   Minimum street widths and design standards



   156.37   Easements



   156.38   Residential block standards



   156.39   Residential lot standards



   156.40   Building lines



Required Land Improvements



   156.50   Compliance required



   156.51   Preliminary improvement plans



   156.52   Final plans and specifications



   156.53   As-built plans



   156.54   Standards of design



   156.55   Detailed specifications



   156.56   Material specifications



   156.57   Fees and expenses; collection procedure



   156.58   Principals and standards



Park and School Sites



   156.70   Recommendation of dedication of land or cash contribution



   156.71   Park and recreation land dedication



   156.72   School site provision



   156.73   Contribution in lieu of park and school sites



   156.74   Dedication and fee



   156.75   Density formula



   156.76   Improved sites



Administration, Enforcement



   156.85   Building permit required



   156.86   Occupancy permit



   156.87   Recordation of plat only upon approval



   156.88   Record of plats



   156.89   Variances and exceptions



   156.90   Official plan



   156.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Project improvement guarantees



   Appendix B:   Construction of Portland cement sidewalks; standard
specifications



   Appendix C:   Construction of Portland cement concrete driveway
aprons;  standard specifications



   Appendix D:   Stormwater detention; standard specifications



   Appendix E:   Street lighting; standard specifications



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter regulating the subdivision of land is hereby made a part
of the Official Plan of the village and contiguous areas.  It is to provide
for the harmonious development of the village and its environs; for the
coordination of streets within new subdivisions with other existing or
planned streets; for the dedication and acceptance of land for public use;
for the installation and construction of utilities, roadways, and other
improvements essential to service the subdivided land; for the dedication and
acceptance of land required for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public
uses; for the preparation of subdivision plans and the procedure for the
submittal, approval, and recording of subdivision plats in and about the
village, in accordance with the authority vested in the municipality under
the provisions of the "Revised Cities and Villages Act" of the state.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.02  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out
within the incorporated limits of the village or 1-½ miles beyond the
incorporated boundary of the village, the subdivider thereof or his agent
shall submit both a preliminary plan and a final subdivision plat to the
village.  Said plans and plats, proposed improvements, and all procedure
relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance with the
regulations hereafter contained in this chapter.



   (B)   All lands offered to the village for use as streets, highways,
alleys, parks, and other public uses, shall be referred to the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission for review and recommendation before being
accepted by the Village Board of Trustees or by any other governing authority.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.03  APPROVALS, INTERPRETATIONS, AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No land shall, after the adoption of these regulations, be
subdivided or filed for record, nor any street laid out, nor any improvements
made to the land, until the plat or plans of the subdivision or street
improvements shall have been certified to and approved by action of the Board
of Trustees of the village.  This approval must be in writing and placed on
the original tracing of the final plats according to the procedure outlined
in §§ 156.20 through 156.22



   (B)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sewerage facilities, lighting, grading, paving, or surfacing of
streets, shall hereafter be made within any such subdivision by any owner or
his agent at the request of such owner or his agent until the plats for the
subdivision and also the plans for improvements thereto have been formally
recommended by the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission and approved
by the Board of Trustees of the village.



   (C)   Subdivisions of land lying outside of the village and within
1-½ miles of the village limits shall also be required to conform with the
requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Where a tract of land is proposed for subdivision that is part
of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the village as a whole,
the Village President and Board of Trustees may cause to be prepared, a
possible plan of the entire area; such plan to be used by the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission and the Village Board as an aid in judging
the proposed plat.



   (E)   All interpretations of these rules and regulations are
reserved to the administrative bodies referred to herein.



   (F)   The Village Board may vary and make exceptions as set forth
herein in instances where there is sufficient evidence, in its opinion, of
hardship caused by topographic conditions, or where any other reasonable
deterrents prevail; provided the variations or exceptions are in substantial
conformance with the standards of design of this chapter.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)  Penalty, see §
156.99



§ 156.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.  An individual appointed by the Village
President by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees, to administer and
enforce this chapter.



   ALLEY.  A public way, not more than 30 feet wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.



   ACCEPTED PUBLIC STREET.  Any dedicated street duly accepted by the
Board of Trustees of the village for maintenance by said village.



   APPROVED STREET.  Any street, whether public or private, meeting
standards and specifications of the village.



   BUILDING LINE.  A line with a lot or other parcel of land, so
designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision (see § 156.38).



   COLLECTOR STREET.  Those existing streets designated as such on the
Official Plan of the village and streets proposed as collector streets in new
subdivisions which are designated with a right-of-way width of 80 feet, for
access of traffic from several minor streets to a major street.



   COMMISSION.  The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission of the
village.



   CROSS-WALKWAYS.  A strip of land dedicated to public use, which is
reserved across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A street having one open end being permanently terminated
by a vehicle turnaround.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land
by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes.



   FINAL PLAT.  The drawings and documents described in § 156.21.



   FRONTAGE.  All the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one
side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.



   FRONTAGE ROAD.  A public or private marginal access roadway or paved
parking lot containing the necessary driveways or trafficways which are
located along the frontage of multiple-family, business, or industrial zoning
districts with regulations for purposes of establishing minimum distances
between points of access to the accepted street, and eliminating parking of
motor vehicles on the accepted public street.



   IMPROVEMENT (PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT).  Any facility for which the village,
another municipal body, or private utility company, may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation or which is constructed for
general public use or benefit.



   INTERSECTION, STREET.  The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which other vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in
conflict.  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by  an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.  In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a
separate intersection.



   LOT.  A parcel of land in a subdivision separated from other parcels
or portions by virtue of a plat of subdivision recorded with the County
Recorder of Deeds and identifiable by reference to said plat of subdivision
and not dependent for such identification by metes and bounds.



   MAJOR STREET.  (See PRIMARY STREET).



   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET.  A minor street which is parallel to and
adjacent to primary streets and highways, and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through-moving
traffic on the primary streets.



   MINOR STREET.  A street intended primarily as access to abutting
properties.



   OWNER.  The individuals, firms, associations, syndicates,
co-partnerships, corporations, trusts, or any other legal entities having
sufficient proprietary interest of record in the land sought to be subdivided
to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the statutes
of the state or under the ordinances of the village.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.  A tract of land developed as a unit, which
includes two or more principal buildings, and which is at least four acres in
area, except for planned developments operated by a municipal corporation
which shall be at least two acres in area.  All applicable provisions of
this chapter shall apply to a planned development except as modified by the
provisions of § 159.109.



   PLAT.  A map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plans of the
subdivision are presented and which he submits for approval and intends to
record in final form.



   PONDING.  The creation of pockets or depressions which have no surface
drainage provided and which, in the event of a failure on the part of inlets
or storm sewers, will contain standing water.  That portion of surface
waters which are flowing will not be considered as ponding.



   PRELIMINARY PLAN.  Shall mean the drawings and documents described in
§§ 156.20 through 156.22.



   PRIMARY or MAJOR STREET.  A street of considerable continuity which
serves as or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery between the
various sections of the village area, as shown on the General  Development
Plan, made a part of the Official Plan.



   PUBLIC AGENCY.  Any public board created by authority of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes.



   PUBLIC STREET.  All primary, secondary, and minor streets which are
shown on the subdivision plan and are to be dedicated for public use.



   ROADWAY or ROAD.  The paved area existing between back of curbs on the
street right-of-way and not the street right-of-way width.



   SECONDARY STREET.  (See COLLECTOR STREET).



   STREET.  The width of the street right-of-way or easement, whether
public or private, and shall not be considered as the width of paving or
other improvement on the street right-of-way width.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any individuals, firms, associations, syndicates,
corporations, co-partnerships, trusts, or other legal entities commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   The division of land into two or more parts, any of
which is less than five acres, whether immediate or future, for the purpose
of transfer of ownership or building development, including all public
streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds,
school grounds, or other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots,
or blocks, and numbering all such lots, blocks, or parcels by progressive
numbers, giving their precise dimensions.  However, the following shall not
be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:



         (a)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels
or tracts of five acres or more in size which does not involve any new
streets or easements of access;



         (b)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between
owners of adjoining and contiguous land;



         (c)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests
therein for use as right-of-way for railroads or other public utility
facilities which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;



         (d)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or
other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;



         (e)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public
purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for
public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a
public use; and



         (f)   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior
conveyances.



      (2)   Any planned development or multiple- family, commercial,
or industrial district established by a zoning district amendment of 
Chapter 159 after the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a
subdivision for the purpose of these regulations regardless of whether the
land is divided into parcels for separate sale or is developed on a lease
basis and said subdivision shall be subject to the improvement and design
requirements of this chapter and other requirements specified by the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.05  CHARACTER OF DEVELOPMENT.



   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission or its staff shall
confer with the subdivider regarding the type and character of development
that will be permitted in the subdivision, and may agree with the subdivider
as to certain minimum restrictions to be placed upon the property to prevent
the construction of substandard buildings and control the type of structures,
or the use of the lots, which, unless so controlled, would clearly depreciate
the character and value of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining
property.  Deed restrictions or covenants should be included to provide for
the creation of a property owner's association or board of trustees for the
proper protection and maintenance of the development in the future; however,
such deed restrictions or covenants shall not contain reversionary clauses
wherein any lot shall return to the subdivider because of a violation thereon
of the terms of the restrictions or covenants.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



PLAN AND PLAT PROCEDURE; REQUIREMENTS



§ 156.20  PROCEDURE FOR FILING.



   (A)   General procedure.



      (1)   Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits
of the village or within 1-½ miles of such corporate limits on
unincorporated land, wishing to divide the same into building lots for the
purposes of sale or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets,
alleys, or other lands for public use, shall first apply for and secure
approval from the village using the procedures required in this section.



      (2)   The application shall specify the intent of the
subdivider with respect to land use, drainage, sewage disposal, water supply,
and street improvement proposed by the subdivider; those deed restrictions
which exist or are to be placed on the property subdivision; and the excepted
date of its development.



      (3)   The applicant shall execute a preliminary cost agreement
in accordance with village ordinance.



      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall refer the applicant to
the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission for an informal review of his
proposed development.  If the basic land use concept is found acceptable by
motion of the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission the Administrative
Officer shall instruct the Village Engineer or the Village Planner to
collaborate with the subdivider and the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission in assembling plans for the design and construction of streets and
such other public improvements as are required by this chapter or any other
ordinances.



   (B)   Filing.



      (1)   The applicant shall submit to the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission four copies of the proposed plans for the
subdivision.  The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall, by
motion, determine whether to waive the requirement for a sketch plan prior to
the review of the preliminary plan.  There shall be no refund of any portion
of the costs accumulated to review the sketch plan if the subdivider fails to
apply for tentative approval of the preliminary plan.  If, because of the
failure of the subdivider to submit a preliminary plan within six months
after receiving tentative approval of the sketch plan, it is necessary to
resubmit a sketch plan for tentative approval, the subdivider shall be
required to pay the fee, if any, currently in effect at the time of
resubmission.



      (2)   The Village Planner and the Village Engineer shall be
available for discussions prior to submission of the sketch plan, upon
compliance with division (A) (3) of this section.



   (C)   The sketch plan shall contain the following:



      (1)   Identification and description.



         (a)   Proposed name of the subdivision.



         (b)   Location map.



         (c)   Names and addresses of developer and designer who
made the plan.



         (d)   Scale of plan, one inch to 50 feet or larger.



         (e)   Date.



         (f)   Northpoint.



      (2)   Delineation of existing conditions.



         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by
solid heavy lines, with angles and linear dimensions, and the total
approximate acreage encompassed thereby.



         (b)   Location, widths, and names of all existing or
prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility
rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and
structures, houses or permanent easements, and section and corporation lines,
within the tract or within 100 feet adjacent to the tract.



         (c)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or other
underground facilities within the tract or adjacent to the tract.



         (d)   Contours at five-foot intervals except where
topography of the tract demands one-foot contour intervals.



         (e)   Soil information as required by the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission.



         (f)   Flood plain areas as determined by the U.S.
Geological Survey.



      (3)   Proposed improvements.



         (a)   Layout of streets, widths of right-of- way.



         (b)   Layout and numbers of lots and blocks.



         (c)   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use or set aside for use of property owners
in the subdivisions.



         (d)   Illustrate drainage and provisions for storm water
storage.



   (D)   The following qualifications shall govern approval of the
sketch plan.  The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall within
60 days after a sketch plan is filed with it, receive recommendations from
the village planner, and determine the acceptability of the plan submitted. 
The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall by motion, give
tentative approval, conditional approval, or deny approval of the sketch
plan, and upon their findings instruct the subdivider to proceed with the
filing of a preliminary plan.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.21  PRELIMINARY PLAN; FILING.



   (A)   Filing.



      (1)   After tentative approval of the sketch plan by the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission and the fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations, the subdivider may proceed with the
submittal of the preliminary plan.  Initially the subdivider shall submit to
the Village four copies of the preliminary plan and all other information as
required in this section.



      (2)   There shall be no refund of any portion of the costs
accumulated for the review of the preliminary plan and the preliminary
engineering plan if the subdivider fails to apply for final approval of the
subdivision.  If, because of the failure of the subdivider to submit a final
plat within 12 months after receiving tentative approval of a preliminary
plan, it is necessary to resubmit a preliminary plan for tentative approval,
the subdivider shall be required to pay the fee, if any, currently in effect
at the time of resubmission.



   (B)   The preliminary plan shall contain the following:



      (1)   Identification and description.



         (a)   Proposed name of the subdivision.



         (b)   Location by township, section, town, and range or
by any other legal description.



         (c)   Names and addresses of developer and designer who
made the plan.



         (d)   Scale of plan, one inch to 50 feet or larger.



         (e)   Date.



         (f)   Northpoint.



      (2)   Delineation of existing conditions.



         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by
solid heavy lines, with angles and linear dimensions, and the total
approximate acreage encompassed thereby.



         (b)   Location, widths, and names of all existing or
prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility
rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and
structures, houses or permanent easements, and section and corporation lines,
within the tract or within 100 feet adjacent to the tract.



         (c)   Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided
or subdivided land, showing ownership where possible.



         (d)   Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and
adjacent tract in zoned areas.



         (e)   Contours at two-foot intervals except where
topography of the tract demands one-foot contour intervals; or when approved
by the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.



         (f)   Easements shall be provided for any and all public
or private utilities where alleys are not provided.  Proper continuity for
the utilities from block to block shall be maintained.



         (g)   Soil borings as required by the Planning, Zoning
and Development Commission.



         (h)   Flood plain areas as determined by U.S. Geological
Survey.



      (3)   Proposed improvements.



         (a)   Layout of streets, together with their proposed
names, pavements, and walks, widths of rights-of-way, and also the widths of
cross-walkway, and easements.



         (b)   Layout, numbers, and dimensions (to the nearest ½
foot) of lots and blocks, setbacks and easements.



         (c)   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or 
temporarily reserved for public use or



set aside for use of property owners in the subdivisions.



         (d)   Refer to and comply with §§ 156.50 through
156.57.



         (e)   Referral to fire or school districts if required
by the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.



   (C)   The following qualifications shall govern approval of the
preliminary plan.



      (1)   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall
within 60 days after a preliminary plan is filed with it, hold a public
hearing after giving notice required by § 159.179.  Within 30 days after
the last public hearing the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall
prepare and submit (unless time is extended by mutual consent or by the
failure on the part of the applicant to file required supporting data) its
findings and recommendations with the President and Board of Trustees.  The
President and Board shall accept or reject the plan within 30 days after it
receives the findings and the recommendations of the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission or within 30 days from date applicant files with the
Board any additional data required by the Board, whichever is latest unless
the time is extended by mutual consent.



      (2)   Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering
proposals pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewage and sewage
disposal, street lighting, fire hydrants, grading, gradients, roadway widths,
and the county officials, where concerned, prior to the approval of the final
plat by the village.



      (3)   Land subject to flooding or containing poor drainage
facilities.



         (a)   No plan will be approved for the subdivision of
land which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor
drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the streets
impossible.  However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which
will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer or the County Superintendent of
Highways, where concerned, make the area completely safe for residential
occupancy and provide adequate street drainage, the preliminary plan of the
subdivision may be approved.



         (b)   The approval of a preliminary plan by the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission and Village Board is strictly
tentative, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout
submitted.  This approval shall be effective for a maximum period of 12
months unless upon application of the developer the Village Board grants an
extension.  If the final plat has not been recorded within this time limit,
the preliminary plan must again be submitted for approval.



   (D)   One print of the approved preliminary plan, signed by the
President and the Village Clerk, shall be retained in the Village Clerk's
office and two copies in the office of the subdivider to proceed with the
preparation of plans and specifications for the minimum improvements required
in these regulations and rules and with the preparation of the final plat.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.22  APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Filing.



      (1)   After approval of the preliminary plan by the Village
Board of Trustees and the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations, a reproducible plan of the final plat of the subdivision shall
be submitted to the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission for approval.



      (2)   When a final plat has been submitted to the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission with all satisfactory documents required,
the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall approve the plat within
60 days from submission of last required document or within 60 days from the
date of filing the application with the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission, whichever is later.  Application for final approval of a plat
shall be made not later than one year after preliminary approval has been
granted.



      (3)   Except as otherwise specifically set forth in this
chapter or in Chapter 159, when approval has been given a final plat by the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission, the President and Board of
Trustees shall act upon the same within 30 days from date of approval by the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission or within 30 days from submission
of any additional data required by the Board, whichever is latest.



      (4)   Upon approval of the final plat by the President and
Board, the developer-owner shall record the plat with the County Recorder,
Cook County, within three months after said approval.  The original of the
plat shall be delivered to, and become the property of, the village after
recording.  Upon failure to so record, the final plat shall automatically
and without further notice be void.



   (B)   The final plat and accompanying documents shall contain the
following:



      (1)   Identification and description.



         (a)   Name of subdivision.



         (b)   Location by township, section, town, and range, or
by other legal description.



         (c)   Names of owners and certification by a licensed
surveyor.



         (d)   Scale one inch to 50 feet or larger (shown
graphically).



         (e)   Date.



         (f)   Northpoint.



      (2)   Delineation.



         (a)   Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse,
with angles and lineal dimensions.



         (b)   Exact location, width, and name of all streets
within and adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all
cross-walkways.  Streets that are obviously in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.  Before the
final plat for the subdivision shall be approved the subdivider shall submit
to the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission a statement from the local
postmaster approving the names of the proposed streets and of the proposed
system of postal addresses along such streets.



         (c)   Before the final plat of any subdivided area shall
be approved and recorded, the subdivider shall furnish profiles of all
streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision, drawn to a horizontal scale
of at least 50 feet to the inch and vertical scale of ten feet to the inch. 
Elevations shall be referred to a permanent recorded benchmark of the village
datum.  Street grades for major streets shall not exceed 5%.



         (d)   True angles and distances to the nearest
established street lines or official monuments (not less than three) which
shall be accurately described in the plat.



         (e)   Municipal, township, county, or section lines
accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.



         (f)   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures,
tangent bearings, and lengths of all arcs.



         (g)   All easements for rights-of-way provided for
public services and utilities.



         (h)   All lot and block numbers with their respective
lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths.



         (i)   1.  An agreement that permanent monuments shall
be placed at all corners and at points of tangency of curve lines along the
boundary of the subdivision prior to final acceptance of the improvements by
the village.  Permanent monuments shall be of concrete with minimum
dimensions of four inches by four inches at top, six inches by six inches at
bottom, and 36 inches long with a brass dowel 3/8-inch in diameter, at least
2-½ inches in length, imbedded so that the top of the dowel shall be flush
with the surface and at the center of the monument.



            2.  All lot corners not marked by concrete monuments
shall be marked by iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least 18 inches in
length and not less than ½ inch in diameter.  The top of the pipe or bar is
to be visible above the established grade of the ground when occupancy
occurs.  Said pipe or bar shall also be flagged with two color stakes.



         (j)   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any
areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated
thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed covenants for common uses of
all property owners.



         (k)   Building setback lines accurately shown by
dimensions which shall not be less than required by Chapter 159.



         (l)   Protective covenants which meet with the approval
of the Village President and Board of Trustees may be lettered on the final
plat.



         (m)   Certification by a registered surveyor to the
effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and
markers shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic
details are correct.



         (n)   Notarized certification, by owner or owners, or by
mortgage holder on record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of
streets and other public areas.



         (o)   Proper form for the approval of the Village Board
with space for signatures, of the Village President and Village Clerk, proper
form for the approval of the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission with
space for the signature of the Commission Chairperson, and approval by
signature of the Village Engineer.  This approval of the final plat shall
not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the
dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space shown on the
plat.



         (p)   Engineering plans and specifications as required
by §§ 156.50 through 156.57.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.23  AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Any owner or subdivider filing an application for approval of
a final plat shall submit a statement of agreement that:  the land
improvements required by §§ 156.50 through 156.57 shall be completed by the
owner or subdivider in accordance with plans and specifications approved by
the Village Engineer and Board of Trustees and all inspection and review fees
required by this chapter and one set of plans and specifications showing such
improvements as installed shall be paid to or filed with the Village Clerk
within two years following the approval of the final plat by the Board of
Trustees.



   (B)   A completion bond shall be posted by such owner or subdivider
with the Village Clerk prior to approval of the final plat.  Such completion
bond shall be in a penal sum in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost
of the subdivision improvements required by §§ 156.50 through 156.57 or, in
lieu of a bond, a deposit of cash, or other security or guarantee acceptable
to the President and Board of Trustees, including an irrevocable straight
commercial letter of credit.  Any such deposit in lieu of a bond must be
acceptable to the President and Board of Trustees in its sole discretion. 
Such cost for the completion of the required subdivision improvements shall
be in accordance with cost estimates prepared by the developer's engineer
with review and approval of the Village Engineer and approved by the
President and Board of Trustees.  If a completion bond, or deposit of cash,
or other security or other guarantee is posted, there shall be good and
sufficient surety thereon, as approved by the President and Board of Trustees
and be in such form as approved by the Village Attorney and conditioned upon
the installation and acceptance of said improvements.



      (1)   The subdivision improvement deposit in an amount equal
to 110% of the estimated cost of the subdivision improvements required by
§§ 156.50 through 156.57 hereof shall be placed in escrow in accordance
with the terms of the escrow agreement contained in Appendix A of this
chapter for the purpose of:



         (a)   To pay the actual costs of construction of the
subdivision improvements required under §§ 156.50 through 156.57 hereof.



         (b)   To pay the engineering and inspection fees of the
village.



         (c)   To pay the cost of maintaining the subdivision
improvements for a period of one year after acceptance by the village.



         (d)   To pay for any other customary expenses of the
developer in meeting any requirements for the village pertaining to the
subdivision.



      (2)   (a)   A subdivider may elect to deposit an amount
equal to 110% of the estimated cost of improvements directly with the
village.  The village, upon the certification of the Village Engineer that
the improvements have been completed or partially completed, will pay to the
contractor, in not more than three payouts, the amount due under the
contract.  The village will also make the distribution of funds from the
deposit for the fees and cost of:



            1.   Engineering and inspection.



            2.   Maintaining the subdivision improvements for
a period of one year after acceptance.



            3.    Any other costs or expenses in meeting the
requirements of the village.



         (b)   Nothing in this division (B) will relieve the
subdivider of bearing the full cost for the subdivision improvements and
expenses required by the village.



         (c)   After completion and acceptance of the subdivision
improvements, the village will authorize the refund of any residue remaining
except for 10% of the original deposit or the amount stipulated in the escrow
agreement.  The retained amount shall be used for the maintenance of the
improvements for a period of one year after the date of acceptance and then
any balance remaining will be refunded.



         (d)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein,
upon the completion of the subgrade, base course, and one-half of the
thickness of the wearing surface course of a street, alley, or parking area,
the President and Board of Trustees may reduce the amount of that portion of
the bond or other guarantee or deposit that directly relates to said street,
alley, or parking area, but such reduction shall not be more than an amount
equal to 85% of the estimated cost of installation of the subgrade and base
course.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall not certify the approval of the Board
of Trustees on the final plat until the required bond, or deposit, or cash,
or other security or other guarantee has been filed as required by this
section.



   (D)   Such agreements, as set forth in Appendix A of this chapter
shall not be required for subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas
within 1-½ miles beyond the village limits when there is evidence that
agreements are entered into between the owner or subdivider and county,
except when the village standards of public improvements are of higher
quality than county standards, such agreements may be required by the village.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 156.35  STREET PLAN.



   The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent,
width, grade, and location of all streets, alleys, or other land to be
dedicated for public use shall conform to the general development plan of the
village as approved and adopted by the Village Board of Trustees and other
responsible governmental bodies, if any; and shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets, and shall be
curvilineal except primary streets.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.36  MINIMUM STREET WIDTHS AND DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The minimum widths of right-of-way for streets to be dedicated or
established after the effective date of this chapter within the village or
the environs under jurisdiction of this chapter, shall conform to the
following schedule (for further information on pavement requirement refer to
§ 156.54):



   (A)   Primary streets, 100 feet through 120 feet (located in
accordance with the street classification plan).



   (B)   Collector streets, 80 feet (37 feet B/B pavement).



   (C)   Minor streets, 66 feet (27 feet B/B pavement).



   (D)   Marginal access street (without intersecting streets), 40 feet
(20 feet B/B pavement).



   (E)   Cul-de-sac, 120 feet diameter (81 feet diameter B/B pavement).



   (F)   Cross-walkways, 10 feet.



   (G)   Utility easements, 10 feet.



   (H)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.



   (I)   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.



   (J)   Clear visibility, measured along the center line of the street
shall be provided for at least 300 feet on all primary streets, 200 feet on
collector streets, and at least 100 feet on all other streets.



   (K)   It must be evidenced that all street intersections and
confluences encourage safe traffic flow.



   (L)   Alleys.



      (1)   Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial
districts.



      (2)   Alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas except
where topographic or other conditions may necessitate their use.



      (3)   The width of an alley shall not be less than 20 feet.



   (M)   The maximum length cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet measured along
the center line from the intersection at origin through center of circle to
end of right-of-way.  Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly
circular shape with a minimum diameter of 120 feet.



   (N)   Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to
the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations; and where the Village President and Board
of Trustees finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the
other half when the adjoining property is subdivided.  Wherever a half-
street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street
shall be placed within such tract.  No strip or area shall be reserved along
any portion of a street, half-street, or alley which will prevent adjacent
property owners access thereto except by consent of the Village Board.



   (O)   No street names may be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets in the Tinley Park Postal
District.  Existing street names must be projected wherever possible.



   (P)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or
proposed major street, the Village President and Board of Trustees may
require a marginal access street or reversed frontage with screen planting
contained in a nonaccess reservation, which shall have a minimum width of ten
feet along the rear property line; or other treatment as may be adequate for
protection of through and local traffic.



   (Q)   If the tract of land proposed to be subdivided or any part
thereof lies adjacent to a highway over which the Division of Highways of the
state has jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof, and an
entrance or entrances are desired from such highway to lots, streets,
roadways, or alleys in such proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit
prior to subdivision approval to the Administrative Officer of the village a
written permit from the said Division of Highways, granting his permission to
obtain and construct such an entrance or entrances.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.37  EASEMENTS.



   Easements across  lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities and street lighting and drainage, where necessary, and
shall be at least ten feet wide.  The easement shall be so laid out that a
proper continuity  may be had from lot to  lot and from block to block. 
In addition, due provisions for extension of easements to adjacent areas
shall be made.  Written approval of the utility easement layout by the
public utility companies shall be required on the final plat.  Where a
subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream,
there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and such
further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose and
approved by the Village Engineer.  In addition to the ten-foot width (for
purposes of gas, telephone, or electric lines) additional width may be
required for drainage or other uses.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.38  RESIDENTIAL BLOCK STANDARDS.



   (A)   The maximum lengths of blocks may be permitted up to 1,800
feet.  Blocks over 800 feet may require crosswalk easements.  Crosswalk
easements not less than ten feet in width shall be provided where deemed
necessary by the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission at the
approximate centers of the blocks.  The use of additional cross-walkways in
any instance to provide safe and convenient access to schools, parks, or
other similar destinations may be recommended by the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission.



   (B)   No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made but
blocks must fit easily into the overall plan of the village and their design
must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow, and public areas.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)  Penalty, see §
156.99



§ 156.39  RESIDENTIAL LOT STANDARDS.



   (A)   All side lot lines shall be at right angles to the straight
street lines, or radial to curved street lines unless a variation to this
rule will give a better street and lot plan.  Lots with double frontage
shall be prohibited.  All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.



   (B)   Where said lots front upon a cul-de-sac or curved road or
street having a radius of 200 feet or less, the minimum width at said
right-of-way line to be not less than 50% of the width required by Chapter
159, with said width being measured on the arc of the street right-of-way.



   (C)   The area of the street right-of-way, whether dedicated  to
the public or a private street or easement for street purposes, shall not be
included in calculating the area of the lot to be in accordance with the
minimum  lot  area  requirements  of  the  zoning district in which the
lot is located.  Lots with an area larger than the minimum requirements are
desirable.  The lot shall also have a width and a depth entirely adequate to
provide the necessary yard requirements of Chapter 159.



   (D)   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
establishment of front building lines on both the front and the side of the
lots adjoining the streets.



   (E)   Lots upon major highway intersections and at all other acute
angle intersections which, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, are
likely to be dangerous to traffic movement shall have a radius of 20 feet at
the street corner.  On business lots, a chord may be substituted, with the
approval of the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission, for the circular
arc.  Where grade separation structures are proposed at the intersection of
major highways, the lots and improvements in the subdivision shall be
arranged so as to make adequate provision for such structure.



   (F)   Lots abutting a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream
shall have additional minimum width or depth as required to provide an
adequate building site and afford the minimum usable area required in Chapter
159 for front, rear, and side yards.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)  Penalty, see §
156.99



§ 156.40  BUILDING LINES.



   (A)   Building lines shall be shown on plats of subdivisions within
the incorporated area of the village which are intended for residential use
of any character, and on commercial or industrial lots immediately adjoining
said residential areas.  Such building lines on lots adjacent to major
highways shall not be less than the building and setback lines established by
any ordinance of the Village Board of Trustees.  In all cases building lines
shall not be less than required by any zoning regulation applying to the
property.



   (B)   Building lines for territory outside the incorporated limits
but within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall conform to the provisions
of the applicable county ordinance.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS



§ 156.50  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No preliminary plan of subdivision nor final plat of subdivision shall
be approved by the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission or the Board
of Trustees of the village unless and until the following requirements of
this subchapter have been complied with concerning the design and
construction of public improvements in the village.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.51  PRELIMINARY IMPROVEMENT PLANS.



   (A)   At the time of submission of a preliminary plan of
subdivision, a preliminary engineering plan or plans of public improvements
shall also be submitted.  There shall be five copies of the preliminary
engineering plans and 15 copies of preliminary plans of subdivision
submitted.  These documents shall include at least the following:



      (1)   Preliminary layout of grading and drainage showing the
approximate method of lot drainage and street drainage throughout the
subdivision.



      (2)   Preliminary layout of sanitary sewerage facilities
showing approximate sizes and lengths of sanitary sewer, location of
treatment facilities, depths and gradients of sewers, and other pertinent
information concerning the sanitary sewer system.



      (3)   Preliminary layout of water mains, showing sizes and
locations of mains, valves, fire hydrants, and other appurtenances.



      (4)   Preliminary layout of storm sewers, showing locations,
sizes, gradients, and depths of all storm sewers and drainage swales,
ditches, and detention areas.



      (5)   Preliminary layout of streets, showing cross-section and
grades and gradients of all streets proposed within the subdivision. 



      (6)   A statement concerning the materials to be used in the
construction of above.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the preliminary plan and the preliminary
engineering plans, the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall
refer the respective plans to the Village Planner and the Village Engineer
for their review and comment.  The Village Planner and Village Engineer
shall review these plans for general compliance with the overall requirements
to the village and submit their recommendations to the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission and the Village Board of Trustees.  If necessary,
depending upon the complexity of the review comments, one set of the reviewed
plans may be returned to the subdividers.



   (C)   All preliminary engineering plans shall bear the signature and
seal of the state registered professional engineer under whose direction they
were prepared.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.52  FINAL PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   At the time of submission of a final plat of subdivision, a
final engineering plan or plans of public improvements shall also be
submitted.  There shall be five copies of the final engineering plans and 15
copies of the final plats of subdivision submitted.  These documents shall
include at least the following: Items (11), (12)(a), (12)(b), (12)(c) and
(14) shall be included in the preliminary plat, while items (12)(d) and (13)
shall be incorporated into the engineering plans.



      (1)   A title sheet showing the name of the project, section,
township and range, and index of sheets, a tabulations of symbols, location
of benchmarks, and a graphic location with respect to nearest traveled
streets and roads.



      (2)   A detailed grading plan indicating the vertical
elevations of all houses, lot corners, and point of change in gradient. 
Directions of flow of surface waters will be delineated with arrows and the
gradient of the land indicated above the arrows.  Curb elevations will be
indicated opposite each lot corner and at all changes in gradient.



      (3)   A detailed plan of street improvements showing
horizontal and vertical locations of all street and sidewalk improvements and
including horizontal and vertical locations of all points of curvature,
points of intersection, points of tangency, points of vertical curvature,
points of vertical intersection, and points of vertical tangency.  Radii of
intersection of streets will be shown on this plan.



      (4)   A detailed plan of storm sewer improvements showing
horizontal and vertical location of all manholes, catch basins, inlets,
headwalls, and the like and indicating lengths, types, and grades and
gradients of all storm sewers, ditches, and detention areas.  Cross sections
will be required for all ditches having side slopes greater than ten
horizontal to one vertical (10:1).  Manholes, catch basins, and inlets will
be dimensioned from lot corners.



      (5)   A detailed plan of sanitary sewer improvements showing
horizontal and vertical locations of all manholes, and indicating lengths,
types, and grades and gradients of all sanitary sewers.  Manholes will be
dimensioned from lot corners.



      (6)   A detailed plan of water system improvements indicating
horizontal and vertical location of all fire hydrants and valve vaults and
showing lengths, sizes, and locations of all water mains.



      (7)   Plans and profiles drawn at a scale not to exceed one
inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch to ten feet vertically
indicating additional horizontal and vertical location of streets, sewers,
appurtenances, and the existing grade.



      (8)   Such additional details as are necessary to clarify the
extent or manner of construction.



      (9)   Detailed material and construction specifications
concerning the work to be performed including general conditions of the
contract acceptable by the village.



      (10)   A detailed cost estimate of the work to be performed.



      (11)   A vicinity map, in sufficient detail to enable easy
location in the field of the site for which plat approval is sought, and
including the boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing
zoning and legend and scale.



      (12)   A development plan of the site showing: 



         (a)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land
with approximately 100 feet of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than
two-foot contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and
drainage pattern of the area.



         (b)   The location of existing buildings, structures,
utilities, water bodies, flood plains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover,
paved areas and other significant natural or man-made features on the site 
and adjacent land within approximately 100 feet of the boundary.



         (c)   A general description of the predominance soil
types on the site, their location and their limitations for the proposed use.



         (d)   Proposed use of the site, including present
development and planned utilizations; areas of excavation, grading and
filling; proposed contours, finished grades and street profiles, provisions
for storm drainage, including the control of accelerated runoff, with a
drainage area map and computation, kinds and locations of utilities; and
areas and acreage proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded,
vegetatively stabilized of left undisturbed.



      (13)   An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing:



         (a)   All erosion and sedimentation control measure
necessary to meet the objectives of this ordinance throughout all phases of
construction and permanently after completion of development of the site.



         (b)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method
of seed bed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and kind and quality of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures.



         (c)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities,
including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.



         (d)   Identification of the person or entity which will
have legal responsibility for maintenance or erosion control structures and
measures after development is completed.



      (14)   The proposed phasing of development of the site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final
grading and landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which
clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas and
the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary sediment control
measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas,
and establishment of permanent vegetative cover.



      (15)   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with
the standards and requirements contained in "Procedures and Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" prepared by the Steering
Committee and adopted by the Cook County Soil and Water Conservation
District, which standards and requirements are hereby incorporated into this
section by reference.



      (16)   The President and Board of Trustees may waive specific
requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information
submitted is sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives
and principles of this chapter.



   (B)   Upon receipt of these final plans, the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission shall refer same to the Village Engineer for his
comments and corrections.  The Village Engineer shall review these plans for
compliance with the requirements of the village, and shall return them,
together with his recommendations to the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission and the Village Board of Trustees.  One set of the reviewed plans
with suggested changes shall be returned to the subdivider at the time of
final approval.  The Village Engineer may, at his discretion, confer with
the engineer for the developer concerning correction to the final plans prior
to his final approval.  All final plans shall be submitted on mylar or
vellum and shall bear the signature and embossed seal of the state registered
professional engineer under whose directions they were prepared.



   (C)   No substantial deviations from these plans and specifications
will be allowed without the written permission of the Village Board.  Field
changes will be allowed by the Village Engineer.  Such field changes shall
be recorded with the Building Commissioner.



   (D)   The Village Engineer shall be empowered to require such field
and laboratory tests as may be necessary to insure the quality of the work. 
The costs of such tests shall be borne by the subdivider.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77); Am. Ord. 89-15, passed 5-10-89; Am. Ord. 95-06,
passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.53  AS-BUILT PLANS.



   (A)   Prior to final approval of improvements, the subdivider shall
submit ink-on-mylar, or vellum reproducible plans showing the works as
actually built.  Separate plans shall be provided for water, sanitary sewer,
and storm sewer improvements.



   (B)   Subject plans shall show horizontal and vertical location of
pipes and service appurtenances referenced to property lines; datum shall be
United States Geological Survey.  As-built plans shall be prepared at a
scale of one inch equal 50 feet, or larger.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.54  STANDARDS OF DESIGN.



   Any streets, sidewalk, water or sewer extension, or other improvements
herein referred to installed in any street or public place must conform to
the following minimum design.



   (A)   Streets.



      (1)   Primary collector streets shall have a width of 37 feet
measured from back of curb to back of curb and shall have a crown of six
inches.  Minor streets shall have a width of 27 feet back to back of curb
and a crown of four inches.  Marginal access streets, when serving only the
marginal access frontage, shall have a width of 20 feet from back of curb to
back of curb and a crown of four inches.  Cul-de-sacs shall be paved to a
diameter of 81 feet back of curb to back of curb, and shall have a crown of
ten inches.  Cul-de-sacs shall be totally paved curb to curb.



      (2)   All streets shall be provided with Portland cement
concrete combination curb and gutter of a design approved by the Village
Engineer.  Pre- molded bituminous expansion joints of the exact contour of
the curb and gutter shall be provided at all points of curvature, centers of
radius returns, and 30 feet on centers in the curb and gutter.  All streets
shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 7 in the Illinois Department of
Transportation Design Manual, as amended.



      (3)   All streets shall have a minimum gradient of 0.5 feet
per 100 feet and a maximum gradient of six per 100 feet.



   (B)   Sidewalks. 



      (1)   If the property subdivided is located within the village
or immediately adjacent thereto, sidewalks shall be required.  Walks without
parkways between street pavement and walks are prohibited in residential
areas.  All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Appendix B,
Standard Specifications for Construction of Portland Cement Sidewalks. 



      (2)   Driveway aprons shall be constructed in accordance with
Appendix C, Standard Specifications for Construction of Portland Cement
Concrete Driveway Aprons.



   (C)   Grading.  Grading of all lots and streets within the village
shall be accomplished in such a manner as to prevent ponding in excess of 18
inches in the event of a complete failure of the storm sewer system.  Except
in special cases, grading on all lots will be kept within the range of 2% to
20%.  Drainage easements will be provided in all cases where surface waters
from more than two lots are conveyed down a property line.



   (D)   Storm sewerage facilities.



      (1)   Storm sewerage facilities shall be provided to accept
and convey all storm waters entering on the subdivision.  They shall be
designed on the basis of a five-year storm and shall be sized to adequately
carry tributary areas at such time as they are developed to the density shown
on the Physical Development Plan of the village.  Inlets shall be provided
at all low points and all points where the design intensity of flow reaches
two cubic feet per second.



      (2)   Rear yard inlets shall be provided with a catch basin
bottom having a depth of at least two feet and the outlet pipes shall be
installed in such a manner as to preclude the entrance of floating matter
into the storm sewer.  Rear yard inlets shall have a frame and grate which
conforms to the State Standard Type I or as approved by the Village
Engineer.  Curb inlet frame and grates shall conform to the State Standard
Type I or as approved by the Village Engineer.  Manhole frame and covers
shall conform to the State Standard Type I.  Storm sewers shall be designed
to flow full with a minimum velocity of three feet per second and a maximum
velocity of ten feet per second.



      (3)   Storm detention facilities shall be provided in
accordance with Appendix D, Standard Specification for Storm Water Detention.



      (4)   Open channels of trapezoidal design may be provided on
an optional basis in lieu of enclosed storm sewer pipe where the following
acreages and conditions are met:



         (a)   The channel will serve as the outlet for  the 
enclosed storm sewers from a drainage area of 80 acres or more; the
trapezoidal channel has a flat base of  eight feet or  more in width; a
side slope of 3:1 maximum, provided all attempts are made to provide a slope
less than the maximum; and an easement of 15 feet or more in width with
sodding full width.



         (b)   The channel will serve as the outlet for a
drainage area of 160 acres or more; the trapezoidal channel has a flat base
of ten feet or more; a side slope of 3:1 maximum, provided all attempts are
made to provide a slope less than the maximum; and an easement 20 feet or
more in width with sodding full width.



         (c)   Open channels serving a drainage area of more than
240 acres shall be subject to design and easement requirements to be
stipulated by the Village Engineer at the time the subdivider's preliminary
plat and preliminary improvement design are submitted.



         (d)   All open channels where the bottom slope is less
than 2%, shall be provided with a low-flow underdrain of 0.02 cfs per acre
capacity.  All open channels should be designed to convey storm water
without eroding velocities and be provided with adequate checks and erosion
control measures.



      (5)   Maintenance.



         (a)   Maintenance of stormwater management facilities
located on a private development shall be the responsibility of the owner of
that development. Before obtaining a permit from the village, the owner of
the development shall execute a maintenance agreement with the village
guaranteeing that the owner of the development and all future owners will
maintain its stormwater management system. The agreement shall specify that
the village is authorized to enter onto the development for purposes of
inspection of the stormwater management facilities. Such agreement shall be
recorded with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds.



         (b)   The Building Commissioner or his designee shall
inspect each stormwater management facility built pursuant to the provisions
of this provision at least annually. If any deficiencies are found which
might cause the facility to fail to operate as designed, the Building
Commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the facility and demand
that it be corrected within 30 days.



         (c)   If the owner of the development or any future
owner fails to adequately maintain the stormwater management facility, and
does not make corrections after being notified in writing 30 days prior, the
village may have the necessary work completed and assess the cost to the
development owner.



   (E)   Sanitary sewers.  Sanitary sewers and services with a minimum
cover of six feet shall be provided to serve all lots and to provide for
reasonable expansions of the system.  Sanitary sewers shall be designed
using the criterion of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago.  Sanitary sewer manholes shall be located at points to minimize the
possibility of submergence in storms.  Manhole frames and grates shall be a
bolt-down watertight frame and lid.  All sanitary sewers and services to
serve residential or commercial properties shall be a Type 1 sanitary sewer
as approved by the agency owning the sewers.



   (F)   Water mains.  Water mains and services shall be provided to
serve all lots and to provide for reasonable expansion of the system.  Water
mains shall be designed using the criterion of the State Department of Public
Health.  All valves (except hydrant auxiliary valves) shall be enclosed in
valve vaults of minimum diameter four feet, and having a frame and grate
similar to that provided for sanitary sewers but bearing the imprint
"Water".  Fire hydrants shall be located so as to be within 200 feet of all
homes and shall be of Eddy or Traverse City manufacture or equivalent with
auxiliary valves and boxes (vaults excepted).  Fire hydrants shall have a
five-inch valve opening and 2-½ inch connections and one four-inch
connection.  All valves and fire hydrants shall open counterclockwise. 
Minimum cover for water mains shall be given five feet.



   (G)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Unpaved or unimproved areas.



         (a)   That all unpaved or otherwise not improved areas
of any parkway adjacent to an improved lot will be fine graded and have an
established lawn, within one year from the date that occupancy (temporary or
otherwise) is approved.



         (b)   All unpaved or otherwise not improved areas of any
parkway adjacent to an unimproved lot will be fine graded and have an
established lawn, before the acceptance of the subdivision.



         (c)   Exceptions.  Those areas designated and approved
for parkway trees and only then when such area does not exceed four feet in
diameter.



      (2)   Street trees shall be provided by the owner along all
streets where trees do not exist.  Trees shall be of a species suitable for
local soil and climate conditions and adapted to street use at least 2-½
inch caliper six inches above grade.  At street corners, the trees shall be
located a minimum of 25 feet from the intersection of the street right-of-way
lines.  They shall be located so as not to interfere with utilities or
sidewalks and placed no further than 45 feet apart.  Trees shall be placed
in the grassed area between curb and sidewalk unless the space is less than
six feet wide or the Village Engineer determines they will interfere with
sewers, water lines, or underground utilities, in which case the trees shall
be planted on the lot.



      (3)   In informal type street patterns, informal planting of
street trees in accordance with approved landscape development plans may be
permitted.



      (4)   (a)   The list of the official street tree species
for the village, which are allowed, are referenced in § 98.15 of this code,
and are made a part hereof.



         (b)   The following trees are NOT allowed to be planted
in street parkway areas:



   Acer negundo (Box Elder)



   Acer saccharinum (Silver Maple)



   Fraxinus species (Ash)



   Juglans nigra (Black Walnut)



   Populus species (Poplar)



   Quercus palustris (Pin Oak)



   Salix species (Willow)



   Ulmus species (Elms)



   Other species generally considered to have weak



     wood, insect problems, or disease problems.



         (c)   The village may approve the use of ornamental
trees upon the review of the location with respect to sight distance, the
association with other trees within a subdivision or on a street, and their
susceptibility to disease and/or insect problems.  Section 98.15 of this
code references the list of official street tree species which are allowed,
as well authority of the Tree Board pursuant hereto.



         (d)   The village shall have certification from the
developer that the street trees are free from disease under the State Plant
Inspection Department of Standards.  The trees shall be transplanted stock
and transplanting thereof having been done within four years from the time of
purchase.  All trees shall have their trunk protected with tree wrap paper,
from the base of the trunk up to the lowest branch.  All trees planted by
the developer shall be guaranteed for one year from the date of planting and
shall be replaced by the developer at no charge to the village, should they
die or fail to be in a healthy and thriving condition in the opinion of the
village.  The replacement tree shall be of the same species, size, and
quality, and carry the same one-year guarantee.



      (5)   (a)   All unpaved areas of all improved lots shall be
fine graded and have an established lawn, within one year from the date that
occupancy (temporary or otherwise) is approved.



         (b)   Exceptions.



            1.   Those areas intended for landscaping, when
such areas are defined and separated from the lawn areas by a permanent type
barrier. Barriers may be curbs, sidewalks, railroad or landscaping timbers,
plastic or aluminum lawn edging or other similar material. The intended
landscaping must be completed within one year from the date that occupancy
(temporary or otherwise) is approved, and must be substantiated by the
submission of a proposed plan and layout.



            2.   Those areas intended for future accessory
structures, including but not limited to patios, decks and pools. These areas
must have all organic material removed and the appropriate base established.
Submission and approval of the permit application for the proposed structure
must be completed within one year from the date that occupancy (temporary or
otherwise) is approved.



      (6)   Median strips and landscaping easements shall be planted
with trees and shrubs in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.



   (H)   Street signs.  Street signs shall be in conformance with
village standards.



   (I)   Street lighting.  Street lighting shall be in conformance
with village standards in Appendix E of this chapter.



   (J)   Public utilities.  Telephone and electric service lines shall
be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area; said conduits or
cables shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner
which will not conflict with other underground services.  Further, all
transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to
the public.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 85-11, passed - -85; Am. Ord. 85-13,
passed 10-9-85; Am. Ord. 89-15, passed 5-10-89; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed
4-10-95; Am. Ord. 2001-010, passed 6-6-01; Am. Ord. 2008-005, passed
3-5-08)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.55  DETAILED SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Design standards for the structural design of pavements shall
be in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of
Transportation Bureau of Local Roads and Streets, Administrative Policies for
Pavements and the Standard Design Manual for Pavements, as amended.



   (B)   Design standards for sewer and water mains shall be in
accordance with State Society of Professional Engineers specifications, as
amended.



   (C)   Reflective crack control shall be used on all new village
streets as required by the State Department of Transportation and shall be
consistent with requirements of Division 700, entitled "Road and Bridge
Construction", adopted October 1, 1983.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 84-11, passed - -84)



§ 156.56  MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Materials used in construction must be capable of performing
adequately for the service intended and be installed as recommended by the
manufacturer.



   (B)   All public improvements installed in the village shall be
constructed of the following materials:



      (1)   Curb and Gutter, Illinois State Standard M-4-12.



      (2)   Base course, cement aggregate, crushed stone, B.A.M.



      (3)   Surface, bituminous concrete, PCC pavement.



      (4)   Miscellaneous, cast iron pipe, asbestos concrete pipe,
clay pipe, reinforced concrete pipe.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.57  FEES AND EXPENSES; COLLECTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person filing or causing to be filed with the village, a
sketch plan or a preliminary plan for approval by the village, shall be
responsible for all engineering, legal, planning, administrative, and field
inspection expenses incurred by the village in connection with the review and
approval and inspection of the sketch plan, preliminary plan, final plan, and
all public and private improvements which are required by this subdivision
code and it shall be unlawful for any person who is billed for such expenses
to fail to remit payment for same to the village within 30 days of the
invoice.



   (B)   In addition to all other requirements, at the time a sketch
plan or a preliminary plan is filed with the village, the person filing the
sketch plan or preliminary plan shall make a partial fee deposit with the
village which shall be applied to the fees described in division (A) which
shall be based on the below schedule.



 

DEPOSIT
 
FEE




Annexation
 
$2,000


Special use
 
$2,000


Zoning change
 
$1,500


Subdivision
 
$1,500


Resubdivision
 
$1,500


Planned unit development
 
$2,000


Variances
 
$1,000




 



The Building Commissioner is authorized to review and adjust the deposit
amounts as necessary based upon his or her perception of the magnitude of the
project or petition submitted.



   (C)   At such time as the village completes its review of the
preliminary plan it will bill the applicant for the estimated cost of the
village's engineering, legal, planning, administrative, and field inspection
services to be rendered in connection with the preliminary and final plans
and the completion of the public and private improvements required under this
subdivision code.  All such invoices shall be paid within 30 days of the
date of the invoice and no further review or investigation of the plan shall
be made by the village until such time as the invoice has been paid.  All
delinquent invoices will be subject to monthly late fees equal to 1.5% of the
outstanding balance of the invoice.



   (D)   The estimated cost described in division (C) shall be 5% of
the estimated cost of construction of all improvements, private and public
which are required under this subdivision code.  The estimated cost shall be
payable as follows:



      (1)   Two and one-half percent shall be paid upon the
village's approval of the estimated cost of the public improvements.



      (2)   Two and one-half percent shall be paid upon the
village's approval of the final plan.



      (3)   The village shall be reimbursed for the balance of its
expenses as a condition of the acceptance of the public improvements by the
village.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 92-08, passed 2-26-92)



§ 156.58  PRINCIPALS AND STANDARDS.



   Except as provided below, no plat of subdivisions shall be approved
unless the preliminary plat and accompanying material indicate that measures
to be taken, to control erosion and sedimentation will be adequate assurance
that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event of ten-year
frequency or less and that the following principles will be applicable to all
development activities in the area to be subdivided. Items (A), (B), and (C)
shall be included on the preliminary plat, while items (D) through (H) shall
be incorporated into the engineering plans.



   (A)   Development shall be related to the topography and soils of
the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep
slopes were high cuts and fill may be required shall be avoided wherever
possible and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.



   (B)   Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses shall be left
undisturbed wherever possible.



   (C)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed for the
shortest practical time during development.



   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt
traps or filters shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from
run-off waters from land undergoing development.



   (E)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures
shall be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other
events likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs
and benefits involved.



   (F)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices,
aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance shall be considered.



   (G)   A provision shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during the after development.
Drainageways shall be designed to that their final gradients and the
resultant velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion, and
shall be protected against erosion and sedimentation during development.



   (H)   Permanent vegetation and structure shall be installed as soon
as practical during development.



(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-10-89)



PARK AND SCHOOL SITES



§ 156.70  RECOMMENDATION OF DEDICATION OF LAND OR CASH CONTRIBUTION.



   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission may recommend and the
Village Board of Trustees may require each applicant to dedicate land for
park and recreational purposes and land for school sites, to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of the parcel, to make a cash
contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or to provide a combination
of both at the option of the village.  Such dedication is necessary to
ensure proper provision of park and school sites for persons who are expected
to reside within the subdivision or development, which sites would otherwise
have to be acquired at the expense of the general public but whose utility
would generally be limited to residents of the parcel.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.71  PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   Applicant may be required to dedicate for park and recreation
purposes an amount of land determined on the basis of 10 acres per 1,000
persons.  This calculation shall be based on the current Illinois School
Consulting Service's "Table of Estimated Population per Dwelling Unit"  in
effect at the time the preliminary plan is submitted.



   (B)   (1)   Location.  The location of the site to be dedicated
shall be determined by the Village Board of Trustees upon recommendation of
the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission, taking into account the
suitability of the site for park purposes or development, its relationship to
population concentrations, and its proximity to other park or recreational
lands.



      (2)   On-site storage.  No storage of any materials,
including spoil materials or top soil will be allowed on a park site
designated for recreational use or land designated as future or proposed
school sites.



   (C)   Credit for private open spaces and recreation areas.  Private
open space or recreation areas may be utilized in lieu of the dedication
required by this section; provided that detailed improvement plans shall be
approved by the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission and Village Board
and that satisfactory guarantees of the permanency of the use and its
maintenance, enforceable by the village, shall be entered into by the
applicant.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 91-35, passed 12-11-91; Am. Ord. 95-06,
passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.72  SCHOOL SITE PROVISION.



   Applicants may be required to begin negotiations with the school
district to determine requirements for school site locations, or cash
contributions to ease the impact of a proposed development.  The applicant
shall provide a written statement to the village that an agreement has been
reached regarding any future school sites or contributions to the school
district.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.73  CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK AND SCHOOL SITES.



   (A)   Where the resulting site in a proposed subdivision or
development is too small to be usable for the purpose intended or where it is
inappropriate for park  and recreational  purposes or a school site, the 
village may require the applicant to contribute cash in lieu of the land
dedication.  The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation land
dedication  shall  be held in trust by the village or other public body
designated by the village, solely for the acquisition of park and recreation
land as hereinbefore classified, which will serve the immediate or future
needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the
improvement of other existing park and recreation land which already serves
such needs.  The cash contributions in lieu of school sites shall be held in
trust by the village, or other public body designated by the village, solely
for use in the acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate
or future needs of children from that subdivision or development or for the
improvement to any existing school site which already serves such needs, but
not for the construction of any school buildings  or additions  thereto. 
If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land
dedication or  cash contribution in lieu of school site is not expended for
the purposes set forth herein within seven years from the date of receipt, it
shall be refunded to the applicant who made such contribution.



   (B)   Fair market value.  The cash contribution in lieu of land
shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land as improved,
that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation or school
sites.  The applicant shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market
value of such improved land or other evidence thereof and final determination
of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the
Village Board of Trustees based upon such information from other sources
which may be submitted to the Village Board by any local park district,
school, district, or others.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.74  DEDICATION AND FEE.



   There will be situations when a combination of land dedication and a
contribution in lieu of land are both necessary.  These occasions will arise
when:



   (A)   The subdivision or development does not have sufficient or
adequate land to meet the dedication requirements hereunder.  That portion
of the land within the subdivision or development which is adequate or
sufficient for the park or school location shall be dedicated as a site as
aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any
additional land that would have been required to be dedicated.



   (B)   A major part of the local park or recreation site or school
site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed
from the subdivision or development to complete the site.  The portions
needed to complete the park or school site shall be dedicated, and a cash
contribution shall be required in lieu of the balance of the required
dedication.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.75  DENSITY FORMULA.



   In order for the village to qualitatively determine current or short
range projected trends in family size for new construction projects, the
Illinois School Consulting Service's "Table of Estimated Population per
Dwelling Unit" shall be used in calculating the amount  of required 
dedication of land acreage or cash contributions.  The most current
aforementioned table that is available at the time the preliminary plan is
submitted shall be used for these calculations unless written objection is
filed with the village by the applicant.  In the event an applicant files a
written objection to the aforementioned table, he shall submit his own
demographic study showing the estimated additional population and in that
event, final determination of the density formula to be used in such
calculations shall be made by the Village Board of Trustees based upon such
demographic information submitted by the applicant and from other sources
which may be submitted to the Village Board by any local park district,
school district, or others.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.76  IMPROVED SITES.



   The slope, topography, and geology of the site to be dedicated as well
as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes.  Grading on
sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land.  Before dedication, all sites shall be improved with a
vigorous stand of grass.  The grass shall be a mixture of bluegrass, Fescue,
and rye as approved by the Village Engineer.  All drainage swales shall be
sodded with a variety of sod that is approved by the Village Engineer.  The
applicant/developer shall be responsible for all maintenance of the site
until the site is accepted by the village, or acceptable provisions shall be
made for such improvements before dedication.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT



§ 156.85  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure, or improvement to the land or any
lot within a subdivision as defined herein, which has been approved for
platting or replatting, until all requirements of this chapter have been
fully complied with.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.86  OCCUPANCY PERMIT.



   No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the
use of any structure within any subdivision approved for platting or
replatting until required utility facilities have been installed and made
ready to service the property, and that roadways providing access to the
subject lot or lots have been constructed, or are in the course of
construction.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.87  RECORDATION OF PLAT ONLY UPON APPROVAL.



   No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the County Recorder's
office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner
prescribed by this chapter.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.88  RECORD OF PLATS.



   All records of such plats for subdivision, after the same have been
submitted and approved, as provided in this chapter, shall be copied upon a
book of plats of the village and shall be filed and kept by said village
among the records of the village with one copy forwarded to the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.89  VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   When the subdivider can show that a provision of these
regulations, if strictly adhered to, would cause unnecessary hardship, and
when in the opinion of the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission,
because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, a
departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission may recommend a variance or
modification to the Village Board of Trustees.  The subdivider shall apply
in writing for such variance or modification of the action to the
Administrative Officer.  Any variance or modification thus authorized by the
Village Board shall be attached to and made a part of the final plat.



   (B)   Whenever a subdivision is developed under the planned
development provisions of Chapter 159, wherein adequate park or playground
area is provided, through traffic is adequately cared for, the majority of 
the minor streets  are of the cul-de-sac type, the Village President and
Board of Trustees may vary the requirements of §§ 156.20 through 156.22 and
156.35 through 156.40 in order to allow the subdivider more freedom in the
arrangement of the street and lots, but at the same time, protect the
convenience, health, welfare, and safety of the probable future residents of
the subdivision as well as the character of the surrounding property and the
general welfare of the entire village.  In no case, however, shall the
average lot area per family requirement be less than is required in any
zoning regulations applying to the property; or in the absence of any zoning
regulations, the average lot area per family shall not be less than 10,000
square feet for single-family residences nor less than 3,000 square feet per
family for lots upon which the residences are to be erected for more than one
family.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 156.90  OFFICIAL PLAN.



   The Physical Development Plan, along with all supporting plans, as
amended, shall be, and is designated as the Official Plan of the village, and
is implemented by the adoption of this subdivision control chapter.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any or all of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500 for each
offense.  Each day or portion of a day thereof shall be deemed a separate
offense in the event such violation continues.



APPENDIX A:  PROJECT IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES



   The purpose of this appendix is to establish a procedure which will
insure performance guarantees for underground and surface improvements in all
subdivisions, planned developments, and other projects.  This appendix as
presented herein is not intended to change the subdivision ordinance which
regulates all improvements but to clarify § 156.23.



   (A)   The completion bond shall be acknowledged before a notary
public by the principal and surety and shall be substantially the same form.



   STANDARD COMPLETION BOND



      1.   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT WE,           
                                      as principal and as
surety, are firmly bound to the Village of Orland Hills, Illinois, in the
penal sum $              , lawful money of the United States of
America, for the payment of such sum well and truly to be made, we bind
ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, jointly and
severally, by these presents.



            The condition of the above obligation is such that:



   WHEREAS,                                         
      has obtained, according to law and ordinances of the Village of
Orland Hills, approval of the (Plat of                        ),
being a Subdivision of                                   
    in              County, Illinois, conditioned upon (a) that by 
            date the making of certain land improvements, to wit:   
                                                   
                        as more fully described in plans dated  
                and prepared by                   ; and (b)
the execution and delivery of this bond.



      NOW, If the said                                
            shall well and faithfully and in a good and workmanlike
manner of good materials according to law and ordinances of the Village of
Orland Hills, and in conformity with said plans dated              ,
construct said improvements, pay for all labor and materials used therein and
pay all inspection fees payable to said Village by reason of such
construction.



      THEN THIS OBLIGATION shall be null and void; otherwise the same
shall remain in full force and effect.



      IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and seals this
day of            , 19    .



                                    



               Principal



                                    



               Surety



      2.   NOTARY CERTIFICATE



            STATE OF ILLINOIS )  ss



            COUNTY OF        ) 



      I,                                  ,  Notary
Public in and for said County, in the state aforesaid, do hereby certify
that                        , personally known to me to be the
same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared
before me this day in person and acknowledge that they signed the above
instrument as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes
therein set forth.



      Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this          day of
              , 19    .



                                         



            Notary Public



   (B)   The  escrow  agreement  required  by § 156.23 shall be in
substantially the same form as follows:



   STANDARD ESCROW AGREEMENT



   This Agreement made and entered into this        day of        
      , A.D. 19    by and between                          
                                  of



                  (name)



                                           ,
hereinafter



                  (address)



   sometimes referred to as "Owner", the VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILLS, a
Municipal Corporation of the State of Illinois, hereinafter sometimes
referred to as "Village", and                           , an
Illinois banking corporation, sometimes hereinafter referred to as "escrowee".



   W I T N E S S E T H:



   WHEREAS, Owner is the legal title owner of the following described
parcel of real property located in the Village and described as follows, and
sometimes hereinafter referred to as the "subdivision, to wit:



   (DESCRIPTION)



   WHEREAS, Owner has applied for approval of a plat of subdivision of
said land to be known as                               ; and



   WHEREAS, the Village of Orland Hills Subdivision Regulations Ordinance,
as amended, requires as a condition of such approval and recording of such
plat, among other things, the guaranteeing of installation of certain public
improvements in accordance with plans and specifications approved by and on
file with the Village Engineer, or and in accordance with the Ordinances of
said Village; and,



   WHEREAS, the Owner has submitted to said Village and said Village has
approved plans and specifications entitled:                      
                                                   
        prepared by                                    
                                                   
   



                  (Engineer)



   for the construction of required public improvements as described in
the aforesaid plans and specifications, sometimes hereinafter called the
improvements, and,



   WHEREAS, the Owner has requested Village to waive the furnishing of a
bond as required by its said Subdivision Ordinance, as amended, and to accept
in lieu thereof a deposit of $         to be deposited in an escrow in
the manner hereinafter directed; and,



   WHEREAS, streets, sewer and water are required in said subdivision; and



   WHEREAS, Village is willing to enter into this Agreement and to grant
approval of the said plat upon the condition that the deposit be made in the
manner herein provided shall be used prior to the termination of the escrow,
as herein provided solely to pay:



         A.   The actual costs of construction of the aforesaid
street, sewer and water improvements;



         B.   The engineering and inspection fees of the Village;



         C.   The costs of maintaining said improvements for a
period of one year after the date an acceptance of said improvements by
Village, sometimes hereinafter referred to as the one year maintenance
period; and



         D.   Any customary expense of the subdivider in meeting
any requirements of the Ordinances of Village pertaining to the aforesaid
Subdivision, in the event that the Owner fails to meet said requirements and,
Owner further agrees that sufficient funds shall be maintained at all times
on deposit with escrowee for such purposes; and,



   WHEREAS, the Owner, in consideration of the waiver of a Subdivision
bond and the approval to be made of such plat of Subdivision by the Village,
agrees to:



         A. 1.   Make and pay for the public improvements
described in the aforesaid plan and specifications;



         B. 2.   Pay for all engineering and inspection fees
incurred by the Village as a result of the construction of improvements and
development of the Subdivision and whether incurred prior to, on or after the
date of this agreement;



         C. 3.   Pay for the costs of maintenance of the
improvements during the one year maintenance period; and



         D. 4.   Pay all customary expense of the subdivider in
meeting any requirements of the ordinances of the Village pertaining to the
aforesaid Subdivision, all of the foregoing, except C above, within two (2)
years from the date hereof, and from the said escrow deposit to the extent of
the monies therein and otherwise by Owner as may be necessary.



   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements
hereincontained, and other good and valuable considerations, the parties
hereto do covenant and agree each with the other as follows:



   1.   That Owner will deposit with the escrowee the sum of $      
                to be held by the escrowee, subject to the terms and
provisions hereof, and that no other agreement with regard to the holding or
disbursement of said funds shall be in effect unless it is approved in
writing by Owner, filed by Owner with the Clerk of Village, approved in
writing by Village, and a copy thereof certified by the Clerk of Village
delivered to the escrowee, and attached to this Agreement.



         2.   Escrowee shall hold said sum on deposit to be
disbursed from time to time payout orders issued by Village Engineer or
Village in payment for work as follows:



            a.   The cost of installation of the aforesaid
street, sewer and improvements;



            b.   Payment for all costs of engineering and
inspection fees incurred by the Village as a result of the construction of
the improvements in and development of the Subdivision and whether incurred
prior to, on, or after that date of this Agreement;



            c.   Payment of the costs of maintenance of said
improvements during the one year maintenance period; and



            d.   Payment of all customary expenses of the
subdivider in meeting any requirements of the Ordinances of Village
pertaining to the aforesaid Subdivision.



      Village or escrowee shall not be required to investigate the
property of any payout orders other than as they deem necessary in their own
interest, if said payout orders are in writing executed by the Village
Engineer, the escrowee shall not be required to investigate the propriety of
any payout orders that it deems necessary in its own interests of said payout
orders are in writing executed by Village.



         3.   That if, at any time before the construction of all
required improvements has been completed, the balance remaining on deposit
with escrowee is not sufficient, in the sole judgement of Village, to cover
all costs as enumerated in paragraph 2 above, or, if by reason of any order,
decree or writ of any court, or for any other reason, the money deposited in
said escrowee shall be withheld, diminished or otherwise unavailable for the
purposes expressed herein for which said deposit was made, Owner agrees to
cause to be deposited with escrowee such additional reasonable sum of money
as shall be required by Village to complete the construction of the
improvements and the performance of this Agreement or Owner shall provide
such other guarantee of said performances as may be required by Village (e.g.
irrevocable straight commercial letter of credit).



         4.   The parties further agree that upon acceptance by
the President and Board of Trustees of Village  of the said public
improvements as referred to by adoption of a resolution, and upon payment of
Items a and b as specified in Paragraph 2 of this Agreement, Village agrees
that any balance remaining undisbursed shall be refunded to Owner except the
sum of $      which shall be withheld for a period of one (1) year to pay
Items c and d as specified in Paragraph 2 of this Agreement, to the extent
that said costs have not been previously paid by Owner, and such sums shall
be paid from said undisbursed balance of funds for such purposes on the
written direction of the Village to the Escrowee.  Upon the expiration of
the one year maintenance period, Escrowee shall, upon receipt of notice in
writing from the Village Engineer that all requirements of the ordinances of
Village applicable to the aforesaid subdivision and public improvements have
been met and the costs of maintaining the improvements during the one year
maintenance period have been paid, pay over to owner or shall apply in
reduction of the principal balance of Owner's development loan, without
further demand or notice, any balance of funds then remaining undisbursed
under said letter of credit.



         5.   In the event that the Village Engineer shall
determine, in the sole exercise of his judgement, that Owner has failed to
install such improvements in accordance with said plans and specifications,
or has failed to maintain, repair or replace the same as hereinabove
provided, or has failed to maintain a sufficient balance of funds under said
letter of credit as provided in paragraph 3 above, he shall advise Owner of
same in writing (with copy to Escrowee), giving Owner sixty (60) days
(weather permitting) to cure such default.  If owner fails to cure said
default, it is agreed that Village may, at its option, declare Owner in
default and, upon written notification to Escrowee of such declaration of
default, all money on deposit pursuant to this Agreement shall and may be
disbursed by Escrowee for the purpose of curing such default of Owner solely
upon authorization of Village Engineer and Escrowee shall be released by
Owner as to such payment or payments.



         6.   In the event said improvements are not accepted by
the President and Board of Trustees of Village within two (2) years from the
date hereof, and if Escrowee thereafter shall elect by a writing delivered to
Village to terminate its letter of credit issued pursuant hereto, Village
shall be limited to one (1) year from the date of said writing to complete
said improvements and to authorize payment of such funds as are necessary
therefor out of the funds held by Escrowee.  If Village shall fail to
complete said improvements within one (1) year from date of said writing,
Escrowee, at its option, may apply all or any part of such funds to the
completion of said improvements or to the reduction of Owner's indebtedness
to Escrowee, if any, with respect to the above described real property,
without the authority, direction or approval of any other party to this
Agreement and, thereupon, Escrowee shall be fully relieved from the terms and
conditions of the Agreement and released from its obligations under the
letter of credit delivered pursuant to this Agreement, provided that any such
funds then remaining undisbursed shall be paid and delivered to Owner. 
Notwithstanding any portion of this paragraph to the contrary upon acceptance
of said improvements by the President and Board of Trustees, either upon
completion by Owner or Village, Escrowee will retain the sum of $        
for the one year maintenance period as provided in paragraph 4 hereof.



         7.   Village agrees that it will sign said plat of
subdivision when, but not before, Owner and Escrowee have executed this
Agreement and Owner has made the foregoing escrow deposit.



         8.   If at any time the Village Engineer shall notify
Escrowee in writing that the balance of funds then remaining undisbursed
under said letter of credit is more than sufficient to cover the cost of
construction, fees, and maintenance hereinabove provided, which said notice
shall specify the reduced balance then deemed sufficient, and if Escrowee
shall concur in such development, Escrowee shall pay over to Owner or shall
apply in reduction of the principal balance of owner's development loan, any
excess of funds over such reduced balance then remaining undisbursed under
said letter of credit.



         9.   This Agreement shall be binding upon and shall
inure to the benefit of each of the respective parties and their respective
successors and assigns.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their respective hands
and seals the day and year first above written.



                                          
         



                                 Owner



         ESCROWEE            VILLAGE OF ORLAND HILL, a
Municipal Corporation



         BY:                         BY:         
           



                                 President



         ATTEST:                     ATTEST:       
         



                                 Clerk



   (Notarizations to be added)



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)



APPENDIX B:  CONSTRUCTION OF PORTLAND CEMENT SIDEWALKS; STANDARD
SPECIFICATIONS



   (A)   General.  The work performed under these standards shall
consist of the construction of Portland cement concrete sidewalks constructed
as described herein.  Such sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet
and a minimum thickness of five inches except the thickness shall be six
inches where passing across an existing or proposed driveway and where
passing over public utility lines.  The length of the thickened slab where
passing over public utility lines shall be a minimum of ten feet.  New
sidewalks abutting existing sidewalks shall be constructed to meet the grade
of such sidewalks or as may be directed by the Village Engineer or his
representative.  The location of sidewalks and grade for sidewalks when no
adjacent sidewalks exist, shall be as directed by the Village Engineer or his
representative.



   (B)   Materials.  All materials shall comply with the following
standards of quality:



Materials               Standards



(1)   Portland cement      ASTM C-150 Type  I, Normal



               ASTM C-150 Type  III, High- Early-  Strength



(2)   Fine aggregate         ASTM C-33, clean    sand grated 
  between #100 and  #4 sieve limits



(3)   Course aggregate      ASTM C-33,        uncoated crushed 
  stone or washed    gravel



(4)   Water            Potable and fit to drink



(5)   Water-reducing admixture   ASTM C494 Type A    (normal) or
Type    D (retarder)



(6)   Air entraining agent      ASTM C-260



(7)   Premolded filler strips      ASTM D-994



(8)   Curing compound      ASTM C-309, Type  I



(9)   Reinforcement         ASTM A615, Grade  40



   (C)   Concrete quality.



      (1)   Use ready-mix concrete, complying with ASTM C-94 and
supplied by a ready-mix source which is inspected yearly by the State Highway
Department, unless otherwise permitted by the Village Engineer or his
representative.  Delivery tickets shall note the mix designation, time
dispatched, date, project, and contractor, and shall be available for review
by the Village Engineer or his representative.



      (2)   Concrete mix design shall be contractor's
responsibility.  Prior to concrete delivery, submit a report from a
Commercial Testing Laboratory on the proposed mix proportions to the Village
Engineer for approval.  Prior to concrete delivery, submit laboratory
reports on 7- and 28-day strengths of each proposed mix.  No concrete will
be allowed to be placed until the mix designs have been approved.



      (3)   Concrete mix shall be designed using the following data:



         (a)   Minimum compressive strength of 3500 psi at 28
days.



         (b)   Minimum of six sacks of cement per cubic yard.



         (c)   Maximum size aggregate of one inch.



         (d)   Air entrainment of 6% ± 1%.



         (e)   Maximum slump of four inches.



         (f)   Maximum water content including moisture in the
aggregate of six gallons per sack of cement.



         (g)   All concrete shall contain a water- reducing
admixture with no reduction in cement content permitted.



   (D)   Subgrade preparation.  Where a fill condition exists, remove
all topsoil and unsuitable material.  Tamp or roll subgrade before placing
granular fill.  Fill shall be placed in six inch layers to the proper
subgrade elevation.  Side slopes of fill material shall not exceed one foot
vertical to three feet horizontal.  Where a cut condition exists, remove all
topsoil and unsuitable material and remove subgrade to the proper elevation
allowing sufficient width to accommodate the forms.



   (E)   Granular base.  Place a granular base of two inch minimum
thickness on the prepared subgrade.  The base shall extend the full width of
the sidewalk.



   (F)   Forms.  Side forms shall be of lumber of not less than two
inches nominal thickness or steel of equal rigidity.  No two by four lumber
forms will be permitted.  Forms shall be held securely in place by stakes or
braces with the top edge true to line and grade.  The forms for the sidewalk
shall be set so that the slab will have a fall of one-inch vertical to four
feet horizontal from the edge nearest the property line toward the edge
farthest from the property line, except as may be otherwise directed by the
Village Engineer or his representative.



   (G)   Reinforcing.  Reinforcing bars shall be embedded in the
concrete at mid-depth in a longitudinal direction over all existing water or
sewer services or other utilities buried beneath the sidewalk.  Three
¾-inch diameter bars, each with a minimum length of ten feet shall be
installed over each utility.  The bars shall be equally spaced across the
width of the sidewalk.



   (H)   Expansion joints.  Expansion joints of the thickness
specified below shall consist of a pre-molded filler strip with the top of
the strip placed ¼ inch below the surface of the sidewalk.



      (1)   One-half inch thick expansion joints.  Expansion joints
½-inch thick shall be placed between the sidewalk and all structures such as
light standards, traffic light standards, and traffic poles, which extend
through the sidewalk.



      (2)   Three-fourth inch thick expansion joints.  Expansion
joints ¾-inch thick shall be placed at intervals of 50 feet in the sidewalk
where specified by the Village Engineer.  Where the sidewalk is constructed
adjacent to pavement or curb having expansion joints, the expansion joints in
the sidewalk shall be placed opposite the existing expansion joints as nearly
as practicable.  Expansion joints shall also be placed where the sidewalk
abuts existing sidewalks, between driveway pavement and sidewalk, and between
sidewalk and curbs where the sidewalk abuts a curb.



   (I)   Placing and finishing concrete.



      (1)   Notify the village when the subgrade has been finished
with a minimum of 24 hours notice prior to placing concrete.  No concrete
shall be placed until the subgrade has been inspected and approved by the
village.



      (2)   The subgrade shall be moistened just before the concrete
is placed.  The concrete shall be placed in successive batches for the
entire width of the slab, struck off from ½ to ¾ inch higher than the
finished slab, tamped until all voids are removed and free mortar appears on
the surface, thoroughly spaded along the edges, struck off to the true grade,
and finished to a true and even surface with floats and trowels.  The final
troweling shall be done with a steel trowel, leaving a smooth, even
surface.  After the water sheen has disappeared, the surface shall be given
a final finish by brushing with a fine-hair broom.  The broom shall be drawn
across the sidewalk at right angles to the edges of the walk, with  adjacent
strokes slightly overlapping, producing a uniform, slightly roughened surface
with parallel marks.



      (3)   Control joints shall be constructed at right angles to
the center line of the sidewalk and shall extend to ¼ the depth of the
sidewalk.  They shall not be less than 1/8 inch nor more than  ¼ inch in
width, and shall be edged with an edging tool having a ¼-inch radius.  All
slabs shall be five feet long on any one side, unless otherwise ordered by
the Village Engineer or his representative.



   (J)   Protecting from low temperatures.  After the first seasonal
frost, protect concrete from freezing for not less than 48 hours after
placing.  The contractor shall be responsible for all concrete damaged by
low temperatures and any concrete so damaged shall be removed and replaced by
him at his expense.



   (K)   Curing.



      (1)   Sidewalks must be cured by one of the following methods:



         (a)   Place burlap on the finished surface, saturate
with water and cover with an impermeable covering.



         (b)   Place polyethylene sheeting as soon as the
concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent marring of the surface.  Wet
the surface of the concrete immediately before the sheeting is placed.  The
edges of the sheeting shall be weighted securely with a continuous windrow of
earth or any other means satisfactory to the village to provide an airtight
cover.



         (c)   Apply specified curing compound with brush,
roller, or spray at the rate of one gallon for every 250 square feet of
sidewalk.



      (2)   Any of the above curing methods must remain in place for
not less than six days.



   (L)   Backfill.  After the concrete has been cured, forms shall be
removed and the space near the edges of the sidewalk shall be backfilled to
the required elevation with material approved by the village.  The material
shall then be compacted until firm and the surface evenly graded.



   (M)   Disposal of surplus material.  Surplus or waste material
resulting from the sidewalk construction operation shall be disposed of by
the contractor.



   (N)   Control of materials.  The contractor shall, at his expense,
have a commercial testing laboratory prepare and test samples of delivered
concrete.  One set of tests shall be taken for the first 25 cubic yards and
one set of tests shall be taken for each 50 cubic yards.  A set of tests
shall consist of four standard cylinders (two shall be broken at seven days
and two shall be broken at 28 days), one slump test, and one air content
test.  The laboratory shall perform tests in accordance with recognized ASTM
standards and shall submit written reports of such tests to the village for
review.



   (O)   Guarantee.



      (1)   All work constructed under these standards shall be
guaranteed by the contractor to be free from defects in workmanship and
materials for a period of one year from the date of written acceptance of the
completed work by the village.  He shall replace or repair any defective
work or material upon written notice from the village that such defects exist.



      (2)   A bond shall be deposited with the village in the amount
of 15% of the improvement cost at the time of acceptance of the sidewalk as
collateral security for the guarantee.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



APPENDIX C:  CONSTRUCTION OF PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE DRIVEWAY APRONS;
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS



   (A)   General.



      (1)   The work performed under these standards shall consist
of the construction of Portland cement concrete driveway aprons as described
herein.  The driveway apron, by definition, shall be that portion of the
driveway located between the sidewalk and the street.



      (2)   Residential driveway aprons shall have a minimum width
of ten feet for one-car driveways, 18 feet for two-car driveways, measured at
the sidewalk, and a width three feet greater at the curb.  All residential
aprons shall have a minimum concrete thickness of six inches, and a granular
base of five inches minimum compacted thickness.  Commercial and industrial
driveway aprons shall be constructed as directed by the Village Engineer.



      (3)   New driveway aprons abutting existing sidewalks or curbs
shall be constructed to meet the grade of such sidewalks or curbs, or as may
be directed by the Village Engineer.  The locations of driveway aprons and
grade for driveway aprons when no adjacent sidewalks or curb and gutter
exists, shall be as directed by the Village Engineer.  The maximum slope of
the driveway apron shall be 8%, and the minimum slope shall be 2% unless
otherwise permitted by the Village Engineer.



   (B)   Materials.  All materials shall comply with the following
standards of quality:



Materials                  Standards



(1)   Portland cement         ASTM C-150 Type  I, Normal ASTM
C-  150 Type III, High-  Early-Strength



(2)   Fine aggregate            ASTM C-33, clean    sand
graded    between #100 and  #4 sieve limits



(3)   Coarse aggregate         ASTM C-33,      uncoated
crushed    stone or washed    gravel



(4)   Water               Potable and fit to    drink



(5)   Water-reducing admixture      ASTM C-494 Type A  (normal)
or  Type D (retarder)



(6)   Air entraining agent         ASTM C-260



(7)   Premolded filler strips         ASTM D-994



(8)   Curing compound         ASTM C-309, Type  I



(9)   Reinforcement            ASTM A-615, Grade  40 or Grade
60.



   (C)   Concrete quality.



      (1)   Use ready-mix concrete, complying with ASTM C-94 and
supplied by a ready-mix source which is inspected yearly by the State
Division of Highways, unless otherwise permitted by the Village Engineer. 
Delivery tickets shall note the mix designation, time dispatched, date,
project, and contractor, and shall be available for review by the Village
Engineer or his representative.



      (2)   Concrete mix design shall be contractor's
responsibility.  Prior to concrete delivery, submit a report from a
commercial testing laboratory on the proposed mix proportion to the Village
Engineer for approval.  Prior to concrete delivery, submit laboratory
reports on seven and 28 day strengths of each proposed mix.  No concrete
will be allowed to be placed until the mix designs have been approved.



      (3)   Concrete mix shall be designed using the following data:



         (a)   Minimum compressive strength of 3500 psi at 28
days.



         (b)   Minimum of six sacks of cement per cubic yard.



         (c)   Maximum size aggregate of one inch.



         (d)   Air entrainment of 6% ± 1%.



         (e)   Maximum slump of four inches.



         (f)   Maximum water content including moisture in the
aggregate of six gallons per sack of cement.



         (g)   All concrete shall contain a water- reducing
admixture with no reduction in cement content permitted.



   (D)   Subgrade preparation.  Where a fill condition exists, remove
all topsoil and unsuitable material; tamp or roll subgrade until thoroughly
compacted before placing granular base; and fill shall be placed in six- inch
layers to the proper subgrade elevation.  Side slopes of fill material shall
not exceed one-foot vertical to three-feet horizontal.  Where a cut
condition exists, remove all topsoil and unsuitable material and remove
subgrade to the proper elevation allowing sufficient width to accommodate the
forms.



   (E)   Granular base.  Place a granular base of five- inch minimum
thickness on the prepared subgrade.  The base shall extend the full width of
the driveway apron.  Aggregate gradation shall conform to gradation CA6 of
the State Division of Highways standard specifications.



   (F)   Forms.  Side forms shall be of lumber of not less than two
inches nominal thickness or steel of equal rigidity.  The use of two by four
lumber forms is not permitted.  Forms shall be held securely in place by
stakes or braces with the top edge true to line and grade.



   (G)   Expansion joints.  Expansion joints shall be placed at the
junction of the driveway apron and the sidewalk and at the junction of the
driveway apron and the curb.  Such expansion joints shall be ½-inch thick
pre-molded filler strips with the top of the strip placed ¼-inch below the
surface of the driveway apron.



   (H)   Placing and finishing concrete.



      (1)   Notify the village when the subgrade has been finished,
with a minimum of 24 hours notice prior to placing concrete.  No concrete
shall be placed until the subgrade has been inspected and approved by the
village.



      (2)   Do not place concrete on ice or frozen subgrade.



      (3)   The subgrade shall be moistened just before the concrete
is placed.  The concrete shall be placed in successive batches for the
entire width of the slab, struck off from ½- to ¾-inch higher than the
finished slab, tamped until all voids are removed and free mortar appears on
the surface, thoroughly spaded along the edges, struck off to the true grade,
and finished to a true and even surface with floats and trowels.  The final
troweling shall be done with a steel trowel, leaving a smooth, even
surface.  After the water sheen has disappeared the surface shall be given a
final finish by brushing with a fine-hair broom.  The broom shall be drawn
across the driveway apron at right angles to the edges of the apron with
adjacent strokes slightly overlapping, producing a uniform, slightly
roughened surface with parallel marks.



      (4)   Control joints shall be constructed so as to divide the
driveway apron into sections which are approximately square, and having no
side longer than 15 feet.  The control joints shall be not less than
1/8-inch nor more than ¼-inch in width, and shall be edged with an edging
tool having a ¼-inch radius.  The minimum depth shall be 1-¼ inch.



   (I)   Cold-weather concreting.  After the first seasonal frost
protect concrete from freezing in accordance with "Recommended Practice for
Cold- Weather Concreting" (ACI 306).  The contractor shall be responsible
for all concrete damaged by low temperatures and any concrete so damaged
shall be removed and replaced by him at his expense.



   (J)   Curing.



      (1)   Driveway aprons must be cured by one of the following
methods:



         (a)   Apply specified curing compound with brush,
roller, or spray at the rate of one gallon for every 250 square feet of
surface.



         (b)   Place burlap on the finished surface, saturate
with water, and cover with an impermeable covering.



         (c)   Place polyethylene sheeting as soon as the
concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent marring of the surface.  Wet
the surface of the concrete immediately before the sheeting is placed.  The
edges of the sheeting shall be weighted securely with a continuous windrow of
earth or any other means satisfactory to the village to provide an airtight
cover.



      (2)   Any of the above curing methods must remain in place for
not less than six days.



   (K)   Backfill.  After the concrete has been cured forms shall be
removed and the space near the edges of the driveway shall be backfilled to
the required elevation with material approved by the village.  The material
shall be compacted then until firm and the surface evenly graded.



   (L)   Disposal of surplus material.  Surplus or waste material
resulting from the driveway apron construction operation shall be disposed of
by the contractor.



   (M)   Control of materials.  The contractor or owner shall, at his
expense, have a commercial testing laboratory prepare and test samples of
delivered concrete.  One set of tests shall be taken for the first 25 cubic
yards or fraction thereof, and one set of the tests shall be taken for each
additional 50 cubic yards.  A set of tests shall consist of four standard
cylinders (two shall be broken at seven days and two shall be broken at 28
days), one slump test and one air content test. The laboratory shall perform
tests in accordance with the recognized ASTM standards and shall submit
written reports of such tests to the Village Engineer for review.



   (N)   Guarantee and bond.



      (1)   All work constructed under these standards shall be
guaranteed by the contractor to be free from defects in workmanship and
materials for a period of one year from the date of written acceptance of the
completed work by the village.  He shall replace or repair any defective
work or material upon written notice from the village that such defects exist.



      (2)   A bond shall be deposited with the village in the amount
of 15% of the improvement cost at the time of acceptance of the driveway
aprons as collateral security for the guarantees.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



APPENDIX D:  STORM WATER DETENTION; STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS



   (A)   General.  It is recognized that the receiving streams and
storm sewers within the area of the village do not have the capacity to
receive and convey the increased storm water runoff resulting from rapid
urbanization occurring in the village and adjacent areas.  These receiving
streams and storm sewers are subject to frequent flooding which results in a
growing rate of property damage.  It is the intent of this specification
that detention storage of storm water be provided to eliminate the excessive
storm water runoff caused by the reduction or elimination of previous land
surfaces through the construction of buildings, parking lots, streets, and
other improvements to real estate.



   (B)   Requirements.  A building permit will not be issued unless
the applicant provides on-site detention of storm water runoff or
participates in the provision of a village approved regional detention
facility as set forth in the following criteria:



      (1)   A combination of storage and controlled release of storm
water runoff is required for all residential developments exceeding five
acres in the area, for all residential developments of less than five acres
which have an impervious area of 50% or greater, for all nonresidential
developments exceeding two acres in area and for all nonresidential
developments of less than two acres which have an impervious area of 50% or
greater.  However, a residential development of five acres or less and a
nonresidential development of two acres or less must have an adequate outlet
as signified by the Village Engineer.  If the outlet is not adequate, then
detention, as determined by the Village Engineer, will be required to store
that portion of the runoff exceeding the outlet capacity.



      (2)   The release rate of storm water from all developments
requiring detention shall not exceed the storm water runoff rate from the
area of 0.15 cfs per acre.



         (a)   Because of the flat conditions of the land in this
area, channel configurations cut by nature are generally unable to handle the
runoff from high intensity rainfalls and results in flood plain storage or
spreading of runoff over the land areas during the larger  storm periods. 
In order not to increase the runoff from such areas after development, the
release rate must be limited to carrying capacity of these natural channels.



         (b)   The village will accept the release rate of not
greater than that calculated from a storm of three-year frequency with a
runoff rate coefficient of 0.15 three-year frequency storm of two- hour
duration or 100-year frequency storm of four-hour duration, unless the
applicant can show by his detail calculations, which are acceptable by the
village that the discharge rate of the natural outlet channel serving the
area is greater.  In the event the downstream channel capacities are less
than the above specified release rates, the release rates from the proposed
area shall be reduced to match that available downstream capacity.



      (3)   Drainage systems shall have adequate capacity to bypass
through the development the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of
design frequency assuming that the land is in a fully developed state under
present zoning or zoning proposed under the Official Plan.  The bypass flow
rate shall be computed utilizing a runoff coefficient of not less than
0.35.  An allowance will be made for upstream detention when such upstream
detention and release rate has previously been approved by the village and
evidence of its construction can be shown.



      (4)   The detention volume required shall be that necessary to
handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any and all durations, from the
fully developed drainage area tributary to the reservoir less that volume
discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate.  The live
detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the
100-year and three-year frequency rainfalls as published by the U.S. Weather
Bureau for the Chicago area.



      (5)   Detention facilities for developments within the village
shall be subject to the approval of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of
Greater Chicago, the approval of the Village Engineer and the Village Board
of Trustees.



      (6)   Designs for fencing, embankment slopes, depth of
permanent pools, protection of inlets and outlets, screenings, physical
shape, and appearance shall be as determined and approved by the Village
Engineer.



(Ord. 77-05, passed 4-6-77)  Penalty, see § 156.99



APPENDIX E:  STREET LIGHTING; STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS



   Street lighting shall consist of a 25-foot concrete pole with six-foot
bracket or type approved by the Board of Trustees with 150 watt sodium vapor
luminaire, lamp, and ballast.  Cable HG x LP use shall be buried in a
one-inch poly duct.  The developer will cause to light and maintain all
street lights for a period of 12 months from date of acceptance of said
lights by the corporate authorities after inspection and approval by the
Village Engineer.



(Ord. 85-13, passed 10-9-85)  Penalty, see § 156.99



CHAPTER 157:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



General Provisions



   157.01   Purpose



   157.02   Compliance required



   157.03   Definitions



   157.04   Permit required; fee



   157.05   Public pools; requirements adopted by reference



   157.06   Private pools; requirements



   157.07   Enclosure of swimming pool



   157.08   Liability for maintenance



Additional Requirements



   157.20   Construction



   157.21   Pool markings



   157.22   Walk areas and rinsing unit



   157.23   Hours of use



 



   157.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 157.01  PURPOSE.



   The village annexed the provisions of this chapter solely for the
purpose of protecting the citizens of the village and for the health, safety,
and welfare of its residents.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82)



§ 157.02  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   Every swimming pool constructed, installed, or maintained hereafter,
shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.  All swimming
pool equipment installed hereafter for use in public or private swimming
pools shall conform to the applicable National Sanitation Foundation
Standards, which are hereby adopted by reference, three copies of said
requirements being filed in the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82) Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PRIVATE POOL.  Any swimming pool or wading pool over two feet in depth
at a private residence intended only for the use of the individual owner, his
family, or friends.  This is to include portable or temporary type pools of
plastic, rubberized cloth, or similar materials installed or placed above
ground elevation.



   PUBLIC POOL.  All swimming and wading pools other than private
residence pools.  This is to include park district, association, club, and
school pools, as well as those for the use at apartment houses, condominiums,
motels, and hotels.



   SWIMMING POOL.  Any artificial basin of water exceeding two feet in
depth improved, modified, constructed, or installed for the purpose of
swimming or wading.



   TEMPORARY POOL.  A private pool above ground level that is removable
when not in use.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82)



§ 157.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   Every swimming pool with a depth greater than two feet must
have a permit for installation issued by the Building Commissioners prior to
beginning construction.



   (B)   A permit fee of $40 shall be payable upon issuance of said fee.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 6-2-88; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02) Penalty, see §
157.99



§ 157.05  PUBLIC POOLS; REQUIREMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Public pools, their bather preparation facilities, equipment, and
operation, shall comply with the Illinois Department of Public Health Minimum
Sanitary Requirements for Swimming Pools and Bathing Places, which are hereby
adopted by reference, three copies of said requirements being on file in the
office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82) Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.06  PRIVATE POOLS; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following requirements shall be applicable to all private
swimming pools:



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   No portion of the pool shall be located in the
property frontage of any premises.



         (b)   No portion of the pool shall be located in the
side yard area; that is the area between the corner side property line and
the building corner side property line, and the building corner line and the
building setback line as defined in the zoning ordinance for a corner lot,
unless the side yard area is fenced with a privacy fence as defined in the
village fence ordinance not less than five feet in height.



         (c)   No portion of the pool shall be located closer
than two feet horizontally to any buried power cable and no closer than ten
feet horizontally to any overhead power line.



      (2)   Water supply and pH.



         (a)   Every private pool shall be equipped with suitable
facilities for the initial filling of the pool, and for adding make-up water
as needed.



         (b)   The water supply for private pool shall be secured
from water works distribution system servicing the village.



         (c)   There shall be no physical connection between the
water supply line and the pool system.



         (d)   The fresh water supply point of discharge to the
pool, whether through hose or pipe, shall be firmly fixed at least six inches
above the overflow level of the pool; or, if a surge of balancing tank is
used, the point of discharge shall be firmly fixed at least six inches above
the rim of the tank.  When a hose connection from a sill cock or other
plumbing fixture is used, an approved vacuum breaker shall be installed
between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and the hose
connection.  The vacuum breaker shall be installed at a height not less than
seven feet six inches above the floor, platform, or ground upon which a
person would stand when operating the sill cock or control valve.



         (e)   The water when in the pool shall be clear and
non-turbid within the pH range of 7.2 to 7.6.  A standard test kit to
determine the pH shall be provided at all private pools, and shall be used to
daily check on the adequacy of the pH treatment.



      (3)   Recirculation system.  Every private pool shall be
equipped with a water recirculation system.  The recirculation system shall
consist of pumping equipment; a hair and lint catcher; rapid pressure
filters, together with all necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and
outlets and for backwashing the filters; and equipment for disinfecting the
pool water.



         (a)   Pump and filter capacity.  The recirculation pump
and filter tank and surface area shall be sufficient to achieve the minimum
turnover, filtration, and backwashing rates required by this chapter.



         (b)   Turnover period and filtration rate.  There shall
be one turnover of the entire contents of the pool every twelve hours or less
at a filtration rate of not more than three gallons per square foot of filter
area per minute.



         (c)   Hair and lint catcher.  A hair and lint catcher
shall be installed on the suction side of the recirculation pump to prevent
hair, lint, and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. 
The hair and lint catcher shall be designed that it can easily be dismantled
for cleaning and inspection.



         (d)   Filter backwashing and rate.  The filters shall
be backwashed at regular intervals at a minimum rate of ten gallons per
square foot of filter area per minute, or at the manufacturer’s recommended
backwash flow rate, whichever is greater.  The backwash cycle shall be
continued until the backwash is clear.  All backwash water and effluents
shall be discharged to the sewer through an indirect connection.



         (e)   Filtration equipment.  Every rapid pressure
filter shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of
head or pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes to determine frequency
of cleaning, and an access head or hole large enough to permit inspection,
maintenance, and repair work.  A sight glass that can be easily removed for
cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line from the filter unit. 
Operating instructions shall be properly designated with metal tags,
indicating purpose.



         (f)   Inlets and outlets.  Water circulation system
inlets shall be located to produce uniform circulation of water throughout
the pool and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlet.  A minimum of one
recirculation system inlet shall be provided for each 500 square feet or
fraction thereof of surface area of the pool.  The inlets shall discharge at
a minimum of ten inches below the pool overflow level.  A main outlet which
connects to the recirculation system shall be placed at the deepest point in
the pool and fitted with a safe grating.  No direct connection shall be made
from the outlet to the sewer.



         (g)   Water disinfection equipment.  Equipment shall be
provided for the disinfection of the pool water.  Any disinfection method
using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be subject to the written
approval of the Public Health Officer.  Disinfection equipment installed for
the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a
minimum free chlorine residual of 0.5 parts per million.  The disinfection
shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the filters.  A
test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at every private
pool, and be used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of the
chlorine treatment.



      (4)   Steps and ladders.



         (a)   In every pool having a depth of water greater than
two feet at least one means of egress in the form of steps or a ladder shall
be provided.



         (b)   In  every pool having both a shallow  and a deep
end, two or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided.  One such means of egress shall be at the deep end and at the
shallow end of the pool.



         (c)   Tread of steps and ladders shall be constructed of
non-slip material at least 2-½ inches wide for their full length, and shall
be equipped with a handrail on both sides.



      (5)   Electrical requirements.  All electrical installations
used with the pool shall be in compliance with the village code.  All
circuits will be with ground- fault circuit type of installation.  All metal
fences in the pool area shall be effectively grounded.



      (6)   Lighting.  A system of artificial lighting sufficient
to light all parts of the pool, the water therein, and the entire pool area
shall be permanently installed at all indoor pools and any outdoor pool to be
used at night.



      (7)   Operation and maintenance.



         (a)   Pool attended.  In pools having a water depth of
two feet or greater, such pool shall be attended by an adult when pool is in
use.



         (b)   Lifesaving equipment.  Every swimming or wading
pool having a depth of water two feet or greater shall be equipped with at
least one lifesaving device such as a ring or a strong pole with blunt ends
not less than 12 feet in length.



         (c)   Maintenance.  All pools and equipment shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 



         (d)   Nuisance and hazards.  No pool shall be used or
kept filled if these conditions are not maintained or if the pool or
equipment becomes a public health hazard or nuisance.



      (8)   Authority to close.  The President and the Board of
Trustees shall designate the person who shall have the authority to close any
pool immediately when failure to meet the sanitary and safety requirements of
this chapter constitutes an immediate, major hazard to health or life.



   (B)   All permanent private pools shall comply with the additional
regulations in §§ 157.20 through 157.25.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 88-15, passed 6-2-88) Penalty, see §
157.99



§ 157.07  ENCLOSURE OF SWIMMING POOL.



   (A)   Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by
a fence or enclosure of not less than four feet in height.  The fence or
enclosure shall not have openings in excess of four inches in length.  All
gates shall be of the self-closing and latching type.



   (B)   Fences that are part of the pool structure must measure in
excess of five feet in height as measured from the ground if the pool is not
enclosed by a conventional fence as previously described.



   (C)   Outside ladders are not allowed to be in place when the pool
is unattended.



   (D)   Any pool owner found filling a pool or with a filled pool
prior to installation of a fence as described in this section will be fined
as provided in § 157.99.



(Ord. 88-15, passed 6-2-88)



§ 157.08  LIABILITY MAINTENANCE.



   The village disclaims all liability as to pools within the village
recognizing that individual property owners must maintain and provide a
proper and safe pool.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82)



ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 157.20  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Wall slopes.  To a depth of five feet from the top, the wall
slope shall not be more than 1-½ feet horizontal and five feet vertical.



   (B)   Floor slopes.  The slope of the floor in the shallow end
shall not exceed one foot vertical to seven feet horizontal.  The transition
point between shallow and deep water shall not be less than 4-½ feet deep
and not more than five feet deep.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82) Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.21  POOL MARKINGS.



   The depth of the water at the shallow and deep ends, and at the
transition point between shallow and deep water, shall be clearly marked on
both sides of the pool.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82) Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.22  WALK AREAS AND RINSING UNIT.



   Unobstructed walk areas not less than 36 inches wide shall be provided
to extend entirely around the pool.  The walk area shall be constructed of
impervious material, and the surfaces shall be smooth and easily cleaned and
of nonslip construction.  The slope of the walls shall have a pitch of at
least ¼ inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from
entering the pool.  A foot rinse unit or hose shall be available for
cleaning the feet before entrance onto pool walks.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82) Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.23  HOURS OF USE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner or operator to use or
allow to be used any permanent public swimming pools between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, or between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day of the week.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82) Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter shall be fined
not more than $500 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each and every day which a violation continues or exists.



(Ord. 82-13, passed - -82)



CHAPTER 158:  TRAILER COACH PARKS



Section



General Provisions



   158.01   Definitions



   158.02   Certain provisions to be in accordance with state law



   158.03   Garbage



   158.04   Lights



   158.05   Use of trailer coach in licensed trailer camp



   158.06   Removal of wheels or alteration of structure; permit;
compliance



   158.07   Exceptions



Licensing



   158.20   License required; application



   158.21   License fees; proration



   158.22   Issuance of license



   158.23   Responsible supervision; person in  charge to be of good
character



 



   158.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 158.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TRAILER COACH.  Any vehicle or similar portable structure constructed
so as to permit its being used as a conveyance on a public street and so as
to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling by one or more persons.



   TRAILER COACH PARK.  An area of land on which two or more occupied
trailer coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue, together
with any building, structure, or enclosure used as part of the equipment of
such park.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 1) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 158.02  CERTAIN PROVISIONS TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW.



   (A)   Facilities.  The provision of Section 8, "An Act in Relation
to Licensing and Regulation of Trailer Coach Parks", as amended, and found in
Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 111½, Article 172, are hereby adopted by
reference as a part of this chapter.  All trailer coach parks shall provide
facilities in accordance with the terms of said statutory provision unless,
the terms of this chapter specifically conflict with the terms of said
statute.  ('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 7)



   (B)   Reports; street and driveways; sanitary and safety
appliances.  The provision of Section 11, "An Act in Relation to Licensing
and Regulation of Trailer Coach Parks", as amended, and found in Illinois
Revised Statutes, Chapter 111½, Article 175, are hereby adopted by reference
as a part of this chapter.  All trailer coach parks shall provide facilities
in accordance with the terms of said statutory provision unless the terms of
this chapter specifically conflict with the terms of said statute.  ('65
Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 8)



   (C)   Custodian's office; registry of school children.  The
provision of Section 12, "An Act in Relation to Licensing and Regulation of
Trailer Coach Parks", as amended, and found in Illinois Revised Statutes,
Chapter 111½, Article 176, are hereby adopted by reference as a part of this
chapter.  All trailer coach parks shall provide facilities in accordance
with the terms of said statutory provision unless the terms of this chapter
specifically conflict with the terms of said statute. ('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art.
11, § 9)



(Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see § 158.99



Editor's Note:



   The statutes cited in this section have been repealed. Current state
law in this area is as follows:



   Mobile Home Landlord and Tenant Rights Act, see ILCS Ch. 765, Act 745,
§ 1 et seq.



   Mobile Home Local Services Tax Act, see ILCS Ch. 35, Act 515, § 1 et
seq. 



   Mobile Home Park Act, see ILCS Ch. 210, Act 115, § 1 et seq.



   Mobile Home Tiedown Act, see ILCS Ch. 210, Act 120, § 1 et seq.



§ 158.03  GARBAGE.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or his agent or caretaker to provide
for the collection and removal of garbage or other waste material and to
otherwise maintain the park in a clean and sanitary condition.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 10) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty,
see § 158.99



§ 158.04  LIGHTS.



   The parks shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all times so
that the grounds shall be safe for occupants and visitors.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 11) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty,
see § 158.99



§ 158.05  USE OF TRAILER COACH IN LICENSED TRAILER CAMP.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any trailer coach, used
for human habitation, upon any plot of ground in the village except in a
licensed trailer camp.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 12) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty,
see § 158.99



§ 158.06  REMOVAL OF WHEELS OR ALTERATION OF STRUCTURE; PERMIT; COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or
other transporting device from any trailer coach or otherwise to affix said
trailer coach permanently to the ground as to prevent ready removal of such
trailer coach, unless a permit to do so is obtained as required for the
construction of a new building.  Any such alteration shall be construed as
converting the trailer coach into a building and subject to the requirements
of the zoning and building ordinances.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to occupy for sleeping or other residence
purposes any trailer coach which has been rendered immobile by the removal of
wheels, or placing the same on a foundation, or on the ground, unless such
trailer coach in construction and location complies with the ordinances
relating to the construction, wiring, plumbing, sewer facilities, and other
regulations applicable to single-family dwellings.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 12) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty,
see § 158.99



§ 158.07  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the storage of
any trailer coach for any length of time when said trailer coach is not used
for living or sleeping purposes.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 13) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



LICENSING



§ 158.20  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, or operate any
trailer coach park in the village without first having obtained a license
therefor.  Application for such licenses shall be made in writing to the
Village Clerk in compliance with the articles relating to license
applications, and shall contain the name of the applicant, the location of
the proposed park, and the number of trailers to be accommodated.  ('65
Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 2)



   (B)   Each such application shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch
showing the size and location of all buildings and structures.  ('65 Code,
Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 3)



(Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.21  LICENSE FEES; PRORATION.



   (A)   The annual fee for licenses shall be $100 plus $10 for each
trailer coach over ten for which accommodations exist.  If the number is
increased, this shall be reported to the Village Clerk, and the additional
fee, if any, necessitated by such increase shall be paid before the
additional spaces are put to use.



   (B)   When a license is applied for, or accommodations are increased
during the license year, the fee shall be prorated on the basis of the number
of months remaining in the license year.  However, during the first year of
operation of any Trailer Coach Park, a license fee shall be paid on the basis
of trailer accommodations actually occupied.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 4) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 158.22  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character,
nor to any corporation if any officer thereof is not a person of good
character.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 5) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



§ 158.23  RESPONSIBLE SUPERVISION; PERSON IN CHARGE TO BE OF GOOD CHARACTER.



   (A)   Each trailer coach park, while operated, shall be in charge of
a responsible attendant or caretaker at all times, who shall be responsible,
with the licensee, for compliance with the provisions of this chapter
relating to the conduct of such parks. ('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 6)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to hire or keep as a manager,
superintendent, or person in charge of a trailer coach park, any person who
is not a person of good character or any person who has been convicted of a
felony. ('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 5)



(Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65) Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $200 for each
offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.



('65 Code, Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 14) (Ord. 65-0-004, passed 6-3-65)



CHAPTER 159:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   159.001   Title



   159.002   Definitions



   159.003   Scope of regulations



   159.004   Permits



   159.005   Building height, bulk, and lot coverage



   159.006   Lot area and dimensions



   159.007   Location of buildings



   159.008   Buildings under construction



   159.009   Buildings on zoning lot



   159.010   Rezoning of public and semi-public areas



   159.011   Grade relationship of dwellings



   159.012   Agricultural exemptions



   159.013   Attachments to residential houses



Zoning Districts; Zoning Map



   159.025   District classifications



   159.026   Zoning map



   159.027   Zoning of streets, alleys, public-ways, and railroad
right-of-way



   159.028   Boundary lines



   159.029   Minimum areas for zoning districts



   159.030   New or annexed land



Residential Districts



   159.040   Purpose



   159.041   R-1 Single-Family Residential District



   159.042   R-2 Single-Family Residential District



   159.043   R-3 Single-Family Residential District



   159.044   R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District



   159.045   R-5 Multiple-Family Residential Districts



   159.046   R-6 Multiple-Family Residential Districts



Business Districts



   159.055   Purpose



   159.056   B-1 Business District, limited retail



   159.057   B-2 Business District, general retail, and service



   159.058   O-1 Office District



Manufacturing Districts



   159.070   Purpose



   159.071   M-1 Manufacturing District



Nonconforming Buildings and Uses



   159.085   Scope of requirements



   159.086   Certificate of nonconformity



   159.087   Restoration of nonconforming buildings



   159.088   Repairs, alterations, additions, and enlargements



   159.089   Extension of use



   159.090   Change of use



   159.091   Abandonment of use



   159.092   Elimination of nonconformities



   159.093   Residential nonconformities



Special Uses



   159.105   Purpose



   159.106   Authority



   159.107   Conditions of approval



   159.108   Procedure



   159.109   Planned developments



Accessory Buildings



   159.120   Conformance to regulations applicable to main buildings



   159.121   Location



   159.122   Erection prior to establishment of main building prohibited



   159.123   Accessory garage



Driveways and Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities



   159.135   Purpose



   159.136   Parking and loading; general requirements



   159.137   Use of parking facilities



   159.138   Joint parking facilities



   159.139   Control of off-site facilities



   159.140   Permitted districts for accessory parking



   159.141   Nonresidential parking in residential districts



   159.142   Design and maintenance



   159.143   Special use public parking areas



   159.144   Loading; design standards



   159.145   Location of parking area; extent of control



   159.146   Schedule of parking requirements



   159.147   Off-street loading and unloading facilities



Planning, Zoning and Development Commission



   159.160   Establishment, membership and term of office



   159.161   Meetings



   159.162   Appeals and review



   159.163   Variances



   159.164   Stay of proceedings



   159.165   [Reserved]



   159.166   Powers and duties



   159.167   Jurisdiction; zoning amendments and special use permits



   159.168   Land subdivision or resubdivision; official map



   159.174   Administrative review



Administration and Enforcement



   159.175   Zoning administrator; duties



   159.176   Enforcement officer; duties



   159.177   Occupancy permits



   159.178   Plats



   159.179   Changes and amendments



   159.180   Fees



   159.181   Preliminary expense and review agreement



   159.200   Conflicting references



   159.999   Penalty



   Appendix:   Zoning classifications; general plan standards



Cross-reference:



   Hearing proceedings and enforcement of building, housing and zoning
ordinance violations, see §§ 39.30 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 159.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Village
Zoning Code.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE.



      (1)   An ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE is one which:



         (a)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building
or principal use;



         (b)   Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the
principal building or principal use served;



         (c)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or
necessity of the occupants of the principal building or principal use served;



         (d)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building or principal use served with the single exception of such accessory
off-street parking facilities as are permitted to be located elsewhere than
on the same zoning lot with the building of use served.



      (2)   An ACCESSORY USE includes, but is not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   A child's playhouse, garden house, private
greenhouse;



         (b)   A garage, shed, or building for domestic storage;



         (c)   Incinerators incidental to residential use;



         (d)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock
on the same lot with any retail service of business use, unless such storage
is excluded by the district regulations;



         (e)   Storage of goods used in or produced by
manufacturing activities, on the same lot or parcel of grounds with such
activities, unless storage is excluded by the district regulations;



         (f)   A nonpaying guest house or rooms for guests within
an ACCESSORY BUILDING provided such facilities are used for the occasional
housing of guests of the principal building and not for permanent occupancy 
by others as housekeeping units;



         (g)   Servants' quarters comprising part of an accessory
garage and solely for occupancy by a servant or household employee (and his
family) of the occupants of the principal dwelling;



         (h)   Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and
loading and unloading facilities;



         (i)  Signs (other than advertising signs) are permitted
and regulated in each district incorporated in this chapter;



         (j)  Carports; and



         (k)  Public utility communication, electric, gas, water,
and sewer lines, their supports, and incidental equipment.



   ACREAGE.  Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or
more which has not been subdivided by metes and bounds or platted.



   AGRICULTURE.



      (1)   The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory
uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; however, the operation of
any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities.



      (2)   AGRICULTURE shall not include the commercial feeding of
garbage or offal to swine or other animals, the commercial feeding of animals
on the open lots where no feed is raised on the premises, or the commercial
feeding of poultry broilers or laboratory animals such as mice, rabbits,
rats, and the like.



   ALLEY.  A public way, not more than 30 feet wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.



   APARTMENT.  A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure
which is arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used as a single
housekeeping unit.  Complete kitchen, bath, and toilet facilities,
permanently installed, must always be included for each APARTMENT.



   APARTMENT HOUSE.  See DWELLING, MULTIPLE.



   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY.  A building, or portion thereof, where automobiles
are washed with the use of a chain conveyor and blower or steam-cleaning
device.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR.



      (1)   MAJOR.  Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of
worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including
body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting of vehicles.



      (2)   MINOR.  Incidental repair, replacement of parts and
motor services to automobiles, but not including any operation specified
under AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR above.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, stored only in
underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil, or grease, for operation of
automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public on the premises, and
including minor accessories and services for automobiles; but not including
major automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where no chain
conveyor, blower, or steam-cleaning device is employed.  When the
dispensing, sale, or offering for each of the motor fuels or oil is
incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage.  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS shall not
include sale or storage or junkers or junk yards as defined in this section.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD.  Any place where two or more motor vehicles
not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are
not being restored to operation, or any land, building, or structure used for
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicle or parts thereof, and including any
used farm vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open
and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial
salvaging of any other goods, articles, or merchandise.



   AWNING.  A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from
the wall of a building or overhangs the pubic way.



   BASEMENT.  A story having part but not more than one-half of its
height below grade.  A BASEMENT shall be counted as a story for the purposes
of height regulations.



   BASEMENT, LIVEABLE.  A basement, as defined in this section, which has
been provided with an outside entranceway; water closet, lavatory enclosed in
a separate room; and a glass area occupying a minimum of 10% of the outside
wall space above grade with one- half of said glass area being adaptable for
ventilation.



   BILLBOARD.  Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display.  This definition does not include
any bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display court or
other public office notices, or sign offering the sale or lease of the
premises on which the sign is located.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  A building other than a hotel or restaurant where
meals are provided or compensation to three or more persons, but not more
than 20, who are not members of the keeper's family.



   BLOCK.  A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or
streets, by a public park, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulk head
lines, or a corporate boundary line of a village.



   BUILDABLE AREA.  The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum
open space requirements of this chapter have been complied with.



   BUILDING.  Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely
affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other
structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors,
windows, or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter,
enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, or chattels.  Any structure
with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas
holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil cranking
towers, and other similar structures, are not considered as buildings. 
Also, includes all other structures of every kind regardless of the lack of
similarity of buildings.



   BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED.  A building separated on all sides from
the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls, pierced only by windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk
elevation or its equivalent established grades opposite the middle of the
front of the building to the highest point of the roof in the  case of a
flat roof, to the deckline of a mansard roof, and to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; provided that where
buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the building may
be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front
of the building.



   BUILDING, NON-CONFORMING.  Any building which does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter prescribing the maximum floor area ratio,
required yards, coverage, height and setbacks, minimum required spacing
between buildings on a single lot, and minimum required usable open space for
the district in which such building is located.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the main use of
the zoning lot on which it is situated.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  A line running parallel to the street line at
a distance from it, regulated by the front yard requirements set up in this
chapter.



   BULK.  The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of
buildings and other structures as to size, height, coverage, shape, location
of exterior walls, in relation to lot lines, to the center lines of streets,
to other walls of the same building, and to other buildings or structures,
and to all open spaces relating to the building or structure.



   CAR LOT.  A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers, or trucks
are displayed for sale or trade.



   CELLAR.  A story having more than one-half of its height below the
curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground.  A CELLAR
shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height requirements, and
shall not be used as separate living quarters.



   CLINIC or MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER.  An establishment where patients are
admitted for special study and treatment by two or more licensed physicians
and their professional associates, practicing medicine together.



   CLUB or LODGE, PRIVATE.  An association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building or
portion thereof.



   COURT.  An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot
with a building, which is totally or partially enclosed by a building or
buildings and is completely open to the sky.



      (1)   INNER.  A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls
of a building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowed.



      (2)   OUTER.  A court enclosed on not more than three sides
by exterior walls of a building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which
walls are allowable, with one side or end open to a street, driveway, alley,
or yard.



   CURB LEVEL.  See GRADE.



   DECK.  A level plane or platform which, for the purpose of this
chapter, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal structure
and is constructed in excess of six inches in height above the average level
of the adjoining ground.



   DENSITY, GROSS.  The numerical value obtained by dividing the total
number of dwelling units in a development by the total area of the tract of
land upon which the dwelling units are located.



   DENSITY, NET.  The numerical value obtained by dividing the total
number of dwelling units in a development by the total net area.  The net
area of a site is the gross area of the site subtracting the area of public
street rights-of-way and dedicated open space of the tract of land where the
dwelling units are located.



   DISTRICT.  A section or sections of the village for which the
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height of
buildings, or the size of yards, for intensity of use, are uniform.



   DRIVEWAY.  The paved area located between the curb of the roadway in
the public street and the open or enclosed parking area located behind the
front line of the dwelling unit.



   DWELLING.  A building or portion thereof, but not including a house
trailer or mobile home, designed to use exclusively for residential
occupancy, including single-family units, two-family units, two-family
dwelling units, and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels,
boarding houses, or lodging houses.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED (GROUP, ROW, or TOWNHOUSE).  A dwelling joined to
two other dwellings by party walls.



   DWELLING, DETACHED.  A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space,
said open space being on the same zoning lot as the building.



   DWELLING, GROUP.  Two or more single-family, or multiple-family
dwellings, or boarding or lodging houses, located on one zoning lot but not
including tourist courts, or motels.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building or portion thereof, designed or
altered for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each
other.



   DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED.  A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a
party wall.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A building designed exclusively for use and
occupancy by one family, and entirely separate from any other dwelling space.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A building designed or altered to provide
dwelling units to provide occupancy for two families.



   DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms in a residential structure,
apartment, hotel, designed for occupancy by one family for living and
sleeping purposes.



   EFFICIENCY UNIT.  A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room,
exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly
off of the principal room.



   FAMILY.  One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO.



      (1)   The FLOOR AREA RATIO of a building on any zoning lot is
the floor area of a building on that zoning lot divided by the area of such
zoning lot, or, in the case of planned unit developments by the net site
area.  The FLOOR AREA RATIO  requirements, as set forth under each zoning
district, shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building
or buildings (total floor area ratio of both principal and accessory
buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot.



      (2)   The floor area of a building shall include a basement
floor (basement as defined by this section); elevator shafts and stairwells
at each floor; floor space used for mechanical equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof; penthouses; attic space having headroom of seven feet
ten inches or more; interior balconies and mezzanines; and enclosed porches,
and floor area devoted to accessory uses.  However, any space devoted to
off-street parking or loading shall not be included in floor area.



   FRONTAGE.  That portion of a lot between the front building setback
line and the street right-of-way.  Every lot shall have only one  front
lot  line and shall be the narrowest  side of  the lot which adjoins a
street.  Where such lot lines are not obviously evident, the Board of
Trustees shall determine the front lot line.



   GARAGE. 



      (1)   BUS or TRUCK.  A building which is used or intended to
be used for the storage of motor trucks, truck-trailers, tractors, and
commercial vehicles exceeding 1-½ tons capacity, and passenger motor buses,
or motor coaches used in public transportation, including school buses.



      (2)   PRIVATE.  An accessory building housing not to
exceeding four motor driven vehicles (for example, automobiles, small trucks,
vans, self- propelled recreation vehicles, and the like), the property of and
for the use of the occupants of the lot on which the private garage is
located.



      (3)   PUBLIC.  A building other than a private garage, used
for the care, servicing, and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor
vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire, or sale within the
structure, but not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and commercial
vehicles exceeding 1-½ tons capacity.



   GRADE. 



      (1)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only,
the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.



      (2)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one
street, the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the center of all
walls adjoining the streets.



      (3)   For buildings having no walls adjoining the street, the
average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior
walls of the building.



      (4)   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than ten
feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.



   GROSS FLOOR SPACE (AREA).  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
all the floors, including attic as defined above under floor area ratio and
basement, in a building, which areas shall be measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of wall separating
buildings, as the case may be.



   HOME OCCUPATIONS.  A gainful occupation or profession customarily
carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use which is clearly
incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes.  The
HOME OCCUPATION shall be carried on wholly within the principal building or
within a building accessory thereto, and only by members of the family
occupying the premises and one person outside the family.  No article shall
be sold or offered for sale on the premises and no mechanical or electrical
equipment shall be installed or maintained other than such as is customarily
incidental to domestic use. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior
signs except as allowed by the sign regulations for the district in which
such HOME OCCUPATION is located, no exterior storage of materials, no other
exterior indication of the HOME OCCUPATION or variation from the residential
character of the principal building and no offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odors, heat, or glare shall be produced.  Offices, clinics, doctors'
offices, hospitals, barber shops, beauty parlors, dress shops, millinery
shops, tea rooms, restaurants, tourist homes, animal hospitals and kennels,
among others shall not be deemed to be HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   HOSPITALS or SANITARIUM.  An institution devoted primarily to the
maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, or care
for not less than 24 hours in any week of three or more nonrelated
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other
abnormal physical conditions.  The term HOSPITAL as used in this chapter
does not apply to institutions operating solely for the treatment of insane
persons, drug addicts, liquor addicts, or other types of cases necessitating
restraint of patients, and the term HOSPITAL shall not include convalescent,
nursing, shelter, or boarding homes.



   HOTEL/MOTEL, APARTMENT.  A building containing dwelling units or
individual guest rooms, the majority of which are for permanent guests. 
Maid and janitor services may be provided but kitchen facilities are not
necessarily included.



   HOTEL or MOTEL.  A building in which more than five rooms or suites
are reserved to provide living and sleeping accommodations for temporary
guests, with no provisions in said rooms for cooking in any individual room
or suite.



   HOUSEHOLDER.  The occupant of a dwelling  unit who is either the
owner or the lessee thereof.



   INSTITUTION.  A  building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a
nonprofit establishment for public use.



   JUNK YARD.  The use of more than 200 square feet of any lot where
waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto
and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses taking place entirely
within a completely enclosed building.



   JUNKER.  An automobile, truck, or other motor vehicle which has been
damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated under its own power and
will require major repairs before being made usable or such a vehicle which
doesn't comply with state or village vehicle laws or ordinances.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL.  Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which
more than four dogs, cats, and other household domestic animals, over four
months of age, are kept or on which more than two such animals are boarded
for compensation or for sale.



   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF- STREET.  An open hard-surfaced area
of land other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for
the standing, loading, and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers,
to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.  Such
space shall not be less than ten feet in width, 60 feet in length, and 14
feet in height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.



   LOT.  The word LOT when used alone shall mean a zoning lot unless the
context of this chapter clearly indicates otherwise.  Also, includes the
words PLOT,PIECE, and PARCEL.



   LOT AREA.  The area of the horizontal plan bounded by the vertical
extension of the front, side, and rear lot lines.



   LOT CORNER.  A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two or
more streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of the block.  On
corner lots, one side of the lot shall be defined as being a front lot
line.  The other lot line, adjacent to a street, shall be the corner side
lot line.



   LOT COVERAGE.  The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal
building or buildings and accessory buildings.



   LOT DEPTH.  The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (THROUGH).  A lot having frontage on two parallel
or approximately parallel streets, which is not a corner lot.  A through lot
shall have front property line on the minor street which serves to provide
access to the lot.  The rear lot line shall adjoin the major street.



   LOT INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner or reverse corner lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  The front property line of a lot.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  A side line common with another lot.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  The rear lot line is the lot line most parallel to
and most remote from the front lot line.  Lot lines other than front or rear
lot lines are side lot lines.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of
which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds; or a
parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds prior to the adoption of this chapter.



   LOT, REVERSED CORNER.  A corner lot, the side lot line adjoining a
street of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the
first lot to its rear.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured along the building setback line.



   MANUFACTURE.  The making of anything by an agency or process.



   MARQUEE or CANOPY.  A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way.



   NON-CONFORMING USE.  A building, structure, or land lawfully occupied
by a use or lawfully established at the time of the adoption of this chapter
or amendments hereto, which does not conform after the passage of this
chapter or amendments hereto with the use regulations of this chapter or
amendments for the districts in which it is situated.



   NURSING HOME or REST HOME.  A private home for the care of children,
or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily
disorders, but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or
injuries or for surgical care.



   NURSERY SCHOOL.  An institution providing day care service for the
children of pre-elementary school age.



   OPEN SALES LOT.  Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying or
selling merchandise stored or displayed out-of-doors prior to sale.



   PARKING AREA.



      (1)   PRIVATE.  A hard-surfaced area other than a street,
driveway, or public way, designed, arranged, and made available for the
storage of private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building
for which the parking area is devoted and is accessory.



      (2)   PUBLIC.  A hard-surfaced area other than a street or
public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under 1-½ tons capacity, and available to the public,
whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or
customers.



   PARKING SPACE (BAY), AUTOMOBILE.  Space within a public or private
parking area that shall be no less than nine feet in width, and 20 feet in
length, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and
work areas, for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle
under 1-½ ton capacity.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.  As defined in this chapter under § 159.109.



   PORCH.  A roofed-over structure, projecting out from the wall of a
main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Any person, firm, corporation, or municipal
department duly authorized to furnish under public regulations to the public
electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, water, solid
waste, or sewage systems.



   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operation, but not including depot, loading platforms,
stations, train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, or locomotive shops.



   RESTAURANT.  A business where the dispensing of edible foodstuff or
beverage on the premises is the principal business operation; including a
cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room, tearoom, and dining room, but not
including a drive-in restaurant.



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN or CARRY-OUT.  A restaurant, whose principal
business operation is the dispensing of edible foodstuff or beverage, ready
for consumption on the premises, in automobiles, at outdoor tables, or at
stand-up counters, or to be carried off the premises.



   RETAIL, STORE.  The sale to the ultimate consumer for direct
consumption and not for resale.



   SETBACK LINE, ESTABLISHED BUILDING.  When 50% or more of the lots
fronting on one side of a street within a block are improved, the existing
building setbacks of such improved lots shall be the ESTABLISHED BUILDING
SETBACK LINE for determining the required setbacks for the remainder of the
lots along such street frontage, as regulated in this chapter.



   SIGN.  Every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign,
illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, pylon or pole sign,
marquee, awning and canopy, and shall include any announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote
the interest of any person when the same is placed out of doors or in windows
facing a street in view of the general public.



   SIGN, FLASHING.  Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use.  For the purpose of this chapter, any revolving
illuminated sign shall be considered a FLASHING SIGN.



   SIGN, SURFACE AREA.  The surface area or facing of a sign shall mean
the surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is
displayed or illustrated on the sign.



   SPECIAL USE.  Any use of land or building, or both, described and
permitted herein, subject to the provisions of §§ 159.105 through 159.109.



   STORY.  That portion of a building including between  the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor  next above  it, or if there be no
floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. 
Any portion of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an
additional story for each 14 feet or fraction thereof.



   STORY, HALF.  A portion of a building under a gable, hip, or mansard
roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are
not more than 4-½ feet above the finished floor of such story.  In the case
of single-family dwellings less than three stories in height, a half-story in
a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this
chapter.  In the case of multiple-family dwellings three or more stories in
height, a HALF-STORY shall be counted as a story.



   STREET.  All property dedicated or intended for public highways,
freeways, roadways, or street purposes or subject to public easements thereof.



   STREET LINE.  A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land
and a continuous street.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having permanent
location on the ground, including but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, back stops for tennis courts, and
pergolas.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change other than incidental repairs
which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.



   TAVERN.  A building where alcoholic beverages are sold to be consumed
on the premises.



   TERRACE, OPEN; and PATIO. A level plane or platform which, for the
purpose of this chapter, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the
principal structure and is constructed not more than four feet in height
above the average level of the adjoining ground.



   TOOL SHED.  An accessory building for the storage of tools, equipment,
and supplies or materials utilized in the maintenance or improvement of the
lot upon which the tool shed is located.  No tool shed shall be used for the
conduct of a business or service.



   TRAILER.  A vehicle without motive power used or adaptable for living,
sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than
wheels, blocks,  skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, which does not  meet
the building code requirements and has been or reasonably may be equipped
with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to
place.  The term TRAILER shall include CAMP CAR and HOUSE CAR.  A permanent
foundation shall not change its character unless the entire structure is
erected in accordance with the village building code.



   TRAILER CAMP.  Any premises occupied or designed to accommodate one or
more families living in an automobile house trailer or mobile home that are
used for residential purposes, or the parking of one or more trailers for
business or storage purposes.



   TRUCK PARKING AREA or YARD.  Any land used or intended to be used for
the storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and including
commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading, and which exceed 1-½
tons in capacity.



   USE.  The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let, or
leased.



   USED FOR.  Includes the phrases ARRANGED FOR, DESIGNED FOR, FOR,
MAINTAINED FOR, and OCCUPIED FOR.



   VILLAGE PLANNER.  The individual or firm appointed by the Village
President by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees, to function, when
authorized by ordinance or by the President, in the administrative review of
specific planning and zoning applications.



   WHOLESALE.  Sale for resale not for direct consumption.



   YARD.  An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building
or group of building which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the lowest
level upward, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, and which
extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto, to a depth or width
specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is
located.



      (1)   FRONT.  A yard extending across the full width of the
lot and lying between the front lot line and the nearest building setback
line, which is unobstructed and unoccupied from its lowest level upward
except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.



      (2)   REAR.  A yard extending across the full width of the
lot lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the
principal building, which is unobstructed and unoccupied from its lowest
level upward except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.



      (3)   SIDE.  That part of the yard lying between the nearest
line of the principal building and the side lot line, and extended from the
required front yard to the required rear yard, which is unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level upward except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR (ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER).  An individual
appointed by the Village President by and with the consent of the Board of
Trustees, to administer and enforce this chapter.



   ZONING LOT.  A plot of ground made up of one or more parcels which is
or may be occupied by a use, building, or buildings, including the open
spaces required by this chapter.



   ZONING MAP.  The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as part
hereof, designating zoning districts.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78; Am. Ord. 82-06,
passed 6-23-82)



§ 159.003  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be
used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the
building or land is located.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77) Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.004  PERMITS.



   No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or for
a certificate of occupancy, shall be approved by the Building
Commissioner/Inspector and no permit or license shall be issued by any other
village department which would authorize the use or change in use of any
building or land contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or the erection,
moving, alteration, enlargement, or occupancy of any building designed or
intended to be used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.005  BUILDING HEIGHT, BULK, AND LOT COVERAGE.



   The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this subchapter
qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in the chapter.



   (A)   Pubic, semi-public, or public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions, or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a
height not exceeding 60 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a
height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line
at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above the
height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is
located.



   (B)   Single-family and two-family dwellings may be increased in
height by not more than ten feet when the side and rear yards are increased
over the yard requirements of the district in which they are located by not
less than ten feet, but they shall not exceed three stories in height.



   (C)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers,
ornamental towers and spires, church steeples, radio towers, or necessary
mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance with
existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the village.



   (D)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until
the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no
accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by domestic
servants employed on the premises.



   (E)   Every parts of a required yard shall be open to the sky,
unobstructed except for accessory buildings on the rear yard, and except for
the ordinary projections of sills, belt course, cornices, and ornamental
features projecting not to exceed 12 inches.  Land area coverage of the
front yard by impervious surfacing material, or compacted material shall not
exceed 40% of the required front yard.



   (F)   Fences may be constructed in accordance with the ordinance or
ordinances of the village regulating fences.



   (G)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside
stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers, projecting into a rear
yard not more than five feet and the ordinary projections of chimneys and
flues may be permitted by the Administrative Officer.



   (H)   For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family, a
group house, or a multiple-family dwelling shall be considered as one
building occupying one lot.



   (I)   No space allocated to a building or dwelling group for the
purpose of complying with the side, rear, or front yard or court or other
open space or lot area requirements of this chapter shall thereafter, by
reason of change in ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy the
yard, court, open space, or lot area requirements of any other building or
dwelling group.



   (J)   An open terrace, but not including a roofed- over porch or
terrace, may occupy a front yard provided the unoccupied portion of the front
yard has a depth of not less than 15 feet.  A one-story bay window may
project into a front yard not more than three feet.  Overhanging eaves,
including gutters, may project over the minimum required side or front yard
not more than two feet.



   (K)   No usable open space existing or provided shall be reduced
below the minimum requirements hereinafter set forth for such usable open
space, nor further reduced if already less than said minimum requirements.



   (L)   No off-street parking space or loading space existing or
provided hereafter for any building shall be reduced below the minimum
requirements hereinafter set forth for such parking space or loading space,
nor further reduced if already less than said minimum requirements, except as
permitted in §§ 159.105 through 159.109 as a special use.



   (M)   All single-family homes hereafter erected without attached
garages shall be located on a zoning lot in such a manner that a detached
garage having exterior dimensions of 20 feet wide by 20 feet long could later
be constructed without the need of any variances.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78; Am. Ord. 84-16,
passed  - -84; Am. Ord. 87-04, passed  - -87) Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.006  LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate
area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in
one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.



   (B)   Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one ownership, which
was of  record at the time of adoption of this chapter, that does not meet
the requirements for minimum lot width and area, may be utilized for a
permitted use, provided that yards, courts, or usable open space are not less
than the minimum required dimensions or areas.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.007  LOCATION OF BUILDINGS.



   Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, every building shall
be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a
street or permanent easement of access to a public street, which easement
shall have a minimum width of 33 feet, unless an easement of lesser width was
of record prior to the adoption of this chapter.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77) Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.008  BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction, or designated use of any building upon which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter and
upon which building actual construction has been diligently carried on; and
provided, that such building shall be completed within one year from the date
of passage and publication of this chapter.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.009  BUILDINGS ON ZONING LOT.



   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide
dwelling units shall be located on a zoning lot as herein defined and in no
case shall there be more than one such principal building on one zoning lot,
except as provided in accordance with the requirements in §§ 159.105
through 159.109.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.010  REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS.



   An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area,
public school site, cemetery, or other similar open space shall not be used
for any other purpose than that designated; and when the use of the area is
discontinued it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted adjoining
district until appropriate zoning is authorized by the Village Board of 
Trustees within three months after the date of application filed for rezoning.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.011  GRADE RELATIONSHIP OF DWELLINGS.



   The top of the foundation wall of residential structures shall be not
less than 15 inches above the grade of the street, as defined in § 159.002.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.012  AGRICULTURAL EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be exercised so as to impose
regulations or require permits with respect to land used or to be used for
agricultural purposes; or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair,
alteration, remodeling, or extension of buildings or structures used or to be
used for agricultural purposes upon such land, except that such buildings or
structures for agricultural purposes may be required to conform to building
or setback lines.  In the event that the land ceases to be used solely for
agricultural purposes, then and only then shall the provisions of this
chapter apply.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.013  ATTACHMENTS TO RESIDENTIAL HOUSES.



   (A)   A screen room attached to the rear of a single family detached
structure shall be used as a seasonal screen room only and shall comply with
the following stipulations:



      (1)   90% of the wall and door space shall be covered by
screening material.



      (2)   No other covering shall be installed in or over the wall
or door space such as glass, vinyl, canvas and not limited to same in the 90%
of screening area.



      (3)   Roof structure shall be designed to support live, dead,
snow and wind loads per B.O.C.A. Code requirements of § 150.020.1.



      (4)   Screen room structure may be of post and beam
construction type at minimum with post and beam structural requirements as
per B.O.C.A. Code § 150.020.1.



      (5)   Screen room structure shall not be built on floating
concrete slab or floating wood deck.



      (6)   All exposed wood to be sealed from the weather elements
or pressure treated or naturally durable wood (redwood or cedar).



      (7)   Gutters and downspouts with splash blocks required.



      (8)   There shall be no encroachment into the side yard
setback requirements of the Zoning Code.



      (9)   Any rear yard encroachment shall not require a zoning
variance and said variance shall not exceed 33% of the rear yard setback
requirement of the Zoning Code.



      (10)   Electric is not required, however if installed shall
comply with the National Electrical Code, § 150.105 and all outlets shall be
of G.F.I. protection type.



      (11)   When the underside of the roof is enclosed with a
ceiling, the attic air space shall be properly ventilated per B.O.C.A. Code,
§ 150.020.1.



      (12)   Heating devices shall not be installed in a seasonal
screen room.



   (B)   A roof installed over existing and proposed single family
concrete patio slab or wooden deck shall comply with the following
stipulations:



      (1)   Roof structure shall be designed to support live, dead,
snow and wind loads per B.O.C.A. Code requirements of § 150.020.1.



      (2)   Roof columns shall be supported on concrete pier
footings in virgin ground with a minimum of 8" x 42" concrete pier below
grade and columns secured to the concrete piers.



      (3)   Roof structure may be of post and beam type construction
at minimum, with wall area being 90% open, not to be covered, screened and/or
enclosed with any type of material.



      (4)   All exposed wood to be sealed from the weather elements
or pressure treated or naturally durable wood (redwood, cedar).



      (5)   Gutters and downspouts with splash blocks required.



      (6)   There shall be no encroachment into the side yard
setback requirement.



      (7)   Any rear encroachment shall require a zoning variance
and said variance shall not exceed 33% of the rear yard setback requirement
of the Zoning Code.



      (8)   Electric is not required, however if installed it shall
comply with the National Electrical Code § 150.105 and all outlets shall be
of G.F.I. protection type.



      (9)   When the underside of the roof is enclosed with a
ceiling, the attic air space shall be properly ventilated per B.O.C.A. Code,
§ 150.020.1.



   (C)   Rooms attached to a residential house that have screens,
windows and/or sliding glass doors and/or exterior doors shall be classified
as a room addition to the main structure and shall be required to adhere to
the Zoning Code, and Building Code, requirements for same.



(Ord. 95-10, passed 6-21-95)  Penalty, see § 159.999(B)



ZONING DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP



§ 159.025  DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.



   In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter the
village is hereby divided into the following districts:



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



   R-1     (10,000 square feet minimum)     Single-Family
Residential District



   R-2     ( 7,500 square feet minimum)      Single-Family
Residential District



   R-3     ( 6,000 square feet minimum)      Single-Family
Residential District



   R-4                   Multiple-Family Residential
District



   R-5                  Multiple-Family Residential
District



   R-6                  Multiple-Family Residential
District



   BUSINESS DISTRICTS



   B-1                  Business District, Limited Retail



   B-2                  Business District, General,
Retail, & Services



   O-1                  Office and Research



   MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS



   M-1                  Manufacturing District



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.026  ZONING MAP.



   The locations and boundaries of the districts established herein are
shown upon the zoning map which is hereby incorporated into this chapter. 
The zoning map together with all notations, references, and other information
shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be a part of this chapter and
shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all
notations, references, and other information shown thereon were fully set
forth and described herein.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.027  ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC- WAYS, AND RAILROAD
RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   All streets, alleys, public-ways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys, public- ways,
and railroad rights-of-way.  Where the center line of a street, alley,
public-way, or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the
zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.028  BOUNDARY LINES.



   Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zoning
district as shown on the zoning map incorporated herein, the following rules
shall apply:



   (A)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following
streets, alleys, or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed as
following the center lines thereof.



   (B)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately
following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.



   (C)   Where a lot held in one ownership and of record at the
effective date of this chapter is divided by a district boundary line, the
entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted district;
provided that this construction shall not apply if it increases the area of
the less restricted portion of the lot by more than 20%.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.029  MINIMUM AREAS FOR ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The minimum areas that may constitute a separate or detached part of
any of the following zoning districts on the comprehensive amended zoning map
or subsequent amendments to said zoning map shall be as shown in the
following table.  When a zoning district is directly across the street from
or abuts a district of the same or a less restrictive classification, the
area of the land directly across the street or abutting the property may be
included in the calculations in meeting the minimum requirements.



 



Zoning Districts
 
Minimum Area
(Acres)


R-4  Multiple-Family Residential
 
2


R-5  Multiple-Family Residential
 
2


R-6  Multiple-Family Residential
 
2


B-1  Business District, Limited Retail
 
0.5


B-2  Business District, General Retail and Service
 
4


O-1  Office
 
2.5


M-1 Manufacturing
 
5


Planned Development (Special Use)
 
4




 



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.030  NEW OR ANNEXED LAND.



   Any territory hereafter annexed to the municipality which is not shown
on the zoning map made a part of this chapter shall automatically upon such
annexation, be classified as within the R-1 (10,000 square feet minimum)
Single-Family Residential District, and be subject to all conditions and
regulations applicable to territory in such district, until said territory is
later zoned in a manner provided by law; provided that in the event the owner
of property to be annexed desires another zoning district classification, in
harmony with density and land use designations shown for said property on the
Official Plan for the  environs of the village, to be adopted at the time of
the annexation, the owner may petition for annexation.  The public notice of
zoning hearing, as required, may be advertised on or before the publication
of the required legal notice for annexation.  After the zoning hearing and
recommendation of the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission, the
Village Board of Trustees may either adopt or deny the report of the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission for the proposed zoning
amendment, at the time of adoption of the final ordinance annexing the
territory.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 159.040  PURPOSE.



   The Residential Districts set forth herein are established in order to
protect public health and promote public safety, convenience, comfort,
morals, prosperity, and welfare. These general goals include, among others,
the following specific purposes:



   (A)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, offensive noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare, and
other objectionable factors.



   (B)   To protect residential areas to the extent possible and
appropriate in each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic,
especially through traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting
off-street parking.



   (C)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of
public streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of
population through regulation of the bulk of buildings.



   (D)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by
providing for ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.



   (E)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable
open space on the same lot with residential development.



   (F)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet
the probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for
necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which
increase safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert
objectionable influences.



   (G)   To promote the best use and development of residential land in
accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of
residential development and protect the character and desirable development,
and to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the
economic base of the village.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.041  R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings.



      (2)   Home occupations as defined in this chapter.



      (3)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes
for a period not to exceed one year.



      (4)   Accessory buildings, as defined herein and as regulated
by §§ 159.120 through 159.123.



      (5)   Signs, as regulated by Chapter 155.



      (6)   Off-street parking facilities, as required or permitted
by §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



      (7)   Model homes, together with related equipment and
furnishings, designed as one-family detached dwellings erected in connection
with the sales of one-family detached dwellings within the corporate limits
of the village.



   (B)   Height of buildings.  The maximum height of buildings
permitted shall be as follows:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings:  35 feet and not over
2-½ stories.



   (C)   Lot size.  When a dwelling is served by public water supply
and by public sanitary sewer facilities, a single-family detached dwelling
may be erected on a lot having not less than 10,000 square feet, and a width
at the established building line of not less than 80 feet, except as provided
in §§ 159.006 and 159.008.



   (D)   Yard areas.  No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure, or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet.  Where lots
comprising 40% or more of the frontage between two intersecting streets are
developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of ten feet or
more in depth from the existing setback requirement, the average of such
front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire
frontage. In no case shall a front yard of more than 50 feet be required.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed
there shall be a side yard on each side equal to not less than five feet. 
The combined total of the side yards for interior lots shall be not less than
16 feet, and the combined total for corner lots shall be not less than 33
feet.



         (b)   On corner lots there shall be maintained a front
yard equivalent to the required front yard of 25 feet on all sides of the lot
that adjoins a street.



      (3)   Rear yard.  Every lot or parcel of land, upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.



      (4)   Permitted obstructions.  The following shall not be
considered as obstructions when located within or over required yards.



         (a)   Terraces.



         (b)   Awnings and canopies.



         (c)   Chimneys, not exceeding 2% of the width of the
yard.



         (d)   Steps not over four feet in height.



         (e)   Arbors and trellises.



         (f)   Fences may be constructed in accordance with
Chapter 155 regulating fences.



         (g)   Breezeways and open porches (rear yards only).



         (h)   Open parking areas.



   (E)   Dwelling standards.  Every dwelling hereafter erected in any
R-1 Single-Family Residential District shall have a total floor area of not
less than 1,500 square feet.  Measurements for said floor area shall not
include cellars, nonliveable basements, open porches, breezeways, or detached
garages.  However, 50% of the floor area of an attached garage and 20% of
the floor area of a liveable basement, as defined in § 159.002, may be
credited toward the required minimum floor area.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78; Am. Ord. 87-04,
passed  -  -87)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.042  R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Any of the uses permitted in the R-1
Single-Family Residential District shall be permitted in the R-2 District.



   (B)   Height of buildings.  The maximum height of buildings
permitted shall be as follows:



      (1)   Single-Family detached dwellings:  35 feet and not over
2-½ stories.



   (C)   Lot size.  When a dwelling is served by public water supply
and by public sanitary sewer facilities, a single-family detached dwelling
may be erected on a lot having not less than 7,500 square feet, and a width
at the established building line of not less than 60 feet, except as provided
in §§ 159.006 and 159.008.



   (D)   Yard areas.  No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure, or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet.  Where lots
comprising 40% or more of the frontage between two intersecting streets are
developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of ten feet or
more in depth from the existing setback requirement, the average of such
front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire
frontage.  In no case shall a front yard of more than 50 feet be required.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed
there shall be a side yard on each side equal to not less than five feet. 
The combined total of the side yards for interior lots shall be not less than
12 feet, and the combined total for corner lots shall be not less than 31
feet.



         (b)   On corner lots there shall be maintained a front
yard equivalent to the required front yard of 25 feet on all sides of the lot
that adjoins a street.



      (3)   Rear yard.  Every lot or parcel of land, upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.



      (4)   Permitted obstructions.  The following shall not be
considered as obstructions when located within or over required yards.



         (a)   Terraces.



         (b)   Awnings and canopies.



         (c)   Chimneys, not exceeding 2% of the width of the
yard.



         (d)   Steps not over four feet in height.



         (e)   Arbors and trellises.



         (f)   Fences may be constructed in accordance with
Chapter 155 regulating fences.



         (g)   Breezeways and open porches (rear yards only).



         (h)   Open parking areas.



   (E)   Dwelling standards.  Every dwelling hereafter erected in any
R-2 Single-Family Residential District shall have a total floor area of not
less than 1,400 square feet.  Measurements for said floor area shall not
include cellars, nonliveable basements, open porches, breezeways, or
garages.  However, 50% of the floor area of an attached garage and 20% of
the floor area of a liveable basement, as defined in § 159.002, may be
credited toward the required minimum floor area.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78; Am. Ord. 87-04,
passed  -  -87)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.043  R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  Any of the uses permitted in the R-2
Single-Family Residential District shall be permitted in the R-3 District.



   (B)   Height of buildings.  The maximum height of buildings
permitted shall be as follows:



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings:  35 feet and not over
2-½ stories.



   (C)   Lot size.  When a dwelling is served by public water supply
and by public sanitary sewer facilities, a single-family detached dwelling
may be erected on a lot having not less than 6000 square feet, and a width at
the established building line of not less than 55 feet, except as provided in
§§ 159.006 and 159.008.



   (D)   Yard areas.  No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure, or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 25 feet.  Where lots
comprising 40% or more of the frontage between two intersecting streets are
developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of ten feet or
more in depth from the existing setback requirement, the average of such
front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire
frontage.  In no case shall a front yard of more than 50 feet be required.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed
there shall be a side yard on each side equal to not less than five feet. 
The combined total of the side yards for interior lots shall be not less than
10 feet, and the combined total for corner lots shall be not less than 30
feet.



         (b)   On corner lots there shall be maintained a front
yard equivalent to the required front yard of 25 feet on all sides of the lot
that adjoin a streets.



      (3)   Rear yard.  Every lot or parcel of land, upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.



      (4)   Permitted obstructions.  The following shall not be
considered as obstructions when located within or over required yards.



         (a)   Terraces.



         (b)   Awnings and canopies.



         (c)   Chimneys, not exceeding 2% of the width of the
yard.



         (d)   Steps not over four feet in height.



         (e)   Arbors and trellises.



         (f)   Fences may be constructed in accordance with
Chapter 152 regulating fences.



         (g)   Breezeways and open porches (rear yards only).



         (h)   Open parking areas.



   (E)   Dwelling standards.  Every dwelling hereafter erected in any
R-3 Single-Family Residential District shall have a total floor area of not
less than 1,300 square feet.  Measurements for said floor area shall not
include cellars, nonliveable basements, open porches, breezeways, or
garages.  However, 50% of the floor area of an attached garage and 20% of
the floor area of a liveable basement, as defined in § 159.002, may be
credited toward the required minimum floor area.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78; Am. Ord. 87-04,
passed  -  -87)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.044  R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  No building or premises improved or
unimproved shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected or
altered within any R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, except for the following uses:



      (1)   Any of the uses permitted in the R-3 Single-Family
Residential District shall be permitted in the R-4 District.



      (2)   Single-family semi-detached dwellings, including
one-story, two-story, and multi-level structures.



      (3)   Single-family attached dwellings (group or row
dwellings) with a maximum of four attached dwelling units on a zoning lot.



      (4)   Two-family detached (two-flat type) dwellings.



      (5)   Special uses listed as permitted in the R-4 Districts in
§§ 159.105 through 159.109, subject to the conditions and procedures
outlines.



   (B)   Floor area ratio.  (For nonresidential permitted uses and
special uses).  Not to exceed 0.6.



   (C)   Height of buildings (for residences).  The maximum height of
buildings shall be 35 feet and not to exceed 2-½ stories.



   (D)   Yard areas.  No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure, or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 30 feet in depth.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed,
there shall be a side yard on each side yard on each side equal to not less
than 15 feet.  the combined total of the side yards for interior lots shall
not be less than 30 feet, and the combined total for corner lots shall be not
less than 45.



         (b)   On corner lots there shall be maintained a front
yard equivalent to the required front yard of 30 feet on all sides of the lot
that adjoins a street.



      (3)   Rear yard.  Every lot or parcel of land, upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard or not less than 40 feet.



      (4)   Yards for nonresidential permitted uses and special
uses.  Front, side and rear yards as required for single-family dwelling
uses for buildings less than 35 feet in height, but for a building 35 feet or
more in height each yard, front, side, and rear, as required for
single-family dwellings, shall be increased in width or depth by two feet for
each additional one foot of building height over 35 feet.



   (E)   Floor area per dwelling.



      (1)   The minimum floor area for single-family structures
shall be the same as required in the R-3 Single-Family Residential District.



      (2)   All other types of dwelling units permitted in the R-4
Multiple-Family Residential Districts shall have the minimum liveable floor
areas per dwelling unit calculated on the same basis as the minimum floor
area requirements for single-family units for the R-3 Single-Family
Residential District as stipulated in § 159.043(E).



         (a)   One-bedroom dwelling units, 700 square feet.



         (b)   Two-bedroom dwelling units, 850 square feet.



         (c)   Three-bedroom dwelling units, 1,000 square feet.



   (F)   Lot areas.



      (1)   For single-family detached dwellings, not less than
7,500 square feet.



      (2)   For two-family detached (two-flat type) dwellings, not
less than 3,750 square feet per dwelling unit.



      (3)   For semi-detached and attached dwellings, as follows:



 

 
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit in Square Feet


Type of Dwelling Unit
Single-Family
 
(Duplex)
Semi-Detached
 
(Group or Row)
Attached


Four bedrooms and over
 
5,000
 
4,000


Three bedrooms
 
4,500
 
3,500


Less than three bedrooms
 
4,000
 
3,000



 



   (G)   Lot width.  Not less than 60 feet at the required minimum
front yard line.



   (H)   Off-street parking.  Parking spaces in accordance with the
provisions set forth in §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (I)   Off-street loading (for nonresidential permitted uses and
special uses).  Loading berths in accordance with the provisions set forth
in §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 87-04, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord.
91-36, passed 12-19-91)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.045  R-5  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  No building or premises improved or
unimproved shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected or
altered within any R-5 Multiple-Family Residential District unless otherwise
provided in this chapter except for the following uses:



      (1)   Any of the uses permitted in the R-4 Multiple-Family
Residential District shall be permitted in the R-5 Multiple-Family
Residential District.



      (2)   Two-family detached (two-flat type) dwellings.



      (3)   Two-family attached dwellings (group or row dwellings)
with a maximum of eight dwelling units in a structure.



      (4)   Apartment buildings containing not more than 12
apartments.



      (5)   Special uses listed as permitted in the R-5 Districts in
§§ 159.105 through 159.109 subject to the conditions and procedures
outlined.



   (B)   Floor area ratio.  The maximum floor area ratio of buildings
and structures shall not exceed 1.0.



   (C)   Height of buildings (for single-family residential uses). 
The maximum height requirements for single-family detached, semi-detached, or
attached dwellings and two-family detached dwellings, shall not exceed 2-½
stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower.  The maximum height requirements for
apartments shall be three stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower.



   (D)   Yard areas.  No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure, or enlargement.



      (1)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is
constructed shall have a front yard of not less than 30 feet.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed,
there shall be a side yard on each side yard on each side equal to not less
than 15 feet with an additional five feet required for each story of the
building above two stories.  The combined total of the side yards for
interior lots shall not be less than 30 feet, and the combined total for
corner lots shall be not less than 45.



         (b)   On corner lots there shall be maintained a front
yard equivalent to the required front yard of 30 feet on all sides of the lot
that adjoins a street.



      (3)   Rear yard.  Every lot or parcel of land, upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard or not less than 40 feet.



      (4)   Yards (for nonresidential permitted uses and special
uses).  Front, side, and rear yards as required for single-family dwelling
uses for buildings less than 35 feet in height, but for a building 35 feet or
more in height, each yard, front, side, and rear, as required for
single-family dwellings, shall be increased in width or depth by two feet for
each additional one foot of building over 35 feet.



   (E)   Court standards.  Inner courts shall not be permitted and the
width and depth of outer courts shall be as follows:



      (1)   Requirements for outer courts.  The width of an outer
court shall not be less than one-half of the height of such court nor less
than one-half of the length of such court.



      (2)   Projections in outer courts.  When an outer court is
partially enclosed by projections, the sum of the projections shall not
exceed 25% of the greatest required width of the court.



   (F)   Number of buildings on a zoning lot.  Except in the case of
planned developments, not more than one principal detached building shall be
located on any zoning district nor shall a principal detached building be
located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building in any
zoning district.  For the purpose of this division, two or more buildings
joined by a fence, canopy, free-standing wall, or other nonfunctional
connection shall not be considered to be one principal detached building.



   (G)   Floor area per dwelling.



      (1)   The minimum floor area for one-story, two-story, or
multi-level single family structures shall be the same as required in the R-3
Single-Family Residential District.



      (2)   All other types of dwelling units permitted in the R-5
Multiple-Family Residential Districts shall have the same minimum floor area
requirements as stipulated in § 159.044(E).



   (H)   Lot area.



      (1)   For single-family detached dwellings, not less than
7,500 square feet.



      (2)   For two-family detached (two-flat) dwellings, not less
than 3,750 square feet per dwelling unit.



      (3)   For semi-detached and attached dwellings, as follows:



 

 
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit in Square Feet
(Group or Row)


Type of Dwelling Unit
Single-Family
 
Semi-Detached
 
Attached




Four bedrooms and over
 
5,000
 
4,000


Three bedrooms
 
4,500
 
3,500


Less than three bedrooms
 
4,000
 
3,000


 
 


Two-Family
 
(Twin Two-Flat)
Semi-Detached
 
(Group or Row)
Attached


Four bedrooms and over
 
3,000
 
2,400


Three bedrooms
 
2,700
 
2,100


Less than three bedrooms
 
2,400
 
1,800




 



   (I)   Lot width.  Not less than 60 feet at the required front yard
line.



   (J)   Off-street parking.  Parking spaces in accordance with the
provisions set forth in §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (K)   Off-street loading (for nonresidential permitted uses and
special uses).  Loading berths in accordance with the provisions set forth
in §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (L)   Maximum building coverage.  Maximum building coverage on a
zoning lot shall not exceed 35%.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 91-36, passed 12-19-91)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.046  R-6 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  No building or premises improved or
unimproved shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected or
altered within any R-6 Multiple-Family Residential District unless otherwise
provided in this chapter except for the following uses:



      (1)   Any of the uses permitted in the R-5 Multiple-Family
Residential District shall be permitted in the R-6 District.



      (2)   Single-family attached dwellings (group or row
dwellings) with a maximum of eight attached dwelling units in a structure.



      (3)   Two-family semi-detached (two-flat type) structures
joined by a party wall.



      (4)   Multiple-family semi-detached (two-flat type) structures
joined by a party wall.



      (5)   Apartment buildings.



      (6)   Special uses listed as permitted in the R-6 Districts in
§§ 159.105 through 159.109, subject to the conditions and procedures
outlined.



   (B)   Floor area ratio.  The maximum floor area ratio of buildings
and structures on a zoning lot shall not exceed 1.5.



   (C)   Height of buildings.  The height requirements for
single-family detached, semi-detached, or attached dwellings and two-family
detached dwellings shall not exceed 2-½ stories or 35 feet, whichever is
lower.  The height requirements for multi-family dwellings shall be three
stories or 40 feet, whichever is lower.



   (D)   Yard areas.  No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building, structure, or enlargement. Use of a Planned Unit Development will
permit reduction of yards; provided the Planned Unit Development respects
residential privacy and reduces development monotony through creative site
planning.



      (1)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is
constructed shall have front yard of not less than 30 feet.



      (2)   Side yard.



         (a)   On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed,
there shall be a side yard on each side equal to not less than 15 feet with
an additional five feet required for each story of the buildings above two
stories.  The combined total of the side yards for interior lots shall be
not less than 30 feet, and the combined total for corner lots shall be not
less than 45.



         (b)   On corner lots there shall be maintained a front
yard equivalent to the required front yard of 30 feet on all sides of the lot
that adjoins a street.



      (3)   Rear yard.  Every lot or parcel of land, upon which a
building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than 40 feet.



      (4)   Yards (for nonresidential permitted uses and special
uses).  Front, side, and rear yards as required for single-family dwelling
uses for buildings less than 35 feet in height, but for a building 35 feet or
more in height, each yard, front, side, and rear, as required for
single-family dwellings, shall be increased in width or depth by two feet for
each additional one foot of building height over 35 feet.



   (E)   Court standards.  Inner courts shall not be permitted and the
requirements for outer courts shall be the same as required in § 159.045(E)
for dwellings in the R-5 Multiple-Family Residential District.



   (F)   Floor area per dwelling.  The minimum floor area for the
one-story, two-story, or multi-level single family structures shall be the
same as required in the R-3 Single-Family Residential District.  All other
types of dwelling units permitted in the R-6 Multiple-Family Residential
District shall have the same minimum floor area requirements as stipulated in
§ 159.044(E) of the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential District.



   (G)   Lot area.



      (1)   For single-family detached dwellings, not less than
7,500 square feet.



      (2)   For two-family detached (two-flat) dwellings, not less
than 3,750 square feet per dwelling unit.



      (3)   For single-family semi-detached and attached dwellings,
as follows:



 

 
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit in Square Feet
(Group or Row)


Type of Dwelling Unit
Single-Family
 
Semi-Detached
 
Attached




Four bedrooms and over
 
5,000
 
4,000


Three bedrooms
 
4,500
 
3,500


Less than three bedrooms
 
4,000
 
3,000


 
 


Two-Family
 
(Twin Two-Flat)
Semi-Detached
 
(Group or Row)
Attached


Four bedrooms and over
 
3,000
 
2,400


Three bedrooms
 
2,700
 
2,100


Less than three bedrooms
 
2,400
 
1,800




 



   (H)   Lot width.  Not less than 60 feet at the required front yard
line.



   (I)   Off-street parking.  Parking spaces in accordance with the
provisions set forth in §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (J)   Off-street loading (for nonresidential permitted uses and
special uses).  Loading berths in accordance with the provisions set forth
in §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (K)   Maximum building coverage.  Maximum building coverage on a
zoning lot shall not exceed 35%.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 91-36, passed 12-19-91)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 159.055  PURPOSE.



   The business districts set forth herein are established to protect
public health, to promote public safety, comfort, convenience, and the
general welfare, and to protect the economic base of the village and the
value of property.  These general purposes include, among others, the
following specific objectives:



   (A)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a
well-considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate
locations for the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and
strengthening the economic base of the village.



   (B)   To place in separate districts those businesses which may
create noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness, or which may generate excessive
traffic.



   (C)   To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacency
to or inclusion in a residential area has sufficient elements of service or
convenience to such areas to offset the disadvantage.



   (D)   To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of
compatible business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually
interchangeable and so promote public convenience and business prosperity and
contribute to the alleviation of traffic and pedestrian congestion.



   (E)   To promote the establishment of off-street parking facilities,
permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote
shopping convenience and business prosperity.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.056  B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT, LIMITED RETAIL.



   The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter when referred to in this section, are the district regulations
in the B-1 Business District, Limited Retail.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  No building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged unless otherwise
provided in this chapter except for the following uses:



      (1)   Retail and service uses, as follows:



         Art and school supply stores.



         Art galleries and studios.



         Auction rooms.



         Barber shops.



         Beauty shops.



         Book or stationery stores.



         Camera and photographic supply stores.



         Carpet, rug, and linoleum stores.



         China and glassware stores.



         Coin and philatelic stores.



         Currency exchanges.



         Custom dressmaking and millinery shops.



         Department stores.



         Drug stores.



         Dry-cleaning and laundry-receiving stations - processing to
be done elsewhere.



         Dry goods or notion stores.



         Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio
and television sales.



         Florist shops and conservatories.



         Food stores:  grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries,
candy and ice cream shops, delicatessens, and frozen food stores including
locker rental in conjunction therewith.



         Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and
conditioning of furs.



         Furniture stores, including upholstering when conducted as
part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use.



         Garden supply and seed stores.



         Gift shops.



         Haberdasheries.



         Hardware stores.



         Hobby shops, for retail of items to be assembled or used
away from the premises.



         Interior decorating shops, including upholstering and
marketing of draperies, slip covers, and other similar articles, when
conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use.



         Jewelry stores, including watch repairs.



         Leather goods and luggage stores.



         Liquor stores, package goods only.



         Locksmith shops.



         Musical instrument stores, including minor repair.



         Office supply stores.



         Optician shops.



         Paint and wallpaper stores.



         Restaurants, tea rooms, outdoor sidewalk cafes, and outdoor
garden cafes conducted accessory to indoor establishments; and drive-in 
facilities for window service prepared and packaged food shall be permitted
where said foods are not consumed on the premises. (Drive-in restaurants or
food stands catering to customers with facilities for parking on the premises
for consumption of food in autos shall not be permitted).



         Sewing machine stores, household machines only.



         Shoe and hat repair stores.



         Shoe stores.



         Sporting goods stores.



         Taverns.



         Telegraph offices.



         Tobacco shops.



         Toy stores.



         Wearing apparel shops.



         Variety stores.



      (2)   Miscellaneous uses, as follows:  Signs, as classified
and regulated by Chapter 155.



      (3)   Residential uses, as follows:  Dwelling units, if
business uses, or premises designed for such uses, occupy the ground floor.



      (4)   Uses incidental to principal permitted uses, as follows:



         (a)   Accessory uses.



         (b)   Home occupations.



         (c)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for
a period not to exceed the duration of such construction.



      (5)   Any other similar type retail store, as identified by
the village not specifically permitted herein, but which has economic
compatibility with the established uses on adjoining premises.



   (B)   Conditions of use.  All uses permitted in this district
(except residential district uses) shall be retail establishments dealing
directly with consumers and shall be subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   Dwelling units are not permitted below the second floor.



      (2)   There shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment
of products other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to
the retail business conducted on the same premises.



      (3)   Not more than three persons (exclusive of manager,
clerks, and drivers) shall be engaged in said manufacture, processing, or
treatment of products.



      (4)   Such uses, operations, or products shall not be
objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, glare, or other
similar causes.



      (5)   Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use
conducted within the building.



   (C)   Automobile parking and loading facilities.  Automobile
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
§§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (D)   Minimum lot sizes.  Every zoning lot for a building hereafter
erected or enlarged shall comply with the lot size requirements of the R-1
District.  Buildings containing mixed residential and business uses shall be
located on a lot having an additional area of not less than 2,000 square feet
per dwelling unit.



   (E)   Maximum floor area ratio.  The maximum floor area ratio of
buildings and structures on a zoning lot shall be as follows:  In a B-1
District the floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.0.



   (F)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a building is constructed
shall have a front yard not less than 25 feet. Where a B-1 District adjoins a
major or minor arterial street the front yard shall not be less than 50 feet.



   (G)   Transitional yards.  Where a B-1 District adjoins a
residential district, transitional yards shall be provided in accordance with
the following regulations:



      (1)   In a B-1 District where a side lot line coincides with a
side or rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard
shall be provided along such side lot line.  Such yard shall be equal in
dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this chapter
for a residential use on the adjacent property in the residential district.



      (2)   In a B-1 District where a rear lot line coincides with a
side or rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard
shall be provided along such rear lot line.  Such yard shall be 20 feet in
depth, and no storage of materials or equipment or the parking of automobiles
shall take place within the 20 feet closest to any residential lot or lots. 
When such yard is paved the area shall be effectively screened by a wall, a
solid fence, or a densely planted compact hedge.  Such wall, fence, or hedge
shall be at least five feet, but not more than eight feet in height and shall
be maintained in good condition.



      (3)   Transitional yards shall be unobstructed from lowest
level to sky except as allowed in §§ 159.003 through 159.012.



   (H)   Rear yard.  In the B-1 Districts a rear yard shall be
provided for residential uses located above the first floor, such yard to be
not less than 30 feet in depth.



   (I)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed three stories
or 35 feet in height, except as otherwise provided in §§ 159.003 through
159.012.



   (J)   Special uses.  In the B-1 District, the following uses may be
allowed as special uses, if the site location and proposed development plans
are first approved as provided in §§ 159.105 through 159.109.



      (1)   Office, professional, and service provided retail uses
occupy the ground floor.



      (2)   Planned developments.



      (3)   Schools; business, dance, music, or nursery.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.057  B-2 BUSINESS DISTRICT, GENERAL RETAIL, AND SERVICE.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the district regulations
in the B-2 Business District, General Retail and Service.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   No building or land shall be used and no building shall
be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, except for the following uses conducted in accordance with the
conditions stipulated in division (C) of this section.



      Any use permitted in the B-1 Business District.



      Amusement establishments:  bowling alleys, pool halls, dance
halls, skating rinks, and other similar places of recreation when conducted
wholly within a completely enclosed building.



      Antique shops.



      Auditorium.



      Automobile repair (minor), when in conjunction with a new vehicle
sales facility.



      Automobile service station.



      Bicycle stores, including rental and repair.



      Blueprinting and photostating establishments.



      Carpenter or cabinet shops (excluding furniture manufacturing).



      Caskets and casket supplies.



      Catering establishments.



      Clothing and costume rental shops.



      Dry-cleaning establishments when employing facilities for the
cleaning and pressing of dry goods for retail trade only, conducted on the
premises, and when using carbon tetrachloride, perchlorethylene, or other
similar noninflammable solvents.



      Exterminating shops.



      Feed and seed stores.



      Frozen food locker, excluding wholesale storage.



      Hotel or motel.



      Laundries, automatic, self-service type, or hand, provided that
laundry machines shall not exceed 25 pounds capacity each.



      Motor vehicle sales, new (new vehicle sales) including
automobiles, vans, small trucks, together with their accessories,  parts,
and services.



      Motor vehicle sales, used (used vehicle sales) including
automobiles, vans and small trucks when in conjunction with a new vehicle
sales facility as permitted in this district.



      Newsstand.



      Parking lots, open and other than accessory, for the storage of
private passenger automobiles and subject to the provisions of §§ 159.135
through 159.147.



      Pet shops.



      Photographers, photograph developing, and processing shops.



      Picture framing establishments when conducted for retail trade on
the premises only.



      Plumbing showrooms.



      Printing, lithographing, or publishing establishments for letter
press, business cards, mimeographing, and other similar custom services.



      Post office.



      Public service facilities, including electric distribution
substations, fire or police stations, telephone exchange, and similar uses.



      Second-hand store if conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building.



      Tailor shop.



      Theatres, excluding drive-in theatres.



      Ticket agencies, amusement.



      Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices.



      Upholstering shop, if conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building.



      Wholesale merchandise broker, excluding wholesale storage.



      Any other similar type retail store or service establishment as
identified by the village not specifically permitted herein but which has
economic compatibility with the established uses on adjoining premises.



      (2)   All activities, except for automobile off-street parking
facilities, as permitted or required in this B-2 District shall be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building.



   (B)   Special uses.



      (1)   In the B-2 Districts the following uses may be allowed
as special uses, if the site locations, and proposed development plans are
first approved as provided in §§ 159.105 through 159.109:



      Agricultural implement sales and service, when conducted wholly
within an enclosed building.



      Air conditioning and heating sales and service.



      Automobile repair and service shop, including automobile repair
and rebuilding, auto laundries, and painting of automobiles.



      Beverages, nonalcoholic, bottling, and distributing.



      Building materials sales, when conducted wholly within a building.



      Cartage and express facilities.



      Clothing, custom manufacturing, and alterations for retail trade
only.



      Contractor or construction shops, such as:



          Air Conditioning



           Building



           Cement



           Electrical



           Heating and Ventilating



               Masonry



           Painting



           Plumbing



           Refrigeration



           Roofing



      Feed and seed store, wholesale.



      Garage, public for the storage of private passenger automobiles
and commercial vehicles under 1-½ tons capacity.



      Glass cutting and glazing.



      Greenhouse, wholesale growers.



      House trailer sales (mobile homes).



      Household appliance repair shops.



      Laundries, limited to 6,250 square feet of gross floor area per
establishment.



      Linen, towel, diaper, and other similar supply services, limited
to 6,250 square feet of gross floor area per establishment.



      Machinery sales and service.



      Monument sales.



      Motor vehicle sales, used car lots.



      Motorcycle sales, including servicing and repair.



      Planned development.



      Recreation places, including archery range, golf practice range,
miniature golf course, or other similar places of amusement or entertainment
when operated for pecuniary profit.



      Restaurants, drive-in type.



      Silver plating and repair shop.



      Tool, die, and pattern making.



      Used passenger automobile sales on an open lot or within a
building.



      Wholesale offices and store rooms with storage limited to 6,250
square feet of floor area per establishment.



      (2)   The following special uses are not permitted below the
second floor:



      Business college, or business school, operated as a business
enterprise.



      Employment services.



      Music conservatory or music instruction.



      Offices, professional, and service.



      Private club or lodge.



   (C)   Conditions of use.  All uses permitted in this district shall
be retail establishments only and shall be subject to the following
conditions.



      (1)   Dwelling units are not permitted below the second floor.



      (2)   There shall be no manufacture, processing, or treatment
of products other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to
the retail business conducted on the same premises.



      (3)   Not more than five persons (exclusive of manager, clerk,
and drivers) shall be engaged in said manufacture, processing, or treatment
of products including catering, cleaning, laundering, plumbing, upholstering,
and other similar permitted uses.



      (4)   Such uses, operations, or products shall not be 
objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations, glare, or other
similar causes.



      (5)   Site plan approval.  A site plan prepared at a scale by
a professional site planner, engineer, architect or landscape architect 
must be approved by the President and Board of Trustees after due
consideration and recommendation by the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission.  In reviewing said plan the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission shall consider:



         (a)   Impacts on surrounding properties;



         (b)   Ingress, egress, and traffic properties;



         (c)   Site engineering.



   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission may recommend and the
President and Board of Trustees may approve required conditions on the site
plan relating to the use of the site outside of buildings, landscape
amenities, special screening techniques, or other improvements to the site or
adjoining public properties.



   (D)   Automobile parking and loading facilities.  Automobile
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
§§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (E)   Maximum floor area ratio.  The maximum floor area ratio of
buildings and structures on a zoning lot shall be as follows:  In a B-2
District the floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.5.



   (F)  Front yards.  In the B-2 District the regulations governing the
front yard in the B-1 District shall apply.



   (G)   Transitional yards.  In the B-2 District the regulations
governing transitional yards in the B-1 District shall apply.



   (H)   Rear yard.  In the B-2 District the regulations governing the
rear yard in the B-1 District shall apply.



   (I)   Minimum lot sizes.  In a B-2 District, for every dwelling
unit established hereafter there shall be provided a minimum of 1,200 square
feet of lot area, except that for every efficiency unit there shall be
provided not less than 800 square feet of lot area.



   (J)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed three stories
or 45 feet in height, except as otherwise provided in §§ 159.003 through
159.012.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86; Am. Ord. 88-25,
passed 9-28-88; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.058  O-1 OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  No building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, except for the following uses:



      (1)   Offices, business and professional, as follows:



      Accountant office.



      Advertising agency.



      Business college or business school operated as a business
enterprise.



      Employment service.



      Engineering, architectural office.



      Insurance agency.



      Law office.



      Loan office.



      Newspaper office, magazine office, or agency.



      Office for executive or administrative purposes.



      Professional office.



      Photographer.



      Other similar office or service establishments not specifically
mentioned above as identified by the village.



      (2)   Offices, educational, as follows:



      Business college or business school.



      Music conservatory or music instruction.



      Personnel training center.



      Technical college or technical school.



      Other similar uses not specifically mentioned above as identified
by the village.



      (3)   Offices, financial, as follows:



      Banks.



      Financial institution or office.



      Investment brokers or offices.



      Lending institutions.



      Loan office.



      Real estate offices.



      Other similar uses not specifically mentioned above as identified
by the village.



      (4)   Office, health, as follows:



      Hospital or sanitarium.



      Laboratories, medical, dental, research, experimental, and
testing, provided there is no danger from fire or explosion, nor of offensive
noise,  smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, vibration, or other objectionable
conditions beyond the confines of the premises upon which the use is located.



      Medical and dental clinics.



      Medical laboratory.



      Orthopedic, medical and surgical.



      Physical, culture, and health services, gymnasiums, swimming
pools.



      Reducing salons masseurs.



      Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.



      Other similar uses not specifically mentioned above as identified
by the village.



      (5)   Office, miscellaneous, as follows:



      Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), fraternal or religious institutions.



      Private club or lodge.



      Scientific or research laboratory.



      Signs as classified and regulated by Chapter 155.



      Utility company office.



      Other similar uses not specifically mentioned above as identified
by the village.



      (6)   Residential uses above first floor.



   (B)   Special uses.  In the O-1 District, the following uses may be
allowed as special uses, if the site locations and proposed development plans
are first approved as provided in §§ 159.105 through 159.109.



      (1)   Planned developments in accordance with § 159.109.



      (2)   Special uses in accordance with §§ 159.105 through
159.109.



      (3)   Unique residential structures:  Notwithstanding any
requirement of the village codes to the contrary, any residential structure
which was originally designed, constructed, and occupied as a single-family
residence and which is located within the village O-1 Office District may be
used or connected to a use as itemized below as a special use within the O-1
Office District in accordance with this subchapter and §§ 159.085 through
159.093 provided:



         (a)   Use limitation:  The only special uses within the
unique residential structure are as follows:



      Accounting office.



      Financial advisor.



      Insurance agency.



      Law office.



      Professional office (excluding medical, dental, and similar
medical related uses).



         (b)   Location:  The unique residential structure shall
be adjacent to a major arterial street as defined by the village's Official
Plan.



         (c)   Remodeling:  Such structure shall be remodeled
substantially in accordance with its original exterior architectural style
and materials.



         (d)   Fire rating.  A fire rating of one hour shall be
provided in such structure and the following additional conditions shall be
met:



            1.   Satisfy the fire rating requirements for
commercial buildings in accordance with the BOCA Code currently used by the
village; and



            2.   Any attic space or third floor space shall be
improved and used for storage only.



         (e)   Emergency exits.  Each floor shall have a
separate emergency exit with doors openings to the exterior.



         (f)   Dwelling units.  No dwelling units shall be
maintained on the premises.



         (g)   Lot area.  The lot area which exists for the
parcel shall not be reduced in area nor shall additional land area be
required for this special use.



         (h)   Yards.  All existing yards shall be maintained
for the primary structure.



         (i)   Parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (C)   Additional uses.  Accessory uses, parking, signs, and
temporary uses shall be permitted in accordance with provisions of this
chapter where applicable.



   (D)    Automobile parking and loading facilities.  Automobile
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
§§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (E)   Lot area.  Any principal use, together with all accessory
uses shall be located on a lot having a minimum area of 10,000 square feet
exclusive of special uses.



   (F)   Floor area ratio. The combined floor area ratio for any
principal building, together with all accessory buildings, shall not exceed
1.0 on any lot.



   (G)   Maximum lot coverage.  The total ground area occupied by any
principal building, together with all accessory buildings, shall not exceed
50% of the total area of the lot.



   (H)   Lot width.  Each lot shall have a width at the building
setback line of not less than 70 feet.



   (I)   Front yard.  Each lot upon which a building is constructed
shall have a front yard not less than 25 feet.  Where a O-1 District adjoins
a major or minor arterial street the front yard shall not be less than 50
feet.



   (J)   Side yards.  Each lot shall have a side yard along each side
lot line, or not less than 10% of lot width.



   (K)   Transitional yards.  Where a O-1 District adjoins a
residential district, transitional yards shall be provided in accordance with
the following regulations:



      (1)   In a O-1 District where a side lot line coincides with a
side or rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard
shall be provided along such side lot line.  Such yard shall be equal in
dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this chapter
for a residential use on the adjacent property in the residential district,
or equal to the side requirement of the O-1 District, whichever is less.



      (2)   In a O-1 District where a rear lot line coincides with a
side or rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard
shall be provided along such rear lot line.  Such yard shall be 20 feet in
depth, and no storage of materials or equipment or the parking of automobiles
shall take place within the 20 feet closest to any residential lot or lots. 
When such yard is paved the area shall be effectively screened by a wall, a
solid fence, or a densely planted compact hedge.  Such wall, fence, or hedge
shall be at least five feet, but not more than eight feet in height and shall
be maintained in good condition.



      (3)   Transitional yards shall be unobstructed from lowest
level to sky except as allowed in §§ 159.003 through 159.012.



   (L)   Rear yard.  In the O-1 Districts a rear yard shall be
provided for residential uses located above the first floor, such yard to be
not less than 30 feet in depth.



   (M)   Height regulations.  No building shall exceed three stories
or 35 feet in height, except as otherwise provided in §§ 159.003 through
159.012.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS



§ 159.070  PURPOSE.



   The manufacturing districts set forth herein are established to protect
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and the general welfare, and
to protect the economic base of the village as well as the value of real
estate by regulating manufacturing development in appropriate locations. 
These general objectives include, among others, the following specific
objectives:



   (A)   To protect established residential areas, and the health of
families living therein, by restricting those nearby industrial activities
which may create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare,
fire hazards, and other objectionable influences, to those areas which are
appropriate therefor.



   (B)   To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for all
types of manufacturing and related activities so that the economic structure
of the community may be strengthened, and that employment opportunities may
be found in the interest of public prosperity and welfare.



   (C)   To provide more space for manufacturing activities in
locations accessible to rail and highways, so that the movement of raw
materials, finished products, and employees can be carried on efficiently and
with a minimum of danger to public life and property.



   (D)   To establish proper standards of performance, which will
restrict obnoxious manufacturing activities, while at the same time encourage
and permit the manufacturing activities, which have adopted facilities for
the processing of finished products without adversely affecting the health,
happiness, safety, convenience, and welfare of the people living and working
in nearby areas.



   (E)   To protect manufacturing districts from incompatible uses of
land by prohibiting the use of such space for new residential development,
thereby preserving the land for a more appropriate use in accordance with the
plans for village improvement and development.



   (F)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a
well-considered plan of land use for all of the village, to conserve the use
of property, to promote stability of manufacturing activities and related
development, and to protect the character and established development in each
area of the community, to enhance and stabilize the value of land, and to
protect the tax base of the village.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.071  M-1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  No building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, except for the following uses, subject to the
conditions required by division (C) of this section.



      (1)   Retail and service uses, as follows:



         Animal hospitals, pounds, and shelters.



         Automobile laundries.



         Automobile sales and service.



         Banks.



         Battery and tire service stations.



         Beverages, nonalcoholic, bottling and distributing.



         Building materials sales.



         Contractor or construction shops (indoor only) such as:



            Air Conditioning



            Building



            Cement



            Electrical



            Heating and Ventilating



            Masonry



            Painting



            Plumbing



            Refrigeration



            Roofing



         Currency exchanges.



         Drug stores.



         Fuel and ice sales.



         Garages, parking lots, other than accessory, subject to the
provisions of §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



         Greenhouses.



         Linen, towel, diaper, and other similar supply services.



         Restaurants.



         Riding academies and stables.



         Training schools.



      (2)   Production, processing, cleaning, testing, and repair,
limited to the following uses and products:



         Advertising displays.



         Art and needlework and hand-weaving.



         Awnings, venetian blinds.



         Bakeries.



         Beverages, nonalcoholic.



         Blacksmith shop.



         Boat-building and repair of pleasure craft and  other
small craft, but not including ship-building  or ship repairs.



         Books, hand-binding and tooling.



         Bottling works, beverage.



         Brushes and brooms.



         Cameras and other photographic equipment, except film.



         Candy manufacture.



         Canvas and canvas products.



         Carpentry and woodworking shops.



         Carpet and rug cleaning.



         Ceramic products, such as pottery and small glazed tile.



         Musical instruments.



         Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial
limbs, braces, supports, and stretchers.



         Paper products, small, such as envelopes and stationery,
bags, boxes, tubes, and wallpaper printing.



         Perfumes and perfumed soaps, compounding only.



         Plastic stamping and extrusion of small products.



         Precision instruments, such as optical, medical, and
drafting.



         Printing and newspaper publishing, including engraving, and
photo-engraving.



         Products from finished materials, such as bone, cork,
feathers, felt, fibre, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious
and semi-precious stones, rubber, shell, or yarn.



         Rubber products, small, and synthetic-treated fabrics
(excluding all rubber and synthetic processing), such as washers, gloves,
footwear, bathing caps, and atomizers.



         Repair of household or office machinery or equipment.



         Sheet metal shop.



         Silverware, plate and sterling.



         Sign painting.



         Shell egg business, candling, cartoning, and distributing.



         Soap and detergents, packaging only.



         Soldering and welding.



         Sporting and athletic equipment, such as balls, baskets,
cues, gloves, bats, racquets, and rods.



         Statuary, mannequins, figurines, and religious and church
art goods, yarn, thread, and cordage, but not including textile bleaching.



         Truck repair garage.



         Tools and hardware, such as bolts, nuts, screws, doorknobs,
drills, hand tools and cutlery, hinges, house hardware, locks, nonferrous 
metal castings, and plumbing appliances.



         Toys.



         Umbrellas.



         Upholstering (bulk) including mattress manufacturing,
rebuilding and renovating.



         Vehicles, children's such as bicycles, scooters, baby
carriages, and wagons.



         Watches.



         Wood products, such as furniture, boxes, crates, baskets,
and pencils and cooperage works.



      (3)   Wholesale and warehousing facilities (but not including
motor freight terminals).



      (4)   Public and community service uses, as follows:



         Bus terminals, bus garages, bus lots, street  railway
terminals, or street car houses.



         Electric substations, and telephone exchanges.



         Fire stations.



         Municipal or privately-owned recreation buildings or
community centers.



         Parks.



         Police stations.



         Railroad passenger stations.



         Railroad rights-of-way.



         Sewage treatment plants.



         Water filtration plants.



         Water pumping stations.



         Water reservoirs.



      (5)   Residential uses, as follows:  Dwelling units for
watchmen and their families when located on the premises where they are
employed in such capacity.



      (6)   Miscellaneous uses, as follows:



         Radio and television towers.



         Signs, as regulated by Chapter 155.



      (7)   Uses incidental to permitted uses, as follows:



         Accessory uses.



         Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period
not to exceed the duration of such construction.



   (B)   Special uses.  In the M-1 Districts the following uses may be
allowed as special uses, if the site locations and proposed development plans
are first approved as provided in §§ 159.105 through 159.109.



      Establishments engaged in producing, processing, cleaning,
testing, or repair, other than those listed as permitted in the M-1 Districts.



      Airports or aircraft landing fields and heliports.



      Automobile service stations.



      Ready mix concrete and bituminous concrete plants, including
extraction of gravel, sand, or other raw materials, subject to grading plans,
landscaping plans, fencing, and other special conditions deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission to protect the public welfare.



      Clothing manufacture.



      Cold storage plant.



      Dentures.



      Drugs.



      Dry-cleaning establishments.



      Electric appliances, such as lighting fixtures, irons, fans,
toasters, and electric toys.



      Food products preparation, including processing and combining of
baking, boiling, canning, cooking, dehydrating, freezing, frying, grinding,
mixing, and pressing, provided there is no danger from fire or explosion nor
offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or other
objectionable influences, but excluding fish products, sauerkraut, vinegar,
starch, and glucose, and slaughtering of animals.



      Fur goods, not including tanning or dyeing.



      Glass products, from previously manufactured glass.



      Hair, felt, and feather products (except washing, curling, and
dyeing).



      Hat bodies of fur and wool felt.



      Hosiery.



      Ice, dry and natural.



      Ink mixing and packaging and inked ribbons.



      Jewelry.



      Laboratories, medical, dental, research, experimental, and
testing; provided there is no danger from fire or explosion nor offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or other objectionable
influences.



      Laundries.



      Leather products, including shoes and machine belting.



      Luggage.



      Machine shops for tool, die, and pattern-making.



      Machinery, farm, sales, repairing, and overhauling.



      Meat products (processing but not slaughtering of animals).



      Metal finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing,
cleaning, rust-proofing, and heat treatment.



      Metal stamping and extrusion of small products, such as costume
jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons, and kitchen
utensils.



      Monument works.



      Motor vehicle repair, major.



      Planned developments, manufacturing.



      Public parks or playgrounds.



      Railroad rights-of-way, railroad and motor freight terminal,
railroad switching facilities, and repair shops.



      Stadiums, auditoriums, and arenas.



      Truck terminals, when located on major streets specified on the
Village Official Plan within the manufacturing district, with a right-of-way
of at least 100 feet or when located on the boundary of the district
adjoining a major street, subject to the terminal being located at least 500
feet from the boundary of a residential district.



   (C)   Conditions of use.  In the M-1 Districts all permitted uses
are subject to the following:



      (1)   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing
repair, or storage of goods, materials, or products shall take place without
creating disturbing influences to the use and occupancy of adjoining
properties.



      (2)   All business, production, servicing, and processing
shall take place within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise
specified.  Within 150 feet of the nearest point of any residential district
all storage shall be in completely enclosed buildings or structures, and
storage located elsewhere in this district may be  open to the sky, but
shall be enclosed by solid wall or fence, including solid doors or gates
thereto, at least eight feet high, but in no case lower in height than the
enclosed storage.  However, open off-street loading facilities and open
off-street parking facilities for the storage of motor vehicles may be
unenclosed throughout the district except for such screening of parking and
loading facilities as may be required under the provisions of §§ 159.135
through 159.147.



   (D)   Automobile parking and loading facilities.  Automobile
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in
§§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (E)   Maximum floor area ratio.  Maximum floor area ratio of
buildings and structures on a zoning lot shall not exceed 2.5.



   (F)   Minimum  front  yards.  In the M-1 Districts on  every
zoning lot a front yard of not less than 25 feet in depth shall be
provided.  However, where lots within the same block and comprising 40% of
the frontage on the same street are already developed on the  effective
date  of this chapter with front yards with an average depth of less than 25
feet, then such average depth shall be the required front yard depth for such
frontage in said block.  Where the M-1 District fronts on a freeway, major
street, primary street, parkway, or secondary street, buildings, structures,
and open storage areas, other than off-street parking areas and signs used to
identify the district shall be set back at least 100 feet on any property
boundary line bordering a residential district, or 75 feet from the right-
of-way line of any highway or thoroughfare which has been designed as a
limited access throughway or freeway.



   (G)   Minimum side yards.  In the M-1 Districts on every zoning lot
a side yard shall be provided along each side lot line.  Each side yard
shall be not less in width than 10% of the lot width but need not exceed ten
feet in width.



   (H)   Minimum rear yards.  A rear yard of not less than 30 feet is
required except where a lot abuts upon a residential district; in which case
there shall be a rear yard of not less than 60 feet, and no storage of
materials or equipment or the parking of automobiles shall take place within
the 30 feet closest to any residential lot or lots.



   (I)   Performance standards.



      (1)   Noise.  Establishments in a manufacturing district
shall be so operated as to comply with the following requirements, to wit: 
At no point on the boundary of a manufacturing district shall the sound
intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the
operation of motor vehicle or other transportation vehicles) exceed the
decibel level in the designated octave bands as hereinafter shown.



 

TABLE 1


Octave Bank (Frequency) Cycles per second
 
Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)




0 to    75
 
79


75 to  150
 
74


150 to  300
 
66


300 to  600
 
59


600 to 1,200
 
53


1,200 to 2,400
 
47


2,400 to 4,800
 
41


Above    4,800
 
39




 



      (2)   Smoke and particulate matter.



         (a)   Any use established in a manufacturing district
shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
smoke and particulate matter as herein established.  If any use already
established on the effective date of this chapter and by the terms hereof
made nonconforming shall be so altered or modified, it shall then be required
to conform with the performance standards governing smoke and particulate
matter as herein established.



         (b)   In addition to the performance standards specified
herein, the emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or
quantity as to endanger or be detrimental to public health, safety, comfort,
or welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.



         (c)   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke,
the Ringelmann Chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of
Mines, shall be employed.  The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a
density greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times
except as otherwise provided herein.



         (d)   The emission, from all sources within any lot
area, of particulate matter containing more than 10% by weight of particles
having a particulate diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited.  Dust
and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such sources as
storage areas, yards, roads, and the like within lot boundaries, shall be
kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, or
other acceptable means.  Emission of particulate matter from such sources in
excess of the weight limitation herein specified is hereby prohibited.



         (e)   The emission of more than ten smoke units per hour
per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann
No. 2.  However, during 1 one-hour period in each day, each stack may emit
up to 20 smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning fires.  Only during fire
cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted, and
then for not more than four minutes.



         (f)   The rate of emission of particulate matter from
all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of
one pound per acre of lot area during any one-hour period, after deducting
from the gross hourly emission per acre, the correction factors set forth in
the following tables for height, velocity, and temperature of emission,
respectively.  Determination of the total net rate of emission of
particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:



            1.   Determine the maximum emission in pounds per
hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of
acres of lot area, thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in
pounds per acre.



            2.   From each gross hourly rate of emission
derived in No. 1 above, deduct the appropriate correction factor
(interpolating as required) for height, velocity, and temperature of emission
set forth in Tables 2, 3, and 4, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission
from all sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot.  Such total
shall not exceed one pound per acre of area during any one hour.



      (3)   Toxic or noxious matter.  No use shall for any period
of time discharge, across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located,
toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public welfare, safety, comfort, or health, or cause injury or
damage to property or business.



      (4)   Odors.  Any use established in a manufacturing district
shall be operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
odorous materials as follows:  The emission of odorous matter in such
quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to
produce a public hazard along lot lines is hereby prohibited.



      (5)   Fire and explosion hazard.



         (a)   Any use established in a manufacturing district
shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
fire and explosive hazards as herein set forth.  If any use already
established on the effective date of this chapter shall be altered or
modified it shall then be required to conform with the performance standards
governing fire and explosive hazards as herein established.



         (b)   The storage, utilization, or manufacture of
materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning as
determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in accordance with generally
accepted standards, is permitted subject to compliance with all other
performance standards for the manufacturing district and provided the
following conditions are met:



            1.   Said materials or products shall be stored, 
utilized, or produced within completely enclosed structures having
fire-resistant construction in accordance with the requirements of the
building ordinance.



            2.   All such structures shall be set back at
least 40 feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such structures shall
be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system (or a carbon dioxide
system of equal protection) complying with the installation standards
prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association.



 


TABLE 2
ALLOWANCE FOR HEIGHT OF EMISSION
(Interpolate for Intermediate Value Not Shown in Table)



Height of Emission
above Grade (Feet)
 
Correction
(Pounds per Hour per Acre)




50
 
0.01


100
 
0.06


150
 
0.10


200
 
0.16


300
 
0.30


400
 
0.50




 



 


TABLE 3
ALLOWANCE FOR VELOCITY OF EMISSION
(Interpolate for Intermediate Values Not Shown in Table)



Exit Velocity
(Feet per Second)
 
Correction
(Pounds per Hour per Acre)




0
 
0.00


20
 
0.03


40
 
0.09


60
 
0.16


80
 
0.24


100
 
0.50




 



 


TABLE 4
ALLOWANCE FOR TEMPERATURE OF EMISSION
(Interpolate for Intermediate Values Not Shown in Table)



Temperature of Emission
(Degrees Fahrenheit)
 
Correction
(Pounds per Hour per Acre)




200
 
0.000


300
 
0.001


400
 
0.002


500
 
0.003


1,000
 
0.01


1,500
 
0.04


2,00
 
0.10




 



   (C)   Manufacturing or processing of materials or products which
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases at ordinary weather
temperatures shall not be permitted, except when such materials are used in
secondary processes or are required in emergency or standby equipment but
their storage for use as power or heating fuels shall be permitted if in
conformity with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection
Association, the village fire protection requirements, and with applicable
requirements embodied in the regulations promulgated by the State Department
of Public Safety.



      (6)   Vibration.  Any uses established in a manufacturing
district shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards
governing vibration set forth herein, and if any use already established on
the effective date of this chapter shall be altered or modified, it shall
then be required to conform with the performance standards governing
vibrations established herein.  Any use or portion thereof creating intense
earth-shaking vibrations such as are erected by heavy drop forges, or heavy
hydraulic surges, shall be set back at least 500 feet from the lot lines on
all sides.



      (7)   Glare or heat.  Any use established in a manufacturing
district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards
governing glare or heat as herein set forth.  If any use already established
on the effective date of this chapter shall be altered or modified, it shall
then be required to conform with the performance standards governing glare or
heat as herein established.  Any operation producing intense glare or heat
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such manner as to
not create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)  Penalty, see § 159.999



NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES



§ 159.085  SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS.



   Any nonconforming building or use which existed lawfully at the time of
the adoption of this chapter (or any amendment hereto) and which remains
nonconforming, and  any building or use which became or shall become
nonconforming upon the adoption of this chapter (or any amendment hereto) may
be continued only subject to the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed



4-23-86)



§ 159.086  CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMITY.



   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all legal
nonconforming uses and buildings, and for any change thereof.



   (A)   Application.  As soon as practicable after the adoption of
this chapter, or after the adoption of any other ordinance which renders
nonconforming any previously lawful building or use, the village shall use
its best efforts to notify the owners of record of all properties containing
a use or structure thus made nonconforming.  Within 90 days after the
receipt of such notice said owners of record shall submit applications, on
forms made available in the Zoning Administrator's office, for a certificate
of nonconformity for any nonconforming building or use.  The failure of the
village to give such notice shall excuse the making of such application, but
shall not extend the period for the amortization of such nonconforming
building or use.



      (1)   Application information.  The application for such
certificate shall designate the location, nature, and extent of such
nonconforming building or use; information satisfactory to document that the
nonconformity was a lawful use at the time of its initiation; and such other
details as may be necessary for the issuance of the certificate of
nonconformity.



      (2)   Failure to apply.  If any owner of a nonconforming
building or use fails to apply for a certificate of nonconformity in the
above stated manner, such building or use shall thereafter be deemed to be in
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Verification; certificate recorded.



      (1)   Prior to issuing a certificate of nonconformity or
renewal thereof for any building or use, the premises shall be visited by a
village representative appointed by the Zoning Administrator.  The Zoning
Administrator shall not issue a certificate of nonconformity or renewal
thereof for any building or use which does not conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located except as permitted in this section, and
shall take appropriate action to enjoin any such use.  In all other cases
the Zoning Administrator shall issue such certificate of nonconformity or
renewal thereof within a reasonable time after application therefor, not to
exceed 90 days.



      (2)   A copy of the certificate of nonconformity shall be
recorded by the village with the County Recorder of Deeds against the
property in question.  Such certificate shall bear on its face the date for
the required elimination of the nonconformity.



   (C)   Fees.  When making application for a certificate of
nonconformity for a nonconforming building or use, the following compliance
fees shall be paid:



      (1)   Accessory buildings, home occupations, private garages,
roadside stands, single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and
multiple-family dwellings, $10.



      (2)   All other nonconforming uses, $25.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.087  RESTORATION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Damage more than 50%.  A nonconforming building which is
destroyed or damaged by any means out of the control of the owner to the
extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before
the occurrence shall exceed 50% of the cost of restoration of the entire
building new, shall not be restored unless said building and the use thereof
shall conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.



   (B)   Damage less than 50%.  In the event a nonconforming building
is destroyed or damaged by any means out of the control of the owner to an
extent of less than 50% of the cost of restoration of the entire building
new, such restoration shall be started or positive procedures shall be
commenced to start such restoration within six months from the date of
partial destruction.  The restoration must be diligently pursued to
completion within a maximum of two years from the time restoration
construction is initiated.  Failure to initiate or conclude restoration
within these limits shall constitute abandonment as defined in §
159.091(A).  In no case shall such restoration nor the time spent during
construction and repairs operate to extend the time for elimination of any
nonconformity.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.088  REPAIRS, ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND ENLARGEMENTS.



   (A)   Buildings nonconforming with respect to bulk.  A building
which is nonconforming as to bulk or setback, and which is designed and used
for a use which is permitted in the district in which it is located, may be
added to or enlarged subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   No nonconforming feature of the building may be added to
or enlarged.



      (2)   The combination of the addition and the original
building must comply with the minimum area and density regulations  of the
applicable zoning district.



   (B)   Conforming buildings with nonconforming uses.  A building all
or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted in
the district in which it is located, and which is occupied by a nonconforming
use, may be repaired, altered, or structurally changed provided said repairs,
alterations, or structural changes conform to the regulations of the district
in which said building or structure is located.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.089  EXTENSION OF USE.



   A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area
of the building or land it occupied at the time of the creation of the
nonconformity.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.090  CHANGE OF USE.



   A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other use except to a
use permitted in the district where located.  No change to even a permitted
use shall be permitted unless all related buildings comply with all village
codes and ordinances pertaining to fire prevention and protection.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.091  ABANDONMENT OF USE.



   Any nonconforming use which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be
re-established.  Any building, land, or building and land in combination,
which was formerly devoted to a nonconforming use which has been abandoned,
shall not again be devoted to any use other than those uses which are
permitted in the district in which the building, land, or building and land
in combination, is located.



   (A)   Abandonment defined.  The term ABANDONMENT as used herein,
shall mean the voluntary discontinuance of nonconforming use when accompanied
by an intent not to re-establish such use or occupancy.  Any one of the
following shall constitute prima facie evidence of intent to abandon:



      (1)   Any positive act indicating such intent;



      (2)   Any conscious failure to take all necessary steps to
resume the nonconforming use with reasonable dispatch in the circumstances,
including advertising of the property for sale or for lease;



      (3)   In the case of a building or of a building and land in
combination, discontinuance of the nonconforming use for 12 consecutive
months;



      (4)   In the case of land only, discontinuance of the
nonconforming use for 90 consecutive days, or for a total of six months
during any one-year period; or



      (5)   In the case of a nonconforming building which is damaged
by means out of the control of the owner to an extent of less than 50% of the
cost of restoration of the entire building new, failure to commence
restoration within six months from the date of partial destruction, or
conclude restoration within two years from the time restoration construction
is initiated.



   (B)   Written notice.  Upon the discontinuance of a nonconforming
use the owner of the premises shall give written notice to the Zoning
Administrator within 30 days expressing one of the following intents:



      (1)   The intent to continue the previous nonconformities (in
which case a new certificate of nonconformity is required); or



      (2)   The intent to discontinue any nonconformities (in which
case any related certificate of nonconformity must be forfeited).



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.092  ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Nonconforming uses in conforming buildings.  Any
nonconforming use located in a building, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall be entirely discontinued and shall thereafter cease operation
at the end of the current lease or one year from the date of the
nonconformity.  In no case shall the operation of a nonconforming use extend
beyond five years if a lease for longer than one year exists.



   (B)   Nonconforming use of land.  The nonconforming use of land
shall be discontinued and cease one year from the date of the nonconformity.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.093  RESIDENTIAL NONCONFORMITIES.



   The provisions of § 159.091 pertaining to the elimination of
nonconformities does not apply to any single-family dwelling or multiple
dwelling which, at the time it was constructed met all of the zoning
requirements of the district within which it was located, where the
nonconformity is caused solely by a changed zoning district or regulation.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 86-03, passed 4-23-86) 



SPECIAL USES



§ 159.105  PURPOSE.



   The principal objective of this zoning code is to provide for an
orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for the proper
location of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of
the village.  To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is
classified as permitted in one or more of the various districts established
by this chapter.  However, in addition to those uses specifically classified
and permitted in each district there are certain additional uses which it may
be necessary to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service
they provide the public.  These special uses require particular
consideration as to their proper location in relation to adjacent established
or intended uses, or to the planned development of a community.  The
conditions controlling the location and operation of such special uses are
established by the following provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.106  AUTHORITY.



   The Village Board of Trustees shall have the authority to permit the
following uses of land or structures, or both, subject to conditions
contained herein, if it finds that the proposed location and establishment of
any such use will be desirable or necessary to the public convenience or
welfare and will be harmonious and compatible with other uses adjacent to and
in the vicinity to the selected site or sites.



   (A)   Auditorium, stadium, arena, armory, gymnasium, and other
similar places for public events, in any business or manufacturing district
or public park area.



   (B)   Bus terminal, railroad passenger station, freight terminal, or
any other public transportation terminal facilities, in any business or
manufacturing districts.



   (C)   Churches and places of public worship, in all zoning districts
on zoning lots having a minimum area of 40,000 square feet; having not more
than 25% of the zoning lot occupied by buildings; and having sufficient land
area to provide for both building space and off- street parking requirements
in §§ 159.135 through 159.147.



   (D)   Golf courses, public or private, in any use district.



   (E)   Municipal or privately-owned recreation building, community
center, in any multiple-family residential district, business district, or
park area.



   (F)   Municipal complex, in any use district or public park.



   (G)   Off-street public parking areas and garages, in any
multiple-family residential district provided there is a need for this
facility and that no appropriate site is available in nearby business or
manufacturing districts.



   (H)   Police station or fire department, in any use district or
public park area.



   (I)   Public building, including art gallery, library, museum, or
similar structure, in any residential or business districts or public park
area.



   (J)   Public park, playground, or club, in any use district.



   (K)   Public utilities facilities, for example, filtration plant,
water reservoir, or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer
station, and other similar facilities, in any use district other than the
manufacturing district where such facilities are permissive uses.



   (L)   Radio and television transmitting or antenna towers
(commercial), telephone exchanges, and other electronic equipment requiring
outdoor structures, and including antenna towers used for the sending of
private messages, but not including private receiving aerials or antennas, in
any B-1, B-2, or M-1 Districts.



   (M)   Railroad right-of-way, in the M-1 District.



   (N)   Rest homes and nursing homes, in the R-6 District.



   (O)   Trailer camp, in the R-6 District.



   (P)   School.  A public or parochial institution which offers
instruction in any of the branches of learning and study as taught in the
public schools under the State Division of Public Instruction, including pre-
kindergarten, elementary school, junior and senior high schools, colleges,
and universities, but excluding pre-kindergarten (nursery), trade, business,
or commercial schools in any Residential District.



   (Q)   Planned developments, as defined hereinafter, in accordance
with the procedures and conditions outlined in § 159.109, in any use
district.



   (R)   Off-street parking areas in any business district, provided
changes which reduce the parking space dimensions or reduced parking area
setbacks conform to § 159.107.



   (S)   Studio and efficiency apartment dwellings, in the R-5 and R-6
Districts.



   (T)   Apartments units with more than three bedrooms unless
permitted by special use or planned unit development.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 84-16, passed  -  -84; Am. Ord.
87-04, passed  -  -87)



§ 159.107  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   The, Zoning and Development Planning Commission may recommend and the
Village Board of Trustees may impose such restrictions upon height, bulk, and
area of occupancy of any structure so approved for special use as may be
reasonable under the particular circumstances; provided that such
restrictions and stipulations shall not be more restrictive than the
requirements established for the district in which such structure is proposed
to be located, or as may be required in any municipal code.  Off-street
parking facilities as well as off-street loading and unloading spaces may
also be stipulated in the order permitting the special use provided the
following conditions are recognized in designing said facilities:



   (A)   Front yard setback.  The front yard setback for parking areas
may be reduced no further than 50% of the maximum required building setback
in the R-5, R-6, B-1, and B-2 Districts.



   (B)   Screening and landscaping areas.  When a request to reduce
setback requirements is submitted, it shall be accompanied by:



      (1)   A landscape plan identifying plant material, ground
cover, mulch, and miscellaneous material.



      (2)   A listing of plant species, type of transplant stock,
and size of material.



      (3)   A cost estimate for said landscape plan.



      (4)   Landscaping and screens provided to satisfy the special
use for reduced parking setbacks shall be maintained by the owner of the
property receiving the special use and any subsequent owners of said
property.  If plant material dies, becomes in disrepair, or is not
maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, the owners shall make every
reasonable effort to replace all material or screens with material of equal
or greater size upon notification by the village.  substitutions of plant
material from that originally approved as part of the special use shall
require approval of the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.  If the
owner has not replaced said material within six months after village
notification, the owner will be in violation of this chapter and be subject
to any or all penalties described in this chapter.  The owner may, upon
approval of the Village Board, extend the period of material replacement.



   (C)   Parking space.  In B-1 and B-2 Districts, parking spaces may
be reduced in size below the required minimum provided no more than 20% of
the total quantity of spaces required is so reduced in area.



   (D)   Planned developments.  The Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission may recommend and the Village Board of Trustees may approve
modifications to the parking conditions stipulated in this section for any
use located within a Planned Development as described in § 159.109.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 84-16, passed  -  -84; Am. Ord.
88-25, passed 9-28-88; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.108  PROCEDURE.



   The procedure to be followed in considering applications for special
uses shall be as follows:



   (A)   Application.  An application verified by the owner or
authorized agent of the owner of the property involved shall be filed with
the Village Clerk for the attention of the Zoning Administrator upon a form
prescribed therefor, which shall contain or be accompanied by all required
information.



   (B)   Public hearing.  Upon receipt of such verified application
the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Chairperson of the Planning, Zoning
and Development Commission, or, in his absence, the Chairperson pro tem, who
shall give notice of a public hearing in the same manner as provided for
hearings on the reclassification of property.  A record of pertinent
information presented at the public hearing shall be made and maintained by
the Planning, Zoning and Development  Commission as part of the permanent
record relative to the application.



   (C)   Determination.  The Planning, Zoning and Development 
Commission shall then make its findings and recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees within 30 days following the date of public hearing on each
application.  The Board of Trustees may then authorize a special use as
defined herein by specific ordinance, provided the evidence presented is such
as to establish beyond reasonable doubt:



      (1)   That the proposed use at the particular location
requested is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which
is in the interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general
welfare of the neighborhood or community.



      (2)   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the
particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or general
welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to
property values or improvements in the vicinity.



      (3)   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations
and conditions specified in this chapter for such use, and with the
stipulations and conditions made a part of the authorization granted by the
Village Board of Trustees.



   (D)   After special uses are discontinued for a period of more than
one year the building and land shall only be used for uses permitted in the
zoning district in which said special use was located.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.109  PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   A planned development is a use of land containing two or more
buildings which offer benefits to the neighborhood of which it is a part or
to the general public welfare beyond those required by this chapter or other
law, and which use of land:



      (1)   Will contain or provide amenities not otherwise required
by law, including but not limited to provisions for common space,
recreational facilities, or specific design, engineering, architectural, site
planning, or landscaping features;



      (2)  Will establish yards or other open space greater than the
minimums required by law, or will provide for bulk of structures and density
of development less than the maximums permitted by law; or



      (3)   Will provide screening or other facilities which benefit
neighborhood property or the public beyond those otherwise required by law.



   (B)   Standards and requirements.



      (1)   No planned development special use permit shall be
approved unless and until there is on file with the village written consent
of every property owner within such development at the time of approval of
the permit agreeing that the applicant shall be bound by the conditions and
regulations proposed and which will be effective in the development and to
record such written agreements with the County Recorder of Deeds.



      (2)   Before detailed studies of any planned development shall
be undertaken by the village administrative staff of Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission there shall be on file with the village the  written
consent  of all  property owners within the development boundaries that
such detailed studies be made.



   (C)   Use exceptions.  In the case of residential, business, or
manufacturing planned developments, the Planning. Zoning and Development
Commission may recommend, and the Board of Trustees may authorize, that there
be in part of the area of such development and for the duration of such
development, specified uses not permitted by the use, regulations of the
district in which said development is located, provided the Planning, Zoning
and Development Commission shall find:



      (1)   That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary
or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the
development;



      (2)   That the uses permitted by such exception are not of
such a nature or so located as they exercise a detrimental influence on the
surrounding neighborhood;



      (3)   That not more than 10% of the ground area or of the
gross floor area of such development shall be devoted to the uses permitted
by said exception;



      (4)   That in a manufacturing planned development, such
additional uses allowed by exception shall conform with the performance
standards of the district in which the development is located, as set forth
in §§ 159.070 and 159.071.



      (5)   That the use exceptions as allowed are recorded on the
zoning districts maps by appropriate symbols or by reference to documents on
file with the Village Clerk; and



      (6)   Where the planned development is to be located in a
residential district, no use exception shall be allowed unless the size of
the planned development exceeds 20 acres.



   (D)   Bulk regulations.  In the case of any planned development,
the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission may recommend, and the Board
of Trustees may authorize, exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of
this chapter within the boundaries of such development, provided that the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall find:



      (1)   That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of
promoting an integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or
occupants of such development, as well as of neighboring properties, than
would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this chapter for buildings
developed on separate zoning lots;



      (2)   That the overall floor area of a planned development
would not exceed the maximum floor area which would be determined on the
basis of the floor area ratio required for the individual uses in such
planned developments;



      (3)   That the total number of dwelling units shall not be
increased above the number which would be permitted under the otherwise
applicable district regulations;



      (4)   That spacing between principal buildings shall be
consistent with recognized site planning principles, due consideration being
given to the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys;



      (5)   That along the periphery of such planned developments
yards shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in
which said development is located; and



      (6)   That public streets will be dedicated and improved, in
accordance with the village standards, as required for proper circulation of
traffic, consistent with the major Street Plan of the village.  If under
Chapter 156, the development of the property on separate zoning lots would
require the dedication of street rights- of-way the area which would be so
dedicated, even though not dedicated in the proposed planned development,
shall be subtracted from the area of the planned development site in
determining the floor area and number of units allowable under division
(D)(2) and (3) of this section.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



ACCESSORY BUILDINGS



§ 159.120  CONFORMANCE TO REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO MAIN BUILDINGS.



   Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this
chapter applicable to the main building.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.121  LOCATION.



   (A)   Tool sheds, which shall be limited to a maximum height of ten
feet and a maximum floor area of 120 square feet, with no side exceeding 15
feet in length, shall not be located in any front yard.  Tool sheds may be
located no nearer than 2½ feet from the rear or side lot lines, but may be
located any distance from the principal buildings; providing that ample light
and air to the principal building's windows are not restricted, and there is
no common wall with the main structure.  All other detached accessory
buildings in residential districts shall not be located nearer than ten feet
from the principal residential structure.



   (B)   No accessory building shall be located on a reversed corner
lot beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be
nearer than six feet to the side lot line of the adjacent lot.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78; Am. Ord. 82-06,
passed 6-23-82; Am. Ord. 98-14, passed 7-1-98)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.122  ERECTION PRIOR TO ESTABLISHMENT OF MAIN BUILDING PROHIBITED.



   An accessory building shall not be erected prior to the establishment
or construction of the main building to which it is accessory.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.123  ACCESSORY GARAGE.



   (A)   In any R-1, R-2, or R-3 District, where an accessory garage
has a driveway entrance from the front of the lot only, the garage shall be
located at least three feet from all lot lines provided there is no
encroachment into any easement.



   (B)   In any R-4, R-5, or R-6 District where an alley is provided
and a garage opens onto the alley, the garage shall be located at least three
feet from the rear lot line, provided there is no encroachment into any
easement.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



DRIVEWAYS AND OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES



§ 159.135  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section of the zoning code is to alleviate or
prevent congestion of the public streets, and so promote the safety and
welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street
parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the
use to which property is put.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.136  PARKING AND LOADING; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Procedure.  An application for a building permit for
a new or enlarged building, structure, or use shall include therewith a plot
plan, drawn to scale, and fully dimensioned showing driveways and parking or
loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



      (2)   Access to lots.  On corner lots, access may be afforded
across either the front lot line or the corner side lot line, or both, access
across the rear lot line of through lots shall be prohibited.



   (B)   Extent of control.  The off-street parking and loading
requirements of this chapter shall apply as follows:



      (1)   All buildings and structures erected and land uses
initiated after the effective date of this chapter shall provide accessory
off-street parking or loading facilities as required hereinafter for the use
thereof.



      (2)   When a building or structure erected prior to or after
the effective date of this chapter shall undergo any decrease in number of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees, or
other unit of measurement specified hereinafter  for  required parking 
or  loading  facilities; and further when said decrease would result in a
requirement for fewer total parking or loading spaces through application of
the provisions of this chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities may be
so decreased only when the facilities remaining would at least equal or
exceed the parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the
provisions of this chapter to the entire building or structure as modified.



      (3)   When a building or structure shall undergo any increase
in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other
unit of measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading
facilities; and when said increase would result in a requirement for
additional total parking or loading spaces through application of the
provisions of this chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities shall be
increased accordingly, so that existing parking or loading facilities shall
be so increased that the facilities would at least equal or exceed the
parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions
of this chapter to the entire building or structure as modified.



   (C)   Existing parking and loading spaces.  Accessory off-street
parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this chapter
may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the requirements of
this section for equivalent new construction; in which event said spaces
shall not be reduced below the number required herein for such equivalent new
construction.



   (D)   Permissive parking and loading spaces.  Nothing in this
subchapter shall prevent the establishment of off-street automobile parking
or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject
to full compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, except that
off-street parking areas accessory to existing multiple-family structures
cannot be located off the premises containing the main use unless on a lot
adjacent thereto without authorization by the Village Board of Trustees.



   (E)   Damage or destruction.  Any building, structure, or use which
is in existence and is a conforming use on the effective date of this chapter
and which subsequently shall be damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse,
explosion, or other cause may be reconstructed, re-established, or repaired
with or  without off-street parking or loading facilities, except that
parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of
such damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. 
However, it shall not be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required in this chapter for equivalent new
construction.



   (F)   Schedule of requirements.



      (1)   Tables for required parking and loading.  Requirements
governing the number and location of off- street parking and off-street
loading facilities in relation to the use of property are established
hereinafter in sections of this chapter.  The parking and loading
requirements for any use not specified therein shall be the same as for a
similar specified use, as determined by § 159.146.



      (2)   Floor area.  The term FLOOR AREA as employed in this
parking and loading section in the case of office, merchandising, or service
types of use shall mean the gross floor area of a building or structure used
or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons,
clients, patients, or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and
equipment used for sale or sale of merchandise.  FLOOR AREA for the purposes
of this subchapter shall not include any area used for:



         (a)   Storage accessory to the principal use of a
building;



         (b)   Show windows, or offices incidental to the
management or maintenance of a store or building;



         (c)   Restrooms; or



         (d)   Utilities.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 78-13, passed 12-13-78; Am. Ord. 82-06,
passed 6-23-82)



§ 159.137  USE OF PARKING FACILITIES.



   Unenclosed, off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use
and developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements
of this subchapter shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structure to which such
facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants.  Under no
circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential
structures be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking
of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors, or
customers of business or manufacturing  establishments, except as 
permitted  in this section.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.138  JOINT PARKING FACILITIES.



   Off-street parking facilities for different buildings, structures, or
uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any zoning district
in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be
permitted; provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall
not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use. 
However, if the parking demand for these separate or mixed uses can be shown
to occur at different times, the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission
may recommend and the Village Board of Trustees may approve that only 90% of
the sum of the separate requirements for each use be provided.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.139  CONTROL OF OFF-SITE FACILITIES.



   When required accessory off-street parking facilities are provided
elsewhere than on the lot upon which the principal use served is located,
they shall be in the same possession, either by deed or long-term lease, as
the property occupied by such principal use, and the owner shall be bound by
covenants filed of record in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds
requiring the owner and his heirs and assigns to maintain the required number
of parking spaces during the existence of said principal use.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.140  PERMITTED DISTRICTS FOR ACCESSORY PARKING.



   Accessory parking facilities provided elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the principal use served in accordance with § 159.146 may be
located in any zoning district except as follows:



   (A)   No parking facilities accessory to an apartment use shall be
located in a R-1, R-2, or R-3 District.



   (B)   No parking facilities accessory to a business or manufacturing
use shall be located in a residential district, except when authorized by the
Village Board of Trustees as prescribed hereinafter.



   (C)   No  parking  facilities accessory to a manufacturing use
shall be permitted in a B-1 District.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.141  NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   Accessory off-street parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of
property may be permitted in R-5 and R-6 Districts when authorized by the
Village Board of Trustees, subject to the following requirements in addition
to all other relevant requirements of this subchapter.



   (A)   The parking lot shall be accessory to and for use in
connection with one or more nonresidential establishments located in
adjoining districts or in connection with one or more existing professional
or institutional office buildings or institutions.



   (B)   Said parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles.



   (C)   No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on said parking lot.



   (D)   No signs of any kind other than signs designating entrances,
exits, and conditions of use, shall be maintained on said parking lot.



   (E)   The parking lot may be open from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and
shall be closed at all other times; however, when supervised by one or more
full-time attendants the parking lot may be kept open until 12:00 midnight.



   (F)   Each entrance to and exit from said parking lot shall be at
least 20 feet distant from any adjacent property located in any residential
district, except where ingress and egress to the parking lot is provided from
a public alley or public way separating the residential areas from the
proposed parking lot.



   (G)   In addition to the foregoing requirements, such parking lots
shall conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be prescribed
by the Village Board of Trustees for the protection of properties adjacent to
and in the vicinity of the proposed parking lot.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.142  DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Parking space; description.  A required off- street parking
space shall be an area of not less than 180 square feet nor less than nine
feet wide by 20 feet long, such space will have a vertical clearance of at
least seven feet and be exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns,
or office and work areas, accessible from streets or alleys or from private
driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys, and to be used for the
storage or parking of passenger automobiles or commercial vehicles under 1-½
tons capacity.  Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall be not less
than 12 feet in width when serving automobiles parked at a 45 degree angle in
one direction nor less than 24 feet in width when serving automobiles parked
perpendicular to the aisles or accommodating two-way traffic.



   (B)   Measurement of spaces.  When determination of the number of
required off-street parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction up to and including ½ shall be disregarded, and
fractions over ½ shall be interpreted as one parking space.



   (C)   Open and enclosed spaces.  Parking areas may be open or
enclosed except that when parking facilities accessory to a multiple dwelling
are located in a residential or B-1 or B-2 District elsewhere than on the
same zoning lot with the principal use served, such parking facilities shall
be open to the sky.



   (D)   Access.  Parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner
as will least interfere with the movement of traffic.  No driveway or curb
cut in any district shall exceed 25 feet in width, without variance.



   (E)   Signs.  No sign shall be displayed in any parking area within
any residential district except such as may be necessary for the orderly use
of the parking facilities.



   (F)   Required setbacks.  No parking space nor portion thereof
established on the same zoning lot with a building shall be located within a
required front yard.  No parking space nor portion thereof established on a
zoning lot without building shall be located closer to any street line than
the established building line on adjacent properties nor closer than the
front yard setback required for the district in which the parking lot is
located.  Further, any wall, fence, or hedge developed around any parking
area shall be subject to the front yard setback requirements of this chapter
in the same manner as a building or structure.



   (G)   Surfacing.



      (1)   All off-street parking areas and driveways shall be
improved with a compacted macadam base not less than four inches thick,
surfaced with asphaltic concrete or some comparable all-weather dustless
material not less than 1-½ inches thick.  Portland cement concrete having a
thickness of not less than five inches may be substituted in lieu of the
above requirement. Where a water-bound macadam is used preparatory to asphalt
surfacing the base may be left without surface treatment for a period of not
more than one year.



      (2)   Driveways for single-family attached or detached
dwellings shall be constructed in a manner or material of portland cement
concrete or asphalt at least four inches in thickness.  Single-family
dwelling driveway concrete shall be as specified by ordinance for sidewalks.



   (H)   Screening and landscaping.



      (1)   All open off-street parking areas for six or more cars
shall be effectively screened by a wall, a solid fence, or a densely planted
compact hedge along any side which adjoins or is directly across a street or
alley from a property in a residential district or an institutional
property.  Such wall, fence, or hedge shall be at least five feet, but not
more than eight feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition.



      (2)   The village may elect to make repairs to any screenn not
maintained in a good condition after giving the owner 15 days notification.
Such repair work shall be paid for by the owner, or the village repairs at
owner's expense.



   (I)   Lighting.  Any lighting used to illustrate an off- street
parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the
adjoining properties.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.143  SPECIAL USE PUBLIC PARKING AREAS.



   Any automobile parking area developed for transient trade, and not
accessory to specific main uses or groups of uses for which parking is
required by this chapter shall be treated as a special use, as defined in
§§ 159.105 through 159.109 and as allowed in accordance with the provisions
of §§ 159.105 through 159.109 by the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77) 



§ 159.144  LOADING; DESIGN STANDARDS



   (A)   Loading berth; description.  An off-street loading berth
shall be a hard-surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street
or a public way, used principally for the standing, loading, or unloading of
motor trucks, tractors, and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with
the public use of streets and alleys.  A required loading space shall be not
less than ten feet in width, 60 feet in length, and 14 feet in height,
exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space, except as otherwise
specifically dimensioned hereafter.



   (B)   Location.  No permitted or required loading berth shall be
closer than 50 feet to any property in a residential district unless
completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence or
wall, or any combination thereof not less than six feet in height.  No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25 feet of the
nearest point of intersection of any two streets.  Loading berths open to
the sky may be located in any required yard, other than the front yard.



   (C)   Measurement of berth.  When determination of the number of
required off-street loading berths results in a requirement of a fractional
berth, any fraction up to and including ½ shall be disregarded, and
fractions over ½ shall be interpreted as one loading berth.



   (D)   Surfacing.  All open off-street loading berths shall be
improved with a compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches thick,
surfaced with not less than two inches of asphaltic concrete or some
comparable all-weather dustless material.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.145  LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS; EXTENT OF CONTROL.



   Off-street automobile parking facilities shall be located as
hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance shall be
walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the
nearest entrance of the building that said parking area is required to serve.



   (A)   For one- and two-family dwellings, on the same lot with the
building they are required to serve.



   (B)   For three- and four-family dwellings not over two stories in
height, on the same lot  or parcel  of land as the building they are
required to serve.  For the purpose of this requirement, a group of such
uses constructed and maintained under single ownership or management shall be
assumed to be on a single lot or parcel of land.



   (C)   For apartment houses containing four or more dwelling units on
the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve, or
on a separate lot or parcel of land not more than 300 feet from the nearest
entrance to the main building being served; provided the lot or parcel of
land selected for the parking facilities is located in an apartment district
or a less restricted district.



   (D)   For rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs, hospitals,
sanitariums, orphanages, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, dormitories,
sorority and fraternity houses, and for the other similar uses, the
off-street parking facilities required shall be on the same lot or parcel of
land as the main building or buildings they are intended to serve.



   (E)   For uses other than those specified above, off- street parking
facilities shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the main
building being served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land as the main
building being served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land not over 1,000
feet of the entrance of the main building, measured from the nearest point of
the parking area, provided the separate lot or parcel of land intended for
the parking facilities is located in a business or manufacturing district.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.146  SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   In all districts, there shall be provided at such time any building or
structure is erected, enlarged, or increased in capacity, off-street parking
spaces for vehicles in accordance with the following requirements:



   (A)   For one-family dwellings one parking space for each family
dwelling unit.



   (B)   For two- or more family dwellings:



      (1)   Units with an attached two car garage, two spaces for
each unit.



      (2)   Units without an attached garage, two spaces for each
unit plus ½-space for unassigned per unit; for a total of 2.5 spaces per
unit.



   (C)   For hotels and clubs, one parking space for each four guests
or one parking space for each sleeping room or suite, plus such additional
space as shall be deemed necessary by the Building Inspector because of any
supplementary parking generative activities such as bars, ballrooms, dining
rooms, nightclub facilities, and the like.



   (D)   For tourist homes, cabins, or motels, parking space for each
guest or sleeping room or suite, plus one additional space for the owner or
manager if resident on the premises.



   (E)   For lodging, rooming, and boarding houses, one parking space
for each four guests, plus one additional space for the owner or manager if
resident on the premises.



   (F)   For private clubs or lodges (without sleeping rooms), parking
space equal in number to 25% of the total membership.



   (G)   For fraternities, sororities, and dormitories, one parking
space for each five active members, plus one additional space for housemother
or manager.



   (H)   For hospitals, one parking space for each three hospital beds
plus one parking space for each 1500 square feet of gross floor area in
residents' quarters, plus one additional parking space for each staff or
visiting doctor.



   (I)   For sanitariums, convalescent homes, or homes for the aged,
one parking space for each six patient beds, plus one additional parking
space for each staff or visiting doctor.



   (J)   For medical or dental offices, or clinics, one parking space
per doctor and staff plus two parking spaces per examination room, treatment
room, or office.



   (K)   For mortuaries or funeral parlors, ten parking spaces for each
room used as a chapel or parlor plus one space for each funeral vehicle
maintained on the premises, plus one space for each family residing on the
premises.



   (L)   For bowling alleys, two parking spaces for each lane, plus one
parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area devoted to affiliated
uses such as bars, restaurants, and the like.



   (M)   For convention halls, dance halls, skating rinks, assembly
halls, exhibition halls, or other places of assembly, one parking space for
each 100 square feet of floor area used for assembly.



   (N)   Stadium, sports arena, auditorium, and gymnasium (other than
incidental to a school), one parking space for each six seats.



   (O)   For theaters:



      (1)   Indoor, one parking space for each ten seats up to 500,
plus one parking space for each five seats above 500.



      (2)   Outdoor, reservoir space equal to 10% of the capacity.



   (P)   For church, high school, college, and university auditoriums,
one parking space for each 12 seats provided in said buildings or structures.



   (Q)   For railroad passenger stations, bus depots, or other
passenger terminal facilities (special uses), such parking space as the
Village Board of Trustees, subject to the recommendations of the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission, shall deem to be adequate for employees,
passengers, spectators, visitors, and others.



   (R)   For banks, or public administration buildings, one parking
space for each 400 square feet of floor area.



   (S)   For business or professional offices, one parking space for
each 250 square feet of floor area.



   (T)   For establishments handling the sale and consumption on the
premises of alcoholic beverages, food, or refreshments, one parking space for
every three seats plus one space for every employee on duty at one time.



   (U)   For retail stores and service shops, one parking space for
each 200 square feet of floor area.



   (V)   For furniture and appliance stores, motor vehicle sales,
wholesale stores, household equipment or furniture repair shops, or machinery
sales, one parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.



   (W)   For manufacturing and industrial uses, research and testing
laboratories, laundry and dry- cleaning plants, printing, binding, publishing
and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, and other reading matter,
warehouses, and storage buildings, engraving shops, assembly of materials and
products, and other similar uses, one parking space for each four employees,
based upon the maximum number of persons to be employed at any one work
period during the day or night, plus such additional parking facilities as
shall be required for vehicles used in the conduct of the enterprise.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 91-26, passed - - 91; Am. Ord. 95-06,
passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.147  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES.



   In all districts where property uses include the loading and unloading
of materials or merchandise from vehicles, off-street loading and unloading
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:



   (A)   For hotels or apartment-hotel buildings wherein there are
contained exhibition halls, convention halls, auditoriums, office facilities,
or retail shops, one off-street loading and unloading space for the first
40,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional off-street
loading space for each 150,000 square feet of gross floor or fraction thereof
of gross floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet.



   (B)   For hospitals or sanitariums containing 40,000 to 100,000
square feet of gross floor area, one off-street loading and unloading space,
plus one additional such space for each additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in excess of 100,000 square feet.



   (C)   For buildings containing bowling lanes, taverns, restaurants,
or any retail shops and having 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area, one off-street loading and unloading space, plus one additional such
space for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof in excess of 100,000 square feet.



   (D)   For banks, business, or professional offices or public
administration buildings containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross
floor area, one off-street loading, and unloading space, plus one additional
such space for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof in excess of 100,000 square feet.



   (E)   For buildings containing furniture and appliance stores, motor
vehicle sales, wholesale stores, household equipment, or machinery sales and
having 8,000 to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, one additional space
for each additional 25,000 square feet.



   (F)   For buildings containing manufacturing uses, research and
testing laboratories, laundry and dry-cleaning establishments, printing,
binding, publishing, and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, and other
reading matter, warehouse and storage facilities, engraving shops, assembly
of materials and products, processing and distribution of materials and
products, and  other  similar uses having more than 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of basement area, and less than 40,000 square
feet of gross floor area, one additional such space for each additional
60,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 159.160  ESTABLISHMENT, MEMBERSHIP AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation
of a Comprehensive Village Plan for the guidance, direction, and control of
the growth and development or redevelopment of the village and contiguous
territory not more than 1-½ miles beyond the corporate limits and not
included in any municipality, for the review of certain decisions of the
Building Commissioner, and for hearings on petitions for variances, a
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission is hereby created under authority
of an act of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois entitled "Illinois
Municipal Code".  There is hereby established a Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission.  The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission
shall perform all of the duties heretofore performed by the Planning, Zoning
and Development Commission pursuant to former Chapter 154 and the Zoning
Board of Appeals pursuant to former §§ 159.60 through 159.165 of Chapter
159.



   (B)   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall consist
of seven members appointed by the President with the advice and consent of
the Board of trustees, one of whom shall be designated by the President as
the Chairperson.



   (C)   Of the original seven members, two shall be appointed for a
term of one year, two shall be appointed for a term of two years, and three
shall be appointed for a term of three years and until their successors are
appointed and qualified.  Thereafter all appointments shall be for a term of
three years except an appointment to fill an unexpired term which shall only
be for the balance of the unexpired term.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.161  MEETINGS.



   (A)   All meetings of the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other
times as the Commission may determine.



   (B)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public.



   (C)   The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote
indicating such fact and shall also keep records of its examinations and 
other official actions. Findings of fact  shall be  included in the minutes
on each case and the reasons for granting or denying each application shall
be specified. Every rule, regulation, and every order, requirement, decision,
or determination of the Commission shall  immediately be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.



   (D)   The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure, a copy
of which and all amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk.



   (E)   The minutes of the Commission shall be open to public
examination at reasonable hours.



   (F)   Expenses incurred by the Commission are to be itemized and
shall be borne by the village.



   (G)   Each Commissioner must attend a minimum of nine of the 12
scheduled meetings each calendar year.  If a Commissioner fails to attend
the minimum number of meetings, the Village President may declare the
position vacant and appoint another person to fulfill the remainder of the
term.



   (H)   The Commission shall appoint a secretary from among its
members.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-05, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 95-06,
passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.162  APPEALS AND REVIEW.



   (A)   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall hear
appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Building Commissioner/Inspector charged with the enforcement of
this chapter.



   (B)   Any appeal to the Commission may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the village. 
Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the
Commission by a general rule, by filing with the Zoning Administrator, the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Commission, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with such plats and exhibits
as are reasonably necessary.  Such appeal shall be taken upon forms provided
by the Commission.  The Village Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the
Commission all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed was taken.



   (C)   The Commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of appeals and shall  give notice thereof to the persons appealing
and to the officer from whom the appeal is taken.  It shall hear the appeal
within 45 days.  At the hearing parties of interest may appear in person or
by agent or attorney.



   (D)   The Commission may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees
their decision to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend
the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from the extent
and in the manner that the Commission may decide to be fitting and proper in
the premises, and to that end the Commission shall also have all the powers
of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.  The concurring  vote of four
members  of the Commission shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Building
Commissioner/Inspector or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon
which it is authorized by this chapter to render decisions.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.163  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Authorized variances.  The Board of Trustees may by ordinance
determine and vary the application of any of the regulations of this chapter
in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such regulations relating
to the use, construction, or alteration of buildings or the use of land in
cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of any such regulations.  Variances,
however, shall only be authorized in the following instances:



      (1)   To permit a temporary building for business or industry
in any district for a use otherwise excluded from such district, provided the
use is incidental to the development of that district, such permit to be for
a period of not more than one year.



      (2)   To permit the alteration or enlargement of an existing
building occupied by a nonconforming use, where such alteration or
enlargement is necessary incident to such use.



      (3)   To permit in an M-1 Manufacturing District a building or
use otherwise excluded from such district, provided such building or use is
distinctly incidental and essential to a use permitted in such district,
provided such incidental building or use occupies not more than 10% of the
lot, that not more than 10% of the employees of the building or plant are to
be engaged therein, and provided that such building or use is not located
within 50 feet of any street.



      (4)   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary
line of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown on record prior
to the date of passage of this chapter.



      (5)   To permit a front yard, a side yard, or a rear yard less
than required by this chapter, but such variance shall not exceed 33%  of
the depth of the front yard, or the depth of the rear yard, or the width of a
side yard, as required by this chapter.



      (6)   To permit a building to exceed the height limit by not
more than 10% of the height limit established by this chapter.



      (7)   To permit the use of a lot less in area by not more than
10% of the lot area required by this chapter.



      (8)   To permit the use of a lot less in width by not more
than 15% of the lot width as required by this chapter.



      (9)   To interpret the provisions of this chapter where the
street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown
on the map fixing the several districts, which map is incorporated in and
made a part of this zoning code.



   (B)   Application.  An application for a variance of the
regulations of this chapter may be made by a property owner or his agent to
the Zoning Administrator for referral to the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission.  Such application shall be made in writing stating the variance
requested, the location of the property for which the variance is requested,
name of the property owner, and cause for the requested variance.



   (C)   Public hearing.  The Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for the public hearing and
shall give notice of the time and place of such hearing, published at least
once, not more than 30 days and not less than 15 days before the hearing in
one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the municipality. 
The notice shall contain a description of the particular location for which
the variance is requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed
variance consists.



   (D)   Report of findings.  The Commission shall report its findings
and recommendations in writing to the Board of Trustees within 30 days from
the conclusions of the public hearing.  In considering all proposed
variances to this chapter, the Commission shall, before recommending that the
Board of Trustees grant any variance from the chapter in a specific case,
first determine and make a finding of fact that the proposed variance will
not merely serve as convenience to the applicant but is necessary to
alleviate some demonstrable hardship and will not impair an adequate supply
of light and air to adjacent property; unreasonably increase the congestion
in public streets; increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety;
unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the
surrounding area; or in any other respect impair the public health, safety,
comfort, morals, and welfare of the inhabitants of the village.  Said
findings of fact shall be incorporated in the written report to the Board of
Trustees.



   (E)   Board of Trustee Action. 



      (1)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendations from the
Commission to grant or deny the variance, the Board of Trustees by ordinance,
without further public hearing, may adopt or reject the proposed variance or
may refer it back to the Commission for further consideration, and any
proposed variance which fails to receive the approval of the Commission shall
not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of all the members of
the Board of Trustees.



      (2)   No variance in any case shall be made by the Board of
Trustees without a hearing by the Commission as required herein, nor without
a report thereof having been made by the Commission to the Board of Trustees.



   (F)   Miscellaneous.



      (1)   No order for a variance permitting the erection or
alteration of a building shall be valid for a period longer than six months
unless a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within
such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to
completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.



      (2)   No order for a variance permitting a use of a building
or premises shall be valid for a period longer than six months, unless such
use is established within such period; provided, that where such use
permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such
order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said
erection or alteration obtained within such period and such erection or
alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms
of such permit.



   (G)   Staff approvals.



      (1)   Authorization.  The Building Commissioner is authorized
to, as stated in this division, approve zoning variances, without a public
hearing being required.



         (a)   The only variation requests that may be processed
by the Building Commissioner, are those which pertain to front, rear, or side
yard setbacks.



         (b)   The Building Commissioner is limited in granting,
a zoning variance, of six inches, or 5% of the required standard, whichever
is greater.



         (c)   The Building Commissioner shall not be required to
base his approval or disapproval, on previous recommendations or approvals of
the Commission or the Village Board.



      (2)   Fees.  the processing of such requests shall  be based
on the same fees, as listed under § 159.180, and the same standards, as
listed under authorized variations, in § 159.163.



      (3)   Denials.  When more than two variations in a one-year
period are requested by the same individual or firm or when it is presumed
that the process offered is being abused, or when the requests are based on a
matter of convenience, such requests will be forwarded to the Commission for
their review and recommendation.



      (4)   Reports.  Upon completion of each application whether
or not approved, a copy of the application, the review and the outcome will
be forwarded to the petitioner, the Chairperson of the Commission, the
Village Administrator, and the Village Board.



      (5)   Occupancy.  No type of occupancy will be permitted
until a revised plat of survey including the variation granted is received
and approved by the Building Commissioner.



      (6)   Previous variations.  Where previous variations have
been granted by the Village Board, a further variation to the same yard, may
not be granted by the Building Commissioner.



      (7)   Appeals.  When approval has not been granted by the
Building Commissioner, the applicant may apply to the Commission under a
separate application, with a separate fee, for the matter to be reconsidered.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 91-27, passed 9-25-91; Am. Ord. 95-06,
passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.164  STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.



   The appeal shall stay all proceedings and furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Building Commissioner/Inspector certifies to the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission, after notice of appeal has been
filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate,  a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property; in which
case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the Commission or by Court of Record on
application, with notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and
all due causes shown.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.166  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:



   (A)   (1)   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities
a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment
of the village and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than 1-½
miles beyond the corporate limits of the village and not included in any
other municipality.  Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the
Official Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof, of the village.  Such Plan
shall be advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by
ordinance duly enacted by the Village Board of Trustees.  All requirements
for public hearings, filing of notice of adoption with the County Recorder of
Deeds and filing of the Plan and ordinances with the Village Clerk shall be
complied with as provided for by law; and



      (2)   To provide for the health, safety, comfort, and
convenience of the inhabitants of the village and contiguous territory, such
Plan or Plans shall establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions
and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to
redevelopments in respect to public improvements as herein defined and shall
establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and
surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service
facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds,
school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water
drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage
collection and treatment.  The requirements specified herein shall become
regulatory only when adopted by ordinance.



   (B)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality
and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.



   (C)   To recommend to the corporate authorities from time to time
such changes in the Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as may be deemed
necessary.



   (D)   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities from
time to time, plans or recommendations for specific improvements pursuant to
the Official Comprehensive Plan.



   (E)   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, or
parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally to
promote the realization of the Official Comprehensive Plan.



   (F)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.



   (G)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions
and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to
assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.



   (H)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted
under authority of the "Illinois Municipal Code".



(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.167  JURISDICTION; ZONING AMENDMENTS AND SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission shall have in addition
to the powers and duties set forth in § 159.166, the authority and
responsibility to hear and report findings and recommendations to the
President and Village Board of Trustees on all applications for amendments
and special use permits in the manner prescribed by the following standards
and other regulations set forth herein:



   (A)   Initiation of amendment.  Amendments may be proposed by the
President or the Village Board of Trustees, the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission, or any property owner.



   (B)   Processing application for amendment.



      (1)   An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
Village Clerk.  The application shall be accompanied by such plans or data,
and such other information, as specified by the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission, and shall include a statement in writing by the
applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed amendments will
conform to the standards of the village ordinances and as set forth herein. 
Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the Village Board to the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission with the request to hold a public
hearing.



      (2)   Notices.



         (a)   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission
shall give notices of the public hearings to the applicant and to the owners
or occupants of other properties which may be affected as determined by the
Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.



         (b)   All notices shall be in writing and shall give
time, place, and purpose of such hearing and shall he mailed not more than 30
days, nor less than 15 days, in advance of such hearing.  The notice shall
be sent by certified mail, properly addressed as shown on the tax assessor's
rolls and with sufficient postage affixed thereof, with return receipt
requested.



      (3)   Publication.  The Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission shall cause a notice of time, place, and purpose of such hearing
to he published in a newspaper of general circulation within the village not
more than 30 days nor less than 15 days in advance of such hearing.



      (4)   Hearing on application.  Upon receipt in proper form of
the application and statement referred to above, the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed
amendment.  However, the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission may
continue from time to time the hearing without further notice being published.



      (5)   Findings of fact and recommendation of the Planning,
Zoning and Development Commission. Within 45 days after the close of the
hearing on a proposed amendment, the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same,
together with its recommendations to the President and Village Board of
Trustees.  Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to
change the zoning classification of particular property, the Planning, Zoning
and Development Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following matters:



         (a)   Existing uses of property within the general area
of the property in question;



         (b)   The zoning classification of property within the
general area of the property in question;



         (c)   The suitability of the property in question to the
uses permitted under the existing zoning classification; and



         (d)   The trend of development, if any, in the general
area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken
place since the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning
classification.



   (C)   Decisions.



      (1)   The Planning, Zoning and Development Commission may hear
a request for any change in zoning and may recommend a zoning classification
more restrictive than that requested.



      (2)   A concurring vote of a majority of those voting members
present at the meeting shall he required to recommend granting or denying an
application for an amendment.



      (3)   Report to the Village Board shall contain number present
and number of votes for or against the motion.



   (D)   Action by the President and Village Board of Trustees.



      (1)   The President and Village Board of Trustees, upon
receiving the recommendations of the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission, may grant or deny any proposed amendments in accordance with
applicable state statutes, or may refer to the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission for further consideration.



      (2)   If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted
upon finally by the Village Board within six months of the date upon which
such application is received by the President and Village Board of Trustees,
it shall he deemed to have been denied.



   (E)   Fees.  A fee in the sum of $150 shall accompany all petitions
for zoning amendments and use permits.  Such fee shall he paid to the
Village Clerk who shall give a receipt therefore, and account therefor to the
Village Board.



(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.168  LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION; OFFICIAL MAP.



   (A)   At any time or times, before or after the formal adoption of
the Official Comprehensive Plan by the corporate authorities, an official map
may be designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the whole area
included within the Official Comprehensive Plan, or one or more separate
geographical or functional parts, and may include all or any part of the
contiguous unincorporated area within 1-½ miles from the corporate limits of
the village.  All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of
adoption with the County Recorder of Deeds, and filing of that plan and
ordinances, including the official map, with the Village Clerk shall be
complied with as provided for by law.



   (B)   No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented
for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the village or
within contiguous territory which is not more that 1-½ miles beyond the
corporate limits shall he entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision in shown thereon provides for standards of design and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
street lights, public grounds, size of lots to he used for residential
purposes, storm and flood water run-off channels and basins, water supply and
distributions, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment in
conformity with the applicable requirements of the ordinances, including the
official map.



(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.174  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   All final administrative decisions of the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission under this subchapter shall be subject to judicial
review pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Review Act," of the
State of Illinois, approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications
thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.  The term ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISION is defined as in Section 1 of the "Administrative Review Act."



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 159.175  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.



   The Trustee who is Chairperson of the Village Planning and Zoning
Committee is hereby designated as the Zoning Administrator and shall perform
the following duties:



   (A)   Review all applications pertaining to land use, including, but
not limited to, requests for annexation, subdivisions, special use,
nonconforming use, variances, and appeals.  Upon review, the applications
will be referred to the unit of government he deems has jurisdiction on the
requested action.



   (B)   Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning code
including all major amendments, conditional uses, nonconforming uses, and
variances.



   (C)   Coordinate the activities of the Planning, Zoning and
Development Commission and the Enforcement Officer.



   (D)   Direct the preparation of the revised village zoning map no
later than March 31 of each year, showing existing zoning uses, divisions,
restrictions, regulations, and classification of the village for the
preceding year, providing there is a change to such zoning use or
classification in the village.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.176  ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner/Inspector to
enforce this chapter.  Appeal from the decision of the Building
Commissioner/Inspector may be made to the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission.



   (B)   The Building Commissioner/Inspector shall have the following
duties:



      (1)   Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of
land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.  In regard to
performance standards, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require the
services of a testing laboratory to determine compliance.  The cost of
employing said testing laboratory shall be paid for by the owner if a
violation of this chapter is established; otherwise by the village.



      (2)   Notify, in writing any person responsible for violating
a provision of this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it.



      (3)   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings,
or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions, or
alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any
other action authorized by this chapter to insure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions.



      (4)   Maintain a current file of all permits, all
certificates, all registers of pollutants, and all copies of all notices of
violation, discontinuances, or removal for such time as necessary to insure a
continuous compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and on request,
provide information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
any specific property.



      (5)   Provide technical assistance to the Planning, Zoning and
development Commission.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.177  OCCUPANCY PERMITS.



   (A)   Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter no change in
the use occupancy in any existing building shall be made, nor shall any new
building be  occupied for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Commissioner/Inspector.  Every certificate of
occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of
any building shall be issued before the application has been made and
approved for a certificate of occupancy and compliance.



   (C)   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the
office of the Building Commissioner/ Inspector and copies shall be furnished
on request to any person having propriety or tenancy interest in land or in a
building affected by such certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all
nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by the passage of this
chapter.  Application for such certificates of occupancy for nonconforming
uses shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner or lessee of
the land or building occupied by such nonconforming use within one year from
the effective date of this chapter.  It shall be the duty of the Building
Commissioner/Inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming
use.



   (E)   Any nonconforming use for which an occupancy permit has not
been obtained in conformity with the requirements of division (D) shall be
presumed to be operating in violation of this chapter and such use shall
thereupon be abated.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77) Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.178  PLATS.



   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat,
in duplicate, or duplicate prints thereof, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimension of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape, and location of the
building to be erected, the size, shape, and location of any existing
buildings, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of this chapter.  A record of applications and plats shall be
kept in the office of the Building Commissioner/Inspector.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



§ 159.179  CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.



   The regulations imposed and the districts created by this chapter may
be amended from time to time, but no such amendments shall be made until a
public hearing has been held, and a report and recommendations have been made
thereon by the Village Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.  At
least  15 days  notice of the  time and place of such hearing shall be
published in an official paper of general circulation in the village.  In
case of written protest against any proposed amendment, signed and
acknowledged by the majority owners of the frontage immediately adjoining or
across an alley therefrom, or by the majority owners of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to such regulation or
district filed with the Village Clerk, such amendment shall not be passed
except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.180  FEES.



   (A)   The following fees are hereby established for the filing of
applications for zoning amendments, variances, special uses or continuances:



 

Services
 
Fee


For all applications for single family owner occupied  residential
variances 
 
$ 75.00*


For non-owner occupied and commercial property variances
 
$150.00*


For continuances
 
$40.00*



 



* plus cost of advertising and engineering fees



   (B)   The fee for publication, transcripts, and preparation of
ordinances shall be paid by the appellant.  The fee for continuances may be
waived at the discretion of the Village Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission.



   (C)   For transcripts on appeal to the circuit court:  transcripts,
necessary upon appeal to the circuit court shall be furnished by the
appellant.  These may be obtained, upon payment of the current charge, from
the reporting service employed by the Planning, Zoning and Development
Commission to take the testimony given at the public hearings.



   (D)   The Board may waive the transcription and ordinance
preparation costs where it is determined that the appellant is unable to pay
for the same.  The following fee schedule shall apply to planned
developments:



      (1)   For filing and zoning amendment, $200 for each
preliminary development plan at the time the plan is submitted.



      (2)   For the examination and inspection of the preliminary
development plan $100 for each net acre for the first five acres or fraction
thereof, plus $50 for each additional net acre or fraction thereof, at the
time the preliminary plan is submitted.



      (3)   For examination and inspection of each stage of the
final development plan, $100 for each net acre or fraction thereof.



      (4)   An additional fee of $150 to cover renotification of
interested persons and office expense shall be charged when a continuance of
any hearing is requested by the applicant or opponent.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 99-07,
passed 2-17-99; Am. Ord. 2002-015, passed 9-4-02)



§ 159.181  PRELIMINARY EXPENSE AND REVIEW AGREEMENT.



   (A)   All parties, interested in annexing a parcel of land or
requesting a zoning classification or variance which the village feels may
result in expenses for its professional staff, must enter into a preliminary
review agreement.



   (B)   The village will not act on any petition until such an
agreement has been entered into by the village and the petitioner.



   (C)   Any action taken by the petitioner without signing the
preliminary expense agreement is taken at his own risk and the village will
not be liable for his costs.



(Ord. 76-27, passed  - - )



§ 159.200  CONFLICTING REFERENCES.



   Wherever any reference is made in the Code of Ordinances to the
Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals that reference shall be deemed
to refer to the Planning, Zoning and Development Commission.



(Ord. 95-06, passed 4-10-95)



§ 159.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 nor
more than $500 for each offense.  Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 77-03, passed 1-19-77)



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any or all of the
provisions of § 159.013 for which another penalty has not been provided
shall be fined not less than $50 no more than $500 for each offense. Each day
or portion of a day thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense
in the event such violation continues.



(Ord. 95-10, passed 6-21-95)



APPENDIX:  ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS; GENERAL PLAN STANDARDS



 



Note: This appendix is available in PDF format. Please click the link below:




Appendix




 



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



         I.   ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS



         II.   ANNEXATIONS



         III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



         IV.   FRANCHISES



         V.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



         VI.   STREET NAME CHANGES



         VII.   VACATIONS



         VIII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



         IX.   VARIANCES



         X.   RESUBDIVISIONS



TABLE I:  ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




80-13
 
11-12-80
 
Authorizing the dedication of certain territory to the village.


96-25
 
8-7-96
 
Authorizing acceptance of a plat of dedication for a public street in the
village.


Res. 2000-PAR-14
 
6-7-00
 
Naming the street north of the Police Department Mike Maicach Way.


Res. 2007-1024
 
6-20-07
 
Dedicating Lake Lorin and associated wetlands east of Kelly Park.


Res. 2009-1011
 
3-18-09
 
Accepting warranty deed and reproration agreement of Outlot A of the Liberty
Square Planned Unit Development.


2018-001
 
1-17-18
 
Authorizing acceptance of a plat of dedication for a public street in the
village.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




71-11
 
1-8-72
 
Annexing certain land described as the north 1493.44 feet of the west half of
the northwest quarter of section 27, township 36 north, range 12 (167th
Street and Route 45).


72-1
 
1-15-72
 
Annexing certain land described as the east 20 acres of the northwest quarter
of the northeast quarter of section 22, township 36 north, range 12 east
(Wittich Memorial Church).


74-11
 
-  -74
 
Annexing certain territory described as that portion of the right-of-way of
171st Street lying south of the line dividing said right-of-way, from a point
approximately 660 feet west of the center line of 88th Avenue westerly for a
distance approximately 1,448 feet to a point approximately 570 feet east of
the center line of 94th Avenue.


76-08
 
-  -76
 
Annexing certain territory described as the southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of section 22, township 36 north, range 12 east.


76-32
 
12-8-76
 
Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Homestead Restaurant
Annexation.


77-02
 
-  -77
 
Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Bee Dee annexation.


77-10
 
5-4-77
 
Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Great Lakes Development
Corp. annexation.


77-15
 
6-30-77
 
Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Palos Savings and Loan
annexation.


79-9
 
5-9-79
 
Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Hickory Builders, Inc.
Development annexation.


81-23
 
11-25-81
 
Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Hickory Builders, Inc.
Commercial Development annexation.


84-06
 
-  -84
 
Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Georgious Development
annexation.


84-07
 
-  -84
 
The following territory is hereby annexed into the village:


 
 
(A) Parcel 1.  The east  half of the east half (except the north 1296.12
feet) of the Southeast quarter of section 15, township 36 north, range 12
east.


 
 
(B) Parcel 2.  The west 30 acres except the north 19.494 acres and except
the east 300 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of section 14,
township 36 north, range 12 east; and the east 300 feet of the west 30 acres,
except the north 19.494 acres of the West half of the southwest quarter of
section 14, township 36 north, range 12 east.


 
 
(C) Parcel 3.  The west half of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter except the east 479.76 feet of section 23, township 36 north, range
12 east.


90-53
 
11-14-90
 
Annexing certain real estate being the east 200.00 feet of the west 569.85
feet of the south 200.00 feet of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 27, together with the remaining part of the right-of-way
of 171st street lying south of and adjacent thereto, in township 36 north,
range 12 east of the Third Principal Meridian.


95-35
 
11-15-95
 
Annexing the East ½ of the East ½ of the East ½ of the Southwest 1/4 of
the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the
Third Principal Meridian.


95-37
 
11-15-95
 
Annexing two parcels:


 
 
Parcel 1 contains the West ½ of the East ½ of the East ½ of the Southwest
1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of
the Third Principal Meridian.


 
 
Parcel 2 contains the East ½ of the West ½ of the East ½ of the Southwest
1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12 East of
the Third Principal Meridian.


95-39
 
11-15-95
 
Annexing the East ½ of the East ½ of the Southwest 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4
of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the Third Principal
Meridian; and the West ½ of the West ½ of the East ½ of the Southwest 1/4
of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the
Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County.


96-06
 
2-7-96
 
Annexing the East ½ of the East ½ of the West ½ of the Southwest 1/4 of
the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the
Third Principal Meridian; and the West ½ of the West ½ of the East ½ of
the Southwest 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 36 North,
Range 12, East of the Third Principal Meridian.


96-08
 
2-7-96
 
Annexing the North 348.00 feet (except the West 333.00 feet thereof) of the
West 3/8 of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21,
Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the Third Principal Meridian, together
with that part of the Northwest Quarter of said Southeast Quarter of Section
21 lying South and West of the Center line of the drainage ditch.


97-18
 
6-18-97
 
Annexing the East Half of the East Half of the East Half of the Southwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12
East of the Third Principal Meridian as well as any adjacent highway not
previously and validly annexed to any municipality.


97-21
 
6-18-97
 
Annexing two parcels:


 
 
Parcel 1:  The West Half of the East Half of the East Half of the Southwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12,
East of the Third Principal Meridian.


 
 
Parcel 2:  The East Half of the West Half the East Half on the Southwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12
East of the Third Principle Meridian as well as any adjacent highway not
previously and validly annexed to the municipality.


97-24
 
6-18-97
 
Annexing the East Half of the East Half of the West Half of the Southwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21, Township 36 North, Range 12,
East of the Third Principal Meridian and the West Half of the West Half of
the East Half of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section
21, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the Third Principle Meridian as well
as any adjacent highway not previously and validly annexed to any
municipality.


97-27
 
6-18-97
 
Annexing the North 348.00 feet (except the West 333.00 feet thereof) of the
West 3/8 of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 21,
Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the Third Principal Meridian, together
with that part of the Northwest Quarter of said Southeast Quarter of Section
21 lying South and West of the Center line of the drainage ditch.


99-02
 
1-6-99
 
Annexing the West (except the North 348 feet thereof and except the West 333
feet there) of the Southwest 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township
36 North, Range 12 East of the Third Principal Meridian.


99-32
 
11-3-99
 
Annexing the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter (except for the south
865.32 feet thereof) of Section 27, together with the south 30.89 feet of the
west half of the northwest quarter of Section 27, all in Township 36 North,
Range 12 East of the Third Principal Meridian.


2004-017
 
12-8-04
 
Annexing three parcels:


 
 
Parcel 1: The south 84 feet of Lot “A” in Owner’s Subdivision of part
of the Southeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 22, Township 36 North,
Range 12, East of the Third Principal Meridian.


 
 
Parcel 2: Commencing at a point in the west line of the Southeast 1/4 of the
Northwest 1/4 of Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the Third
Principal Meridian.


 
 
Parcel 3: The south 216 feet of the north 610.50 feet of the Southeast 1/4 of
the Northwest 1/4 of Section 22, Township 36 North, Range 12, East of the
Third Principal Meridian.


2005-007
 
3-16-05
 
Disconnecting Lots 1-4 in Formula’s Subdivision, being part of the
Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 27, Township 36 North, Range
12, East of the Third Principal Meridian, which lots are being annexed by the
Village of Tinley Park.


 
 




 



TABLE III:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




69-8
 
11-19-69
 
Authorizing the execution of a contract for fire protection with the village
of Tinley Park.


70-8
 
8-5-70
 
Authorizing execution of 159th Street improvement agreement.


78-06
 
8-23-78
 
Adopting an employment agreement between the village and prospective police
officers.


84-13
 
11-14-84
 
Implementing an indemnification agreement with Cook County in lieu of
insurance and surety bond requirements.


88-04
 
-  -88
 
Adopting an employment agreement between the village and prospective police
officers.


- -
 
7-27-88
 
Intergovernmental agreement authorizing the exchange of real estate between
the village and the fire protection district.


91-25
 
9-12-91
 
Authorizing the execution of a development agreement between Harris Bank as
trustee under Trust 4230 and the village.


92-07
 
2-26-92
 
Authorizing the amendment to an intergovernmental agreement between the
Village of Orland Hills and the Village of Orland Park.


92-23
 
6-24-92
 
Implementing an indemnification agreement with Cook County in lieu of
insurance and surety bond requirements.


92-42
 
10-14-92
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the
Village of Orland Hills and the Village of Orland Park for police dispatch
and detention service.


92-44
 
10-14-92
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the
Village of Orland Hills and the Orland Fire Protection District relating to
regulation of vehicles in fire lanes.


93-03
 
1-12-93
 
Authorizing the execution of the contract and bylaws of the South Towns
Agency for risk management (STARM) and thereby authorizing membership in this
intergovernmental agency.


93-16
 
3-25-93
 
Authorizing the execution of a planned unit development agreement.


93-17
 
3-25-93
 
Authorizing the execution of a planned unit development agreement.


93-21
 
4-6-93
 
Authorizing the execution of certain agreements regarding scavenger services
and sweeping services for the village.


93-34
 
6-16-93
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the
village and the Orland Fire Protection District relating to regulation of
public displays of fireworks permits.


94-19
 
7-20-94
 
Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Orland
Hills and Kirby School District 140 providing for the use of Kirby School
District 140 facilities by the village.


Res. 95-12
 
3-15-95
 
Authorizing the execution of a local agency funding agreement between the
village and the State Department of Transportation.


95-34
 
11-15-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


95-36
 
11-15-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


95-38
 
11-15-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


95-48
 
12-20-95
 
Authorizing the acceptance of revenue pursuant to the Calumet City South
Suburban Mayors and Managers Association Agreement.


95-49
 
12-20-95
 
Authorizing the acceptance of revenue pursuant to the Rosemont-West Central
Municipal Conference Agreement.


96-05
 
2-7-96
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


96-07
 
2-7-96
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


96-29
 
10-16-96
 
Approving and authorizing the execution of a first amended and restated
declaration of trust in the village.


97-05
 
 
 
2-5-97Authorizing the execution of a reciprocal grant of utility easement and
curb cut permit between the Village Fire Protection District and the village.


97-17
 
 
 
6-18-97Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


97-20
 
 
 
6-18-97Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


97-23
 
 
 
6-18-97Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


97-26
 
 
 
6-18-97Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.


Res. 98-09
 
4-1-98
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between Cook
County, the Sheriff of Cook County, and the Village of Orland Hills for the
provision of Criminal Apprehension Booking System Equipment and Related
Services.


Res. 99-08
 
1-15-99
 
Entering into a reinsurance and claims administration agreement between South
Town Agency for Risk Management and its members and American Guarantee and
Liability Insurance Company, a New York corporation.


99-14
 
 
 
5-26-99Right-of-way agreement between the Village of Orland Hills and
Metricom, Inc., a Delaware corporation.


99-20
 
 
 
7-7-99Intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Orland Hills and
Kirby School Districts 140 providing for the use of Kirby School District 140
facilities by the Village of Orland Hills.


Agr. 99-08
 
9-30-98
 
Entering into a reinsurance and claims administration agreement between South
Town Agency for Risk Management and its members for the years that they were
members of STARM,, and American Guarantee and Liability Insurance Company, a
New York corporation.


Agr. 99-20
 
7-7-99
 
Intergovernmental agreement between the village and Kirby School District
140, providing for the use of Kirby School District 140 facilities by the
village.


Agr. 99-33
 
9-16-99
 
Agreement between the village and Barclay & Associates, Architects, for the
new community center, to be constructed in phases.


Agr. 99-27
 
10-4-99
 
Intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Orland Park and the
Village of Orland Hills providing for police dispatching and prisoner
detention services.


Agr. 99-34
 
10-14-99
 
Agreement between the village and Robert T. Slanker and Associates,
Construction Manager, for construction of the Orland Hills Community Center.


Res. 99-32
 
11-1-99
 
Authorizing a representative to sign grant documents for an Illinois
First/IEPA Grant.


Agr. 2000-PAR-04
 
1-19-00
 
Economic incentive agreement between the village and Orland Hills Partners.


Agr. 2000-PAR-12
 
5-3-00
 
Intergovernmental agreement between the village and Kirby School District
140, providing for the use of Kirby School District 140 facilities by the
village.


Res. 2000-PAR-13
 
6-7-00
 
Authorization for Ashbourne Park Development Grant.


Agr. 2001-PAR-004
 
4-18-01
 
Intergovernmental agreement between the village and Kirby School District
140, providing for the use of Kirby School District 140 facilities by the
village.


Res. 2002-006
 
2-20-02
 
Adopting the Northeastern Illinois Mutual Aid Network Public Works Emergency
Mutual Aid Service Agreement.


Agr. 2002-PAR-021
 
8-7-02
 
Intergovernmental agreement between the village and Kirby School District
140, providing for the use of Kirby School District 140 facilities by the
village.


Agr. 2002-PAR-022
 
9-10-02
 
Agreement between the village and All Purpose Erectors, Inc.


Agr. 2002-PAR-027
 
11-20-02
 
Illinois Law Enforcement Alarm Systems Mutual Aid Agreement.


Agr. 2002-PAR-028
 
12-4-02
 
Agreement between JULIE, Inc. and the village.


Res. 2004-R-051
 
2-1-04
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the
Villages of Tinley Park and Orland Hills for the property located at 171st
Street and LaGrange Road.


Res. 2004-1006
 
2-18-04
 
Authorization of an intergovernmental agreement between the County of Cook
and the Village of Orland Hills, which provides for certain reimbursements
for services relating to improvements in the public way on 94th Avenue.


Res. 2004-1014
 
5-5-04
 
Adopting the Non-Emergency Mutual Aid in Public Works in the village.


Res. 2004-1015
 
5-5-04
 
Adopting the Emergency Mutual Aid in Public Works in the village.


Agr. 2004-1018
 
6-2-04
 
Intergovernmental agreement between the village and Kirby School District
140, providing for the use of Kirby School District 140 facilities by the
village.


Res. 2004-1021
 
9-1-04
 
Adopting the National Incident Management System (NIMS) in the village.


Agr. 2004-1025
 
10-20-04
 
Intergovernmental agreement with South Suburban Mayors and Managers
Association for professional range instruction simulator.


Agr. 2005-1005
 
2-16-05
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Cook County for use of Orland Hills
Community Center by Cook County Department of Public Health.


Res. 2005-1006
 
2-16-05
 
Authorizing the execution of an inter- governmental agreement with the
Village of Tinley Park for the property located at 171st Street and LaGrange
Road.


Agr. 2005-1020
 
4-6-05
 
Communications site lease agreement with Nextel West Corp.


Agr. 2005-1021
 
6-8-05
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Kirby School District 140, providing for the
use of Kirby School District 140 facilities by the village.


2006-009
 
3-15-06
 
Authorizing the execution of an economic incentive agreement between Wal-Mark
Real Estate Business Trust and the village.


Agr. 2006-1016
 
6-21-06
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Kirby School District 140, providing for the
use of Kirby School District 140 facilities by the village.


Agr. 2006-1020
 
9-20-06
 
Agreement between the village and Illinois Convenience & Safety Corporation.


Agr. 2006-1021
 
9-20-06
 
Agreement between the village and MMC/ enterpriz Municipal Energy
Collaborative/Energy Choices, P.C.


Agr. 2006-1027
 
12-6-06
 
Teppco easement agreement - 163rd St. and 94th Ave.


Res. 2007-1014
 
4-4-07
 
Northeastern Illinois Mutual Aid Network Public Works Emergency Mutual Aid
Service Agreement to address area-wide equipment and personnel exchange in
emergency situations.


Res. 2007-1015
 
4-4-07
 
Northeastern Illinois Mutual Aid Network Public Works Non-Emergency
Intergovernmental Service Agreement to address area-wide equipment and
personnel exchange in non- emergency situations.


2007-016
 
9-19-07
 
Authorizing and providing for an installment purchase agreement for purpose
of paying all or  a portion of the cost of acquiring and constructing bike
and walking path improvements and streetscape improvements and issuance of
bonds therefor.


Agr. 2007-1030
 
11-21-07
 
Third amendment to Orland Hills TIF Redevelopment Agreement (Orland Towne
Center).


Agr. 2007-1033
 
12-5-07
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Orland Park for dispatch and
detention services.


Agr. 2008-1006
 
1-16-08
 
IDOT Engineering Agreement with Cristopher B. Burke Engineering Ltd. for HPP
Project - Safety-LU Services.


Agr. 2008-1021
 
4-16-08
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Chicago and other suburban police
departments for Illinois/Indiana Task Force.


Res. 2008-1024
 
5-20-08
 
Adopting emergency services and disaster mutual aid agreement with Will
County Emergency Services Mutual Aid Association.


Agr. 2008-1025
 
5-20-08
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Elementary School District #140.


Agr. 2008-1030
 
11-19-08
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Kirby School District #140 for facility
utilization.


Agr. 2009-1001
 
1-7-09
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Homer Glen, Orland Park, Tinley Park,
Markham and Oak Forest for Illinois Tomorrow grant.


Res. 2009-1016
 
4-28-09
 
Authorizing participation in inter-jurisdictional application for
neighborhood stabilization program funds.


Agr. 2009-1026
 
11-14-09
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Kirby School District 140 for the use of
Fernway school facilities.


Agr.2010-1009
 
5-19-10
 
Agreement with Clear Channel Outdoor for visibility rights regarding a
billboard located at 9135 West 159th Street.


Agr. --
 
6-1-10
 
Mutual aid agreement regarding the Greater Will County Emergency Services
Mutual Aid Association.


Agr. 2010-1023
 
6-16-10
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Village of Orland Park for rehabilitation of
88th Avenue from 159th Street to 171st Street.


Agr. 2010-1031
 
10-20-10
 
Parking agreement with SSMHCC.


2010-09
 
12-15-10
 
Approving an economic incentive agreement between Orland Towne Center, LLC
and the Village of Orland Hills, Cook County, Illinois.


Agr. 2011-1024
 
- -11
 
Professional  energy  consultancy  services agreement with BlueStar Energy
Services, Inc., d/b/a BlueStar Energy Solutions.


Agr. 2012-1004
 
2-1-12
 
Intergovernmental agreement with the Village of Orland Park for dispatch and
detention services.


Agr. 2012-1005
 
2-1-12
 
Development reimbursement agreement with LaRocco Brothers, Inc., for off
track betting facility improvements.


Agr. 2012-1010
 
2-3-12
 
Professional  energy  consultancy  services agreement with the Illinois
Community Choice Aggregation Network (ICCAN).


Res. 2012-1006
 
2-15-12
 
Approving an intergovernmental agreement with the Illinois Office of the
Comptroller for collection of tax and non-tax debt.


2012-012
 
6-20-12
 
Approving a contract with First Energy Solutions for provision of electricity
for the electricity aggregation program, and authorizing the President to
execute documentation.


2012-018
 
10-17-12
 
Approving the Illinois Elevator Safety Program Agreement, and amending Ch.
150 of the code.


2013-009
 
11-20-13
 
Authorizing and providing for an installment purchase agreement by the
village for the purpose of paying all or a portion of the cost of acquiring
and constructing bike and walking path improvements and streetscape
improvements within the village.


Res. 2013-1016
 
7-17-13
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago and the Village of
Orland Hills for the remediation of Tinley Creek.


Res. 2014-1008
 
3-19-14
 
Approving a memorandum of understanding with the Illinois State Police for
the live scan registration of fingerprints.


Agr. 2013-1025
 
10-21-13
 
An intergovernmental agreement permitting the use of the Village of Orland
Hills phone service and phone number by the Orland Hills Public Library
District.


Agr. 2014-1019
 
7-16-14
 
Intergovernmental agreement with Orland Township to share the costs of
certain improvements to Kelly Park.


Agr. 2014-1020
 
8-6-14
 
Services agreement between the Village of Oralnd Hills and the Illinois
Community Choice Aggregation network for electricity aggregation consultancy
services and procurement for the municipality’s residential and small
business electric accounts.


Agr. --
 
1-21-15
 
Settlement agreement and release between the Illinois Public Risk Fund and
the Village of Orland Hills.


Agr. --
 
1-21-15
 
Intergovernmental agreement establishing the Fifth District Swat Team.


Agr. 2015-1018
 
2-6-15
 
Agreement between the Village of Orland Hills, the Cook County State’s
Attorney’s Office and the Illinois State Police (“ISP”), regarding
$337.619.55 in forfeited funds that should have been processed through the
ISP Asset Forfeiture Section.


Res. 2015-1017
 
5-6-15
 
Authorizing the execution of a law enforcement mutual aid agreement, and the
existence and formation of the Illinois Law Enforcement Alarm System by
mutual cooperation.


Agr. 2015-1019
 
7-1-15
 
Mutual aid agreement between the Village of Orland Hills and the Greater Will
County Emergency Services Mutual Aid Association.


Res. 2015-1021
 
8-5-15
 
Authorizing participation as a member in the Illinois Emergency Management
Mutual Aid System pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement between the
Village of Orland Hills and Illinois Emergency Services Management
Association.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  FRANCHISES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




80-12A
 
11-12-80
 
Cable Television franchise granted to Metropolitan of Southwest Cook County
#2, Inc.


83-22
 
-  -83
 
Amending Ord. 62-0-008, granting to the Illinois Bell Telephone Company
certain rights in the village.


84-15
 
-  -84
 
Amending Ord. 62-0-008, granting to the Illinois Bell Telephone company
certain rights in the village.


92-06
 
2-26-92
 
Granting to the Illinois Bell Telephone Company certain rights in the village.


92-46
 
11-11-92
 
Granting to the Commonwealth Edison Company certain rights in the village.


Res. 95-11
 
3-1-95
 
Approving the transfer of cable television system and franchise from
Metrovision of Southwest Cook County No. 2, Inc. to Time Warner Entertainment
-Advance/Newhouse Partnership.


2000-23
 
11-15-00
 
Extending the cable television franchise with AT&T  Broadband to November
12, 2001.


Agr. 2009-1028
 
12-2-09
 
Granting to Comcast of Illinois X, LLC., a franchise for the construction,
operation and maintenance of a cable system.


2013-005
 
8-21-13
 
Authorizing Northern Illinois Gas Company (d/b/a Nicor Gas Company) to
construct, operate and maintain a gas distributing system in and through the
village.


 
 




 



TABLE V:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION


76-26
 
11-3-76
 
Authorizing the purchase on an installment basis of real property located
within the corporate boundaries of the village and for the entering into a
purchase installment contract describing all the details of the purchase
thereof, together with an appropriation and levy of taxes for the purpose of
paying for the cost.


83-10
 
7-13-83
 
Authorizing the purchase of real property located in lots 27 and 28 in block
3 of the Westhaven Resubdivision.


92-61
 
12-23-92
 
Authorizing the sale of certain real property to Kubas Family at 17007 S.
92nd Ave.


98-01
 
2-18-98
 
Approving a two lot subdivision for Ace Hardware and Wendy's at 9545 W. 167th
St. and 16737 S. 96th Ave.


2005-002
 
1-5-05
 
Authorizing acquisition by eminent domain of the west 200 feet of the
Southeast 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4, with exceptions, of Section 22, Township
36 North, Range 12, East of the Third Principal Meridian.


 
 



 



TABLE VI:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION


80-06
 
-  -80
 
(A) Changing the name of 92nd Place running north from 162nd Street to Quail
Court. 


 
 
(B) Changing the name of 92nd Place running south from 162nd Street to Fox
Court.


81-05
 
-  -81
 
Changing the name of a portion of 162nd Street running east from 94th Avenue
to approximately 9300 west and that section running south, shall be named
Hawthorne Lane.


94-46
 
12-21-94
 
Changing the name of 163rd Street located between 94th Avenue and 91st
Avenue, extended, to Meadowview Drive.


2001-012
 
6-6-01
 
Changing the name of Christine Court to Cardinal Circle.


 
 



 



TABLE VII:  VACATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION


77-11
 
12-28-77
 
Vacating a public street being:  Third addition to village, a subdivision of
part of the southwest quarter of the south-east quarter and part of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 22, township 36 north,
range 12 east.


78-10
 
-  -78
 
Vacating a subdivision being:  Hunter's Ridge Subdivision of part of the
southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 22, township 36 north,
range 12 east.


97-02
 
2-5-97
 
Vacating certain drainage and utility easements relating to lot numbers 29,
30, and 31 in the Pepperwood Subdivision Phase One at 9316, 9324, and 16531
Park Place.


2001-015
 
6-20-01
 
Vacating certain drainage and utility easements relating to lot numbers 210,
211 and 212 in the Pepperwood Subdivision Phase 4 at 9206, 9200 and 9154
Cardinal Circle.


2003-005
 
3-5-03
 
Vacating a portion of a pedestrian and bike path easement located on Lot 183
of Pepperwood Phase Three.


 
 



 



TABLE VIII:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




84-10
 
-  -84
 
Rezoning certain property being the north 466.70 feet of the west half of the
northwest quarter of section 27, township 36 north, range 12 east from B-1 to
B-2.


94-08
 
3-2-94
 
Rezoning property being lots 1 and 2 in Cozy Corner Subdivision commonly
known as the south side of 167th Street and approximately 84.53 feet east of
90th Avenue from R-3 Special Use to R-3 Single Detached Family Use.


95-28
 
10-18-95
 
Rezoning property located at 9135 West 159th Street from B-1 to B-2 with a
Special Use.


96-19
 
5-15-96
 
Rezoning property located at 16121 S. 94th Avenue from O-1 to R-4.


97-19
 
6-18-97
 
Rezoning newly annexed property to R-4.


97-22
 
6-18-97
 
Rezoning newly annexed property to R-4.


97-25
 
6-18-97
 
Rezoning newly annexed property to R-4.


97-28
 
6-18-97
 
Rezoning newly annexed property to R-4.


98-32
 
10-21-98
 
Rezoning property located at 16099 South 94th Avenue from R-4 to O-1.


99-33
 
11-3-99
 
Zoning the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of section 27 into the
B-2 district.


2000-06
 
1-19-00
 
Rezoning the property at 9201 W. 159th Street to B-2, and granting a special
use allowing for motor vehicle sales.


2003-023
 
12-3-03
 
Rezoning the property at 9344 West 171st Street to B-2 and granting a Planned
Unit Development for the property.


2005-009
 
5-18-05
 
Rezoning the property known as 16125 South 94th Avenue to B-2 and granting a
special use.


2005-020
 
9-7-05
 
Approving a planned unit development of the property commonly known as 9755
and 9800 W. 167th Street.


2006-006
 
3-15-06
 
Approving rezoning to B-2 and granting a special use for the property
commonly known as 16121 South 94th Avenue.


2006-008
 
3-15-06
 
Approving rezoning from R-1 to combined Residential/B-2 and Site Plan/PUD for
the property commonly known as the southwest corner of 159th Place and 91st
Avenue.


2007-011
 
7-17-07
 
Granting preliminary approval to planned unit development at 9910 W. 167th
Street.


2007-018
 
10-17-07
 
Approving final approval of planned unit development (Farano PUD) at 9750 W.
167th Street.


2008-006
 
3-19-08
 
Approving final site approval and granting special use for property at 9271
West 159th Street.


2014-006
 
11-5-14
 
Granting a special use to Medicann, LLC, to operate and Illinois-registered
medical cannabis dispensary organization facility at 8806 West 159th Street.


2016-005
 
8-17-16
 
Granting final approval of planned unit development (Cresthaven PUD) at 9755
and 9800 West 167th Street.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IX:  VARIANCES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




94-06
 
3-2-94
 
Granting a variance to Georgios D La Parco for a sign at 8800 W. 159th Street.


94-07
 
3-2-94
 
Granting a variance to Georgios Bar & Grill for a sign at 8888 W. 159th
Street.


94-11
 
5-4-94
 
Granting a variance to Petsmart, Inc. for wall signs at 9277 West 159th
Street.


94-12
 
6-1-94
 
Granting a variance to the property at 9000 Westwood Drive for a setback.


94-13
 
6-1-94
 
Granting a variance for rear yard encroachment to the property located at
8817 West O'Brien Drive.


94-17
 
7-6-94
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 9005 Westwood
Drive.


94-18
 
7-6-94
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 16284 S. 92nd
Avenue.


94-21
 
7-20-94
 
Granting a variance for a sign to the property located at 9400 W. 163rd
Street.


94-22
 
7-20-94
 
Granting a variance for a shed to the property located at 8800 W. 169th
Street.


94-25
 
8-17-94
 
Granting a variance for a swimming pool to the property located at 8907 Ridge
Lane.


94-29
 
10-19-94
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 17061 92nd Avenue.


94-30
 
10-19-94
 
Granting a variance to Gas City for a sign at 9390 W. 171st Street.


94-32
 
11-2-94
 
Granting a variance for an encroachment in the front yard setback to the
property located 16804 South 93rd Avenue.


94-33
 
11-2-94
 
Granting a variance for an encroachment in the front yard setback to the
property located at 16207 S. Haven Ave.


95-03
 
4-10-95
 
Granting a variance for a parking lot to the property at 15905 90th Avenue.


95-09
 
6-7-95
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 8861 Ridge Lane.


95-14
 
8-2-95
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 8861 Ridge Lane.


95-16
 
8-16-95
 
Granting a variance to Beverly Bank for a sign at 8811 W. 159th Street.


95-21
 
9-20-95
 
Granting a variance for garage size to the property located at 9324 W. 170th
Street.


95-22
 
9-20-95
 
Granting a variance for a swimming pool to the property located at 17001 S.
Hobart Avenue.


95-23
 
9-20-95
 
Granting a variance for fire sprinklers placement to the property located at
16033 S. 94th Avenue.


95-29
 
10-18-95
 
Granting a variance to Rock Enterprises for rear yard setback located at 9135
West 159th Street.


95-30
 
10-18-95
 
Granting a variance to Mancari's of Orland, Inc. for a sign at 8821 West
159th Street.


95-31
 
10-18-95
 
Granting a variance to Mancari's of Orland, Inc. for signs at 8821 West 159th
Street.


95-32
 
10-18-95
 
Granting a variance to Zany Brainy for signs at 9275 West 159th Street.


96-01
 
1-3-96
 
Granting a variance for a front yard setback to property located at 9310
Hunter Court.


96-02
 
1-17-96
 
Granting a variance for a swimming pool to property located at 8850
Marshfield Lane.


96-03
 
1-17-96
 
Granting a variance for a front yard setback to the property located at 15939
Haven Avenue.


96-04
 
1-17-96
 
Granting a variance to Mancari's of Orland for wall signs at 8821 W. 159th
Street.


96-14
 
2-21-96
 
Granting a variance for a swimming pool to the property located at 8831
Meadowview Drive.


96-16
 
3-6-96
 
Granting a variance for distance between buildings to the property located at
16279 S. Haven Avenue.


96-20
 
4-17-96
 
Granting a variance for a shed to the property located at 9024 W. 169th Place.


96-21
 
5-15-96
 
Granting a variance for a residential garage to the property located at 9750
W. 167th Street.


96-22
 
6-5-96
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 9217 W. 167nd
Avenue.


96-28
 
10-16-96
 
Granting a variance for a sign to the property located at 8841 W. 159th
Street.


97-04
 
2-5-97
 
Granting a variance for a display of merchandise to the property located at
9265 W. 159th Street.


97-13
 
5-21-97
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 17042 S. 92nd
Avenue.


97-16
 
6-18-97
 
Granting a variance for a ground graphics to the property located at 8800 W.
159th Street.


97-29
 
7-2-97
 
Granting a variance for a fence to the property located at 16800 S. 93rd
Avenue.


97-34
 
7-16-97
 
Granting a variance for a sign on the property located at 8821 W. 159th
Street.


97-42
 
10-15-97
 
Granting a variance for a side corner yard fence encroachment on the property
located at 8881 Leslie Drive.


97-45
 
11-19-97
 
Granting a variance for a side corner yard fence encroachment on the property
located at 8933 W. 167th Street.


97-46
 
11-19-97
 
Granting a variance for a side yard encroachment the property located at
17029 Redwood Court.


98-04
 
3-18-98
 
Granting a variance for a sign on the property located at 9545 W. 167th
Street.


98-05
 
5-20-98
 
Granting a variance for an easement encroachment on the property located at
17001 Westwood Court.


98-06
 
5-20-98
 
Granting a variance for a sign on the property located at 9545 W. 167th
Street.


98-11
 
6-17-98
 
Granting a variance for a special use permit to allow for the storage and
dispensing of propane gas in an outside fenced-in area on the property
located at 9545 W. 167th Street.


98-16
 
7-15-98
 
Granting a variance for a three-foot setback from the side yard property line
on the property located at 16187 S. 92nd Avenue.


98-17
 
7-15-98
 
Granting a ten-foot variance in the front yard setback on the property
located at 9260 Pepperwood Drive.


98-19
 
7-15-98
 
Granting a variance for a sign on the property located at 8800 W. 159th
Street.


98-22
 
8-19-98
 
Granting a variance for a fence on the property located at 9224 W. 162nd
Street.


98-24
 
9-16-98
 
Granting a variance for fences on the property located at 16259 Maplewood
Court.


98-26
 
9-16-98
 
Granting a variance for seasonal outside storage, display and sale of goods
and merchandise on the property located at 9265 West 159th Street.


98-29
 
10-7-98
 
Granting a variance for side yard encroachments on the property located at
16188 South 92nd Avenue.


98-30
 
10-7-98
 
Granting a variance for side yard encroachments on the property located at
16284 92nd Avenue.


98-31
 
10-7-98
 
Granting a variance for side yard encroachments on the property located at
16284 Haven Avenue.


98-33
 
10-21-98
 
Granting variances for minimum lot areas and minimum required parking spaces
on the property located at 16099 South 94th Avenue.


98-34
 
11-16-98
 
Granting a variance for seasonal outside storage, display and sale of goods
and merchandise on the property located at 9265 West 159th Street.


98-37
 
8-20-98
 
Granting a variance for sign on the property located at 9135 W. 159th Street.


98-39
 
9-17-98
 
Granting a variance for fences on the property located at 8934 W. 167th Place.


99-04
 
1-20-99
 
Granting a variance for side yard encroachment on the property located at
16284 Haven Avenue.


99-06
 
4-7-99
 
Granting a Special Use and certain variances on the property commonly known
as 9111 West 159th Street.


99-10
 
4-7-99
 
Granting a variance for prefabricated aluminum patio enclosure on the
property located at 17029 Westwood Court.


99-13
 
5-26-99
 
Granting a variance for fences on the property located at 8890 Meadowview
Drive.


99-18
 
6-16-99
 
Granting a variance for front yard setbacks on the property located at 16664
Beacon Lane.


99-19
 
6-16-99
 
Granting a variance for fences on the property located at 16160 S. Haven
Avenue.


99-26
 
10-20-99
 
Granting a variance for a side corner yard deck encroachment on the property
located at 16347 Terrace Court.


99-27
 
10-20-99
 
Granting a variance allowing a screen room structure to be built on an
existing wood deck on the property located at 9023 W. 170th Street.


99-28
 
10-20-99
 
Granting a variance pertaining to the distance between the principal
residential structure and the proposed detached garage on the property
located at 16737 S. Haven Avenue.


99-34
 
11-17-99
 
Granting a variance pertaining to a corner side yard encroachment on the
property located at 9333 Rachel Court.


2000-10
 
6-7-00
 
Granting a variance pertaining to a side corner yard fence encroachment on
the property located at 16201 Fox Court.


2000-19
 
10-18-00
 
Granting a variance allowing a 10 x 20-foot shed attached to  the back of a
detached garage on the property located at 16726 S. 91st Avenue.


2001-09
 
5-16-01
 
Granting a variance allowing a 12 x 12-foot shed  to be built on the
property located at 16617 S. 89th Court.


2001-17
 
7-11-01
 
Granting a variance allowing a 12 x 14-foot shed to be built on the property
located at 16312 Terrace Court.


2001-18
 
7-11-01
 
Granting a variance to allow an outdoor café to encroach 35 feet into the
existing front yard setback on the property located at 8888 West 159th Street.


2001-022
 
11-7-01
 
Granting a variance from § 155.20 requiring maximum size of 40 square feet
to 100 square feet and maximum height of 18 feet to 22 feet for a ground sign
on property located at 9201 W. 159th Street.


2001-023
 
11-7-01
 
Granting a variance from § 155.20 requiring maximum size of 40 square feet
to 80 square feet for a ground monument sign on property located at 9001 W.
159th Street.


2001-024
 
11-7-01
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high wood fence to encroach 10 feet
into the corner side yard setback on property located at 9313 W. 170th Place.


2002-002
 
5-15-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a prefabricated aluminum patio enclosure to be
build on a treated wood deck on property located at 16626 O’Brien Drive.


2002-003
 
5-15-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high vinyl fence to encroach 15 feet
into the corner side yard setback for property located at 16460 Boardwalk
Terrace.


2002-005
 
6-20-02
 
Granting a variance to allow two 5 x 5-foot corner barriers 3' high to be
erected on property located at 9223 Quail Court.


2002-006
 
6-20-02
 
Granting a variance allowing 40' of 6' high vinyl fence to be erected
directly next to an existing chain link fence on property located at 8856
West 167th Place.


2002-007
 
6-20-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a 4' high vinyl fence to encroach 15' into the
corner side yard setback on property located at 16313 Haven Avenue.


2002-009
 
7-17-02
 
Granting a variance from § 155.20 requiring maximum size of 40 square feet
to 60 square feet and maximum height of 18 feet to 20 feet for a ground sign
for the property located at 8835 W. 159th Street.


2002-011
 
8-21-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high wood privacy fence to encroach 25
feet into the corner side yard setback for the property located at 8800 West
167th Street.


2002-012
 
8-21-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a sign to be erected 19 feet high with 60 square
feet of signage for property located at 8843 West 159th Street.


2002-013
 
8-21-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high wood privacy fence to encroach 3
feet into the corner side yard setback for property located at 16030 South
91st Avenue.


2002-016
 
9-18-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high wood privacy fence to encroach 23
feet into the corner side yard for the property located at 8800 West 167th
Street.


2002-018
 
10-30-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a sign to be erected 24 feet high with 216
square feet of signage for property located at 9121 West 159th Street.


2002-021
 
11-20-02
 
Granting a variance to allow a 5 foot high PVC picket fence to encroach 15
feet into the corner side yard setback for property located at 9120 Mayors
Row.


2002-026
 
12-18-02
 
Granting a variance to § 159.058 to allow a Roly Poly Restaurant located at
9121 West 159th Street.


2003-006
 
5-7-03
 
Granting a variance to allow a room addition to partially encroach
approximately 8 feet into the corner side yard setback for property located
at 8912 West 167th Street.


2003-007
 
4-16-03
 
Granting a variance to allow 61 feet of double fencing to be erected along
the rear property line for property located at 16831 Hilltop.


2003-010
 
5-7-03
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high wooden privacy fence to encroach
12 feet into the corner side yard setback for property located at 16421
Morgan Lane.


2003-011
 
5-7-03
 
Granting a variance to sign regulations (§ 155.08(E)) for property located
at 16675 Haven Avenue.


2003-015
 
8-20-03
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high wooden privacy fence to encroach
25 feet into a corner side yard setback for property located at 16701 Haven
Avenue.


2003-019
 
9-17-03
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high wooden privacy fence to encroach
25 feet into a corner side yard setback for property located at 16201 South
92nd Avenue.


2003-024
 
12-17-03
 
Granting a variance to sign regulations to allow a ground monument sign for
property located at 9001 W. 159th Street.


2004-010
 
7-7-04
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6 foot high privacy fence to encroach 8 feet
into the corner side yard setback for property located at 16401 Morgan Lane.


2004-011
 
7-7-04
 
Granting a variance to allow 70 feet of double fencing to be erected along
the North side property line for property located at 16625 Leslie Drive.


2004-012
 
8-18-04
 
Granting a variance to allow a garage to be built 4 feet from the primary
structure and 2 feet from the side property line for property located at
15933 S. Haven Avenue.


2005-005
 
2-16-05
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6-foot high wooden privacy fence to encroach
19 feet into the corner side yard setback for property at 9201 W. 167th
Street.


2005-012
 
6-15-05
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6-foot high wooden privacy fence to encroach
14 feet into the corner side yard setback for property located at 9217 W.
167th Street.


2005-013
 
6-15-05
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6-foot high wooden privacy fence to encroach
15 feet into the corner side yard setback for property located at 16701 S.
91st Avenue.


2005-015
 
7-20-05
 
Granting a variance to allow an 18-foot by 28-foot detached garage to be
built 4 feet within the 10-foot rear yard utility easement for property
located at 16049 S. Haven Avenue.


2005-016
 
8-17-05
 
Granting a variance to allow a 12-foot by 14-foot shed to be built for
property located at 9143 Cardinal Circle.


2005-018
 
9-7-05
 
Granting a variance to allow a 5-foot high vinyl picket fence to encroach 25
feet into the corner side yard setback for property located at 8912 Ridge
Lane.


2005-022
 
11-16-05
 
Granting a variance to allow a ground monument sign for property located at
9201 W. 159th Street.


2006-005
 
2-15-06
 
Granting a variance to allow a 4-foot high vinyl picket fence for property
located at 16301 Haven Avenue.


2006-007
 
3-15-06
 
Granting a variance relating to lot area, lot coverage, yard setbacks and
park for the property known as Orland Towne Center.


2006-008
 
3-15-06
 
Granting a variance relating to lot area, lot coverage, yard setbacks and
parking for the property located at the southwest corner of 159th Place and
91st Avenue.


2006-0011
 
4-19-06
 
Granting a variance to allow a 4-foot high vinyl picket fence for property
located at 16460 Boardwalk Terrace.


2006-016
 
7-19-06
 
Granting a variance to allow a 4-foot high vinyl picket fence for property
located at 9100 Robin Court.


2006-017
 
7-19-06
 
Granting a variance to allow a 12-foot by 14-foot shed to be built on
property located at 17054 Westwood Drive.


2006-018
 
7-19-06
 
Granting a variance to allow a 6-foot high wood privacy fence on property
located at 8836 West 169th Street.


2006-026
 
9-20-06
 
Granting a variance to allow a 10-foot by 12-foot shed to be built on the
property located at 9231 Pepperwood Drive.


2007-006
 
5-16-07
 
Granting a variance to allow a 12-foot by 16-foot shed to be built 11 feet
high on property located at 16548 Park Place.


2007-013
 
7-17-07
 
Granting a variance for a fence at property located at 16357 Pepperwood Trail.


2007-014
 
7-17-07
 
Granting a variance for a garage for property located at 16150 Haven Avenue.


2009-005
 
5-20-09
 
Granting a variance for a fence for property located at 9235 Maplewood Court.


2009-009
 
8-18-09
 
Granting a variance for a fence for property located at 17000 Westwood Drive.


2010-004
 
5-19-10
 
Granting a variance for a garage for property located at 16825 South 93rd
Street.


2010-012
 
8-18-10
 
Granting a variance for a ground sign for property located at 8833 West 159th
Street.


2011-001
 
3-2-11
 
Granting variances for purpose of allowing construction of an 87 unit
assisted living facility located at 9800 W. 167th Street.


2011-010
 
9-7-11
 
Granting variance for shed type structure for property located at 9120 W.
162nd Street.


2012-004
 
4-18-12
 
Granting a variance relating to the size of a ground monument sign for
property located at 9201 W. 159th Street.


2013-006
 
8-21-13
 
Granting a variance relating to fence construction requirements for property
located at 9153 Boardwalk Terrace.


2014-009
 
12-17-14
 
Granting a variance relating to fence construction requirements for property
located at 17019 South 93rd Avenue.


2014-010
 
12-17-14
 
Granting a variance to § 159.057 to allow Dan Labriola to operate the Villa
Roma Pizza Restaurant at 16199 and 16201 South 94th Avenue.


2015-006
 
6-17-15
 
Granting a variance relating to fence construction requirements for property
located at 17049 South 92nd Avenue.


2016-004
 
8-17-16
 
Granting a variance  to wall standards, horizontal and vertical separation
standards for multi-family structures to allow for the construction of an
87-unit assisted living facility at 9800 West 167th Street.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE X:  RESUBDIVISIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
DESCRIPTION




97-03
 
2-5-97
 
Resubdividing Lot Numbers 29, 30, and 31 in the Pepperwood Subdivision Phase
One at 9316, 9324, and 16531 Park Place in the village.


97-07
 
2-19-97
 
Resubdividing Lot “A” in Owners Subdivision at 16121 S. 94th Avenue in
the village.


99-05
 
9-1-99
 
Resubdividing the subject property commonly known as 9101 West 159th Street.


2000-07
 
1-13-00
 
Resubdividing the property located at 9501 W. 171st Street.


2000-05
 
1-19-00
 
Resubdividing the property located at 9201 W. 159th Street.


2001-03
 
1-17-01
 
Resubdividing the property located at 16101 S. 94th Avenue.


2001-016
 
6-20-01
 
Resubdividing lot numbers 210, 211 and 212 in the Pepperwood Subdivision
Phase 4 at 9206, 9200 and 9154 Cardinal Circle.


2005-019
 
9-7-05
 
Approving a subdivision of property commonly known as 9755 and 9800 W. 167th
Street.


2006-007
 
3-15-06
 
Approving resubdivision of the property commonly known as the Orland Towne
Center.


2006-008
 
3-15-06
 
Approving subdivision of property commonly known as the southwest corner of
159th Place and 91st Avenue.


2006-024
 
9-20-06
 
Approving a subdivision of the east half of the east half of the east half of
the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 21, Township 36
north, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian.


2011-003
 
4-20-11
 
Approving subdivision of property located at 9320 and 9338 West 171st Street.


 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Illinois Compiled Statutes



References to 1965 Code of Ordinances



References to Ordinances



References to Resolutions



References to Agreements



REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Section
 
Code Section




Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.27
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 3
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 4
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 85, § 2
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
 
10.17


Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3
 
37.01


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-54
 
35.095


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 15-10
 
35.095


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 1-3
 
37.01


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4
 
37.01


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3
 
37.01


Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9
 
33.016


Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3
 
33.002


Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 1 et seq.
 
154.02


Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
 
115.199, 115.200


Ch. 50, Act 105, §§ 1 et seq.
 
31.050


Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.
 
32.068


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2.2
 
32.129


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2.2-1 et seq.
 
32.120


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-10-1
 
31.081


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-5-5
 
10.17


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5
 
31.150


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10
 
31.140


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35
 
31.028


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.
 
153.02, 153.07


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-3-14
 
33.065


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.1
 
33.165


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.2
 
33.165


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3
 
33.165


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.4
 
33.165


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2
 
33.040, 33.088


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5
 
33.015


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-5 et seq.
 
33.001


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-7
 
33.105


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-12
 
33.040


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17
 
33.040, 33.088


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq.
 
35.005


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-4
 
32.071


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1 et seq.
 
32.121, 32.122


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1-1 et seq.
 
39.30, 39.32, 39.42


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-74.4-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4(a)
 
Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-4.2
 
33.130, Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(a)
 
Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(c)
 
Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d)
 
Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-5(d)(9)
 
Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74.4-6(e)
 
Ch. 33, App.


Ch. 105, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
131.09


Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
38.06


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 2-202
 
33.088


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-221
 
33.040


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222
 
33.040


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1
 
33.085


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-104
 
33.040


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
 
115.196


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
 
115.195


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)
 
115.196


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801
 
115.195


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
 
115.195


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
115.195


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501
 
115.180


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s)
 
115.182


Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.
 
154.16


Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4
 
154.05


Ch. 225, Act 312, § 140
 
150.010


Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 - 49
 
153.02


Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1 - 49
 
153.02


Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.
 
132.05


Ch. 230, Act 40, § 65
 
110.07


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
111.21


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-16
 
134.01


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-20
 
134.01


Ch. 425, Act 30, § 2
 
130.07


Ch. 430, Act 65, § 1.1
 
130.07


Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
154.02


Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18g
 
153.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.
 
70.01, 71.04, 72.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146
 
33.115


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609
 
73.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616
 
73.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-204
 
32.121, 32.122


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5
 
72.38, 72.45, 73.31, 73.34


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5(c)
 
72.38


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3
 
72.35, 72.38, 72.39, 72.43, 72.45, 73.31, 73.33, 73.43


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3 (f)
 
73.34


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.6
 
72.35, 72.39, 72.40


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305
 
72.22


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306
 
72.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306.5
 
72.35


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502(a)
 
72.16


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-505
 
72.24


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601
 
72.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2
 
73.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1306
 
72.43, 73.33


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101
 
72.23


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-603.1
 
35.007


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111
 
72.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 8-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 9-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 10-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-14
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-15
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-17
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20.1
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 12 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-1
 
135.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-3
 
135.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 16-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16-1
 
136.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 20-2 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1
 
136.03


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-2
 
136.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3
 
136.05


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
 
111.33, 130.07


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(1)
 
130.07


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 25-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 26-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 28-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1
 
132.05, 134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 31-1 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1
 
131.10


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 36-1 et seq.
 
71.10


Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
96.33, 134.01


Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et seq.
 
134.01


Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402
 
132.03


Ch. 720, Act 600, § 3.5
 
132.04


Ch. 725, Act 5, §§ 100-1 et seq.
 
33.999


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 2-203
 
73.43


Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
 
39.43, 71.10, 73.41


Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15(a)
 
35.095


Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15(b)
 
35.095


Ch. 765, Act 205, §§ 1 et seq.
 
33.999


Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2
 
153.10


Ch. 775, Ch. 5, § 6-101
 
35.095


Ch. 820, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.
 
35.008


Ch. 820, Act 320, §§ 1 et seq.
 
35.100


Ill. Rev. Stats.,  Ch. 111½, Art. 172
 
158.02


Ill. Rev. Stats.,  Ch. 111½, Art. 175
 
158.02


Ill. Rev. Stats.,  Ch. 111½, Art. 176
 
158.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1965 CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1965 Code Section
 
1990 Code Section




Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 1
 
31.110


Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 2
 
31.111


Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 3
 
31.112


Ch. 1, Art. 5, § 4
 
31.113


Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 1
 
113.20


Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 2
 
113.21


Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 3
 
113.25


Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 4
 
113.22


Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 5
 
113.23


Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 6
 
113.24


Ch. 10, Art. 2, § 7
 
113.99


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 1
 
158.01


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 2
 
158.20


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 3
 
158.20


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 4
 
158.21


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 5
 
158.23, 158.22


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 6
 
158.23


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 7
 
158.02


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 8
 
158.02


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 9
 
158.02


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 10
 
158.03


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 11
 
158.04


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 12
 
158.05, 158.06


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 13
 
158.07


Ch. 12, Art. 11, § 14
 
158.99


Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 1
 
95.01, 95.02


Ch. 16, Art. 1, § 3
 
95.99


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 1
 
131.01


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 2
 
131.07


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 3
 
132.02


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 4
 
132.01


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 5
 
131.02


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 6
 
131.05


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 7
 
131.03


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 8
 
91.03


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 9
 
133.02


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 10
 
133.01


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 11
 
92.01


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 12
 
92.02


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 13
 
133.03


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 14
 
155.10


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 15
 
131.04


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 16
 
93.01


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 17
 
155.12


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 18
 
155.11


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 19
 
95.03


Ch. 17, Art. 4, § 20
 
131.99, 132.99, 133.99, 155.99


Ch. 21, Art. I, § 1
 
150.022


Ch. 21, Art. I, § 6
 
150.027


Ch. 21, Art. I, § 7
 
150.026


Ch. 21, Art. I, § 9
 
150.024


Ch. 21, Art. I, § 10
 
150.025


Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 2
 
150.022


Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 3
 
150.022


Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 5
 
150.020.1


Ch. 21, Art. 1, § 8
 
150.021


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




--
 
7-27-88
 
T.S.O. III


12-8-76
 
93.26
 
93.35


65-0-003
 
5-19-65
 
30.02


65-0-004
 
6-3-65
 
31.110 - 31.113, 91.03, 92.01, 92.02, 93.01, 95.01 - 95.03, 95.99, 113.20 -
113.25, 113.99, 131.01 - 131.05, 131.07, 131.99, 132.01, 132.02, 132.99,
133.01 - 133.03, 133.99, 150.020.1, 150.022, 150.024 - 150.027, 158.01 -
158.07, 158.20 - 158.23, 158.99


65-0-005
 
6-16-65
 
32.015, 32.016


66-0-001
 
1-19-66
 
50.05


66-0-002
 
1-19-66
 
32.015, 32.016


66-0-005
 
9-7-66
 
51.01 - 51.03, 51.05 - 51.07, 51.20 - 51.22


66-0-007
 
11-5-66
 
32.015, 32.016


67-0-003
 
3-4-67
 
150.077


67-0-005
 
- -67
 
32.015, 32.016


69-8
 
11-19-69
 
T.S.O. III


70-8
 
8-5-70
 
T.S.O. III


70-9
 
- -70
 
150.009


71-2
 
- -71
 
51.35, 51.99, 150.076, 150.999


71-4
 
- -
 
30.04


71-5
 
6-5-71
 
150.026


71-11
 
1-8-72
 
T.S.O. II


72-1
 
1-15-72
 
T.S.O. II


72-07
 
4-15-72
 
150.105


72-12
 
10-7-72
 
131.06, 131.99


73-17
 
8-7-73
 
90.01 - 90.11, 90.99


73-20
 
10-2-73
 
150.140 - 150.144, 150.146 - 150.148


73-22
 
12-18-73
 
74.01 - 74.15, 74.99


74-11
 
- -74
 
T.S.O. II


75-4
 
3-4-75
 
114.01 - 114.12, 114.99


75-6
 
4-1-75
 
33.030 - 33.037


75-12
 
7-2-75
 
150.105


75-13
 
7-2-75
 
150.022


75-15
 
7-30-75
 
10.99, 30.01 - 30.05, 31.001 - 31.011, 31.025 - 31.030, 31.065 - 31.067,
31.080, 31.081


76-3
 
1-21-76
 
150.085.1


76-05
 
- -
 
150.035


76-6
 
- -76
 
92.15.1


76-08
 
- -76
 
T.S.O. II


76-18
 
5-5-76
 
33.001 - 33.003, 33.015 - 33.017


76-22
 
8-18-76
 
30.02


76-25
 
10-20-76
 
130.01 - 130.05, 130.99


76-26 A
 
- -76
 
91.01, 91.02, 91.20 - 91.24, 91.35 - 91.38, 91.50 - 91.52, 91.99


76-26
 
11-3-76
 
T.S.O. V


76-27
 
- -
 
159.181


76-29
 
 
 
93.35, 113.99


76-29
 
12-8-76
 
51.04, 91.04, 93.25, 93.35 - 93.38, 94.01 - 94.03, 94.99, 95.15 - 95.18,
95.99, 97.01 - 97.04, 97.99, 113.01, 113.02


76-32
 
12-8-76
 
T.S.O. II


77-02
 
- -77
 
T.S.O. II


77-03
 
1-19-77
 
159.001 - 159.012, 159.025 - 159.030, 159.040 - 159.046, 159.055 - 159.058,
159.070, 159.071, 159.085 - 159.093, 159.105 - 159.109, 159.120 - 159.123,
159.135 - 159.147, 159.160 - 159.165, 159.175 - 159.180, 159.999


77-05
 
4-6-77
 
156.01 - 156.05, 156.20 - 156.23, 156.35 - 156.40, 156.50 - 156.57, 156.70 -
156.76, 156.85 - 156.90, 156.99


77-07
 
5-4-77
 
150.143 - 150.144


77-10
 
5-4-77
 
T.S.O. II


77-11
 
12-28-77
 
T.S.O. VII


77-12
 
6-15-77
 
30.02


77-15
 
6-30-77
 
T.S.O. II


77-22
 
10-12-77
 
152.01 - 152.03


77-23
 
11-23-77
 
150.160 - 150.168


78-02
 
4-12-78
 
150.200


78-06
 
8-23-78
 
T.S.O. III


78-09
 
10-25-78
 
150.005


78-10
 
- -78
 
T.S.O. VII


78-12
 
11-22-78
 
131.06, 131.99


78-13
 
12-13-78
 
159.002, 159.005, 159.041 - 159.043, 159.121, 159.123, 159.136


79-06
 
3-28-79
 
92.15.1


79-07
 
3-28-79
 
150.020.1


79-9
 
5-9-79
 
T.S.O. II


79-12
 
- -79
 
72.01, 72.02, 72.99


79-20
 
11-28-79
 
150.105 - 150.109, 150.111, 150.113


80-04
 
- -80
 
91.38


80-05
 
- -80
 
96.01 - 96.04, 96.15 - 96.25, 96.27 - 96.39, 96.99


80-06
 
- -80
 
T.S.O. VI


80-07
 
- -80
 
130.99


80-09
 
8-13-80
 
96.26


80-12
 
- -80
 
152.02, 152.03


80-12A
 
11-12-80
 
T.S.O. IV


80-13
 
11-12-80
 
T.S.O. I


81-01
 
2-25-81
 
150.020.1


81-02
 
- -82
 
150.085.1


81-03
 
2-25-81
 
114.12


81-05
 
- -81
 
T.S.O. VI


81-09
 
- -81
 
150.007


81-10
 
- -
 
150.110, 150.112


81-13
 
- -81
 
150.004


81-16
 
- -81
 
150.200


81-23
 
11-25-81
 
T.S.O. II


82-02
 
- -82
 
33.030


82-03
 
- -82
 
96.28


82-06
 
6-23-82
 
159.002, 159.121, 159.136


82-07
 
- -82
 
152.01 - 152.04, 152.99


82-13
 
- -82
 
157.01 - 157.03, 157.05, 157.06, 157.08, 157.20 - 157.23, 157.99


82-14
 
- -
 
31.125


83-03
 
- -83
 
150.001


83-06
 
- -83
 
150.200


83-10
 
7-13-83
 
T.S.O. V


83-15
 
9-14-83
 
150.160, 150.169 - 150.171


83-18
 
- -83
 
92.03


83-19
 
- -83
 
152.03


83-22
 
- -83
 
T.S.O. IV


84-01
 
1-11-84
 
70.01, 70.02, 70.99


84-02
 
- -84
 
50.01 - 50.04, 50.20 - 50.26, 50.99


84-03
 
- -
 
150.035


84-04
 
- -84
 
150.200


84-06
 
- -84
 
T.S.O. II


84-07
 
- -84
 
T.S.O. II


84-08 A
 
- -84
 
34.01 - 34.12


84-10
 
- -84
 
T.S.O. VIII


84-11
 
- -84
 
156.55


84-13
 
11-14-84
 
T.S.O. III


84-15
 
- -84
 
T.S.O. IV


84-16
 
- -84
 
159.005 - 159.107


85-01
 
1-9-85
 
112.01 - 112.09, 112.99


85-02
 
2-27-85
 
112.08


85-03
 
2-27-85
 
113.01, 113.02, 113.99


85-11
 
- -85
 
156.54


85-13
 
10-9-85
 
156.54, 156.99


85-15
 
- -
 
32.030 - 32.035


85-16
 
12-12-85
 
150.020.1


86-01
 
3-12-86
 
98.03


86-03
 
4-23-86
 
159.056 - 159.058, 159.085 - 159.093


86-05
 
5-14-86
 
Ch. 75; Scheds. I - IV


86-11
 
- -86
 
93.15, 93.16, 93.25, 94.99, 97.04


86-12
 
10-8-86
 
Ch. 75; Sched. I


86-14
 
11-12-86
 
73.01 - 73.04, 73.99


86-15
 
- -
 
32.068


86-19
 
- -86
 
98.01, 98.02, 98.04, 98.15 - 98.22, 98.35 - 98.40, 98.99


87-01
 
1-28-87
 
73.01


87-03
 
2-11-87
 
150.201, 150.999


87-04
 
- -87
 
159.005, 159.041 - 159.044, 159.106


87-05
 
- -87
 
32.001 - 32.005


87-06
 
- -
 
30.04


87-09
 
- -87
 
111.21 - 111.23, 111.25, 111.27, 111.29 - 111.36, 111.45 - 111.51, 111.65 -
111.68, 111.99


87-12
 
9-23-87
 
Ch. 75; Scheds. I, IV, V


87-17
 
12-9-87
 
31.045 - 31.051


87-18
 
12-9-87
 
Ch. 75; Sched. I


88-02
 
- -88
 
111.26, 111.27, 111.65


88-03
 
- -88
 
32.065 - 32.067


88-04
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. III


88-07
 
- -88
 
155.01 - 155.09, 155.20 - 155.23, 155.35, 155.36, 155.45 - 155.47, 155.99


88-11
 
4-27-88
 
150.022


88-13
 
5-11-88
 
150.163


88-15
 
6-2-88
 
157.04, 157.06, 157.07


88-25
 
9-28-88
 
159.057, 159.107


88-36
 
11-23-88
 
131.06, 131.99


88-37
 
12-14-88
 
111.52


88-40
 
12-14-88
 
110.01 - 110.08, 110.99


88-41
 
12-28-88
 
111.30


88-42
 
12-28-88
 
32.065 - 32.067


88-44
 
12-28-88
 
150.180 - 150.187, 150.189, 150.190, 150.999


89-01
 
1-11-89
 
155.48


89-02
 
1-11-89
 
36.01 - 36.13


89-03
 
1-11-89
 
131.06


89-09
 
4-12-89
 
Apps. A through G


89-11
 
4-26-89
 
52.01, 52.99


89-12
 
5-10-89
 
30.04


89-13
 
5-10-89
 
Ch. 75; Sched. I


89-15
 
5-10-89
 
156.54, 156.58


89-22
 
7-26-89
 
32.068


89-23
 
7-26-89
 
150.006


89-25
 
8-3-89
 
111.25


89-27
 
9-13-89
 
Ch. 75; Sched. I, Ch. 76; Sched. I


89-28
 
10-11-89
 
150.078


89-30
 
11-8-89
 
110.06, 110.07, 110.99


89-31
 
11-22-89
 
151.01 - 151.04, 151.99


89-32
 
11-22-89
 
153.01 - 153.14, 153.99


89-34
 
12-13-89
 
33.050 - 33.056


90-09
 
3-6-90
 
150.003


90-13
 
3-14-90
 
73.01 - 73.04, 73.99, Ch. 76; Sched. I


90-14
 
3-14-90
 
71.01 - 71.09, 71.99


90-18
 
3-28-90
 
150.023, 150.999


90-36
 
6-27-90
 
32.069


90-37
 
6-27-90
 
110.20 - 110.26, 110.99


90-39
 
7-11-90
 
150.125, 150.999


90-43
 
8-22-90
 
111.28


90.50
 
10-24-90
 
150.020.1


90-53
 
11-14-90
 
T.S.O. II


90-54
 
11-14-90
 
32.080


90-56
 
12-19-90
 
153.01 - 153.14. 153.99


91-02
 
2-13-91
 
73.01 - 73.04, 73.99, Ch. 76, Sch. I


91-05
 
2-13-91
 
32.066


91-13
 
6-12-91
 
Adopting Ordinance


91-14
 
6-12-91
 
112.01, 112.02, 112.04, 112.07


91-17
 
7-24-91
 
131.05, 131.99


91-22
 
9-9-91
 
110.03


91-23
 
9-11-91
 
111.27, 111.28, 111.30


91-25
 
9-12-91
 
T.S.O. III


91-26
 
-  -91
 
159.146


91-27
 
9-25-91
 
159.163


91-30
 
10-23-91
 
71.04, 71.06, 71.99


91-31
 
11-13-91
 
153.01 - 153.14, 153.99


91-35
 
12-11-91
 
156.71


91-36
 
12-19-91
 
159.044, 159.045, 159.046


91-37
 
12-19-91
 
150.023, Ch. 150, App.


92-03
 
1-22-92
 
92.15.1


92-04
 
1-22-92
 
150.020.1, 150.035, 150.075, 150.085.1, 150.105


92-06
 
2-26-92
 
T.S.O. IV


92-07
 
2-26-92
 
T.S.O. III


92-08
 
2-26-92
 
156.57


92-10
 
5-13-92
 
93.50 - 93.54


92-14
 
5-13-92
 
112.02, 112.04, 112.07, 112.10


92-16
 
6-10-92
 
152.03


92-22
 
7-8-92
 
152.05


92-23
 
6-24-92
 
T.S.O. III


92-24
 
7-8-92
 
111.24


92-29
 
7-22-92
 
92.15.1, 92.99(B)


92-32
 
8-12-92
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


92-33
 
9-9-92
 
73.15 - 73.23, 73.99(B)


92-42
 
10-14-92
 
T.S.O. III


92-44
 
10-14-92
 
T.S.O. III


92-45
 
10-28-92
 
33.065 - 33.073, 33.999


92-46
 
11-11-92
 
T.S.O. IV


92-55
 
11-11-92
 
150.020.1


92-60
 
12-23-92
 
32.066


92-61
 
12-23-92
 
T.S.O. V


93-01
 
1-12-93
 
10.02, 10.04, 10.06, 10.17, 31.050, 31.081, 70.01, 71.04


93-03
 
1-12-93
 
T.S.O. III


93-04
 
1-12-93
 
30.02


93-05
 
1-12-93
 
110.03, 110.07


93-06
 
1-12-93
 
155.03


93-07
 
1-12-93
 
155.03


93-16
 
3-25-93
 
T.S.O. III


93-17
 
3-25-93
 
T.S.O. III


93-18
 
4-6-93
 
99.01


93-19
 
4-6-93
 
97.15, 97.16


93-20
 
4-6-93
 
33.067, 33.073, 33.999


93-21
 
4-6-93
 
T.S.O. III


93-28
 
4-21-93
 
Ch. 75, Sch.I


93-29
 
4-21-93
 
32.066


93-30
 
5-14-93
 
30.02, 30.04


93-33
 
6-2-93
 
32.032


93-34
 
6-16-93
 
T.S.O. III


93-37
 
6-16-93
 
Ch. 150, App.


93-38
 
6-16-93
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


93-40
 
6-16-93
 
32.032, 32.033


93-41
 
6-16-93
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


93-43
 
6-16-93
 
32.085, 32.086, 32.087


93-44
 
6-16-93
 
32.095 - 32.097


93-51
 
9-1-93
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


93-52
 
9-1-93
 
30.04


93-56
 
11-3-93
 
98.35


94-03
 
2-2-94
 
111.27, 111.28, 111.30


94-06
 
3-2-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-07
 
3-2-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-08
 
3-2-94
 
T.S.O. VIII


94-11
 
5-4-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-12
 
6-1-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-13
 
6-1-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-14
 
6-15-94
 
131.05


94-15
 
6-6-94
 
31.126


94-17
 
7-6-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-18
 
7-6-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-20
 
7-20-94
 
Adopting Ordinance


94-21
 
7-20-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-22
 
7-20-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-24
 
8-17-94
 
32.066


94-25
 
8-17-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-29
 
10-19-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-30
 
10-19-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-31
 
10-19-94
 
71.04, 71.05


94-32
 
11-2-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-33
 
11-2-94
 
T.S.O. IX


94-35
 
11-16-94
 
131.06


94-36
 
11-16-94
 
110.07, 112.04


94-41
 
12-7-94
 
111.23, 111.24


94-46
 
12-21-94
 
T.S.O. VI


95-01
 
3-1-95
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


95-02
 
3-28-95
 
31.048


95-03
 
4-10-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-04
 
4-10-95
 
150.020.1


95-05
 
4-10-95
 
159.161


95-06
 
4-10-95
 
31.048, 150.020.1, 150.035, 151.03, 152.05, 155.04, Ch. 155 App, 156.02
-156.05, 156.20 - 156.22, 156.38, 156.39, 156.50 - 156.52, 156.54, 156.70,
156.71, 156.88, 156.89, 159.030, 159.057, 159.107 - 159.109, 159.138,
159.146, 159.160 - 159.164, 159.166 - 159.168, 159.174 - 159.176, 159.179,
159.180, 159.200


95-07
 
4-10-95
 
151.01 - 151.04


95-08
 
4-19-95
 
130.01 - 130.08, 130.99


95-09
 
6-7-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-10
 
6-21-95
 
159.013


95-12
 
7-5-95
 
30.02


95-14
 
8-2-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-15
 
8-16-95
 
31.048


95-16
 
8-16-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-19
 
9-20-95
 
Adopting Ordinance


95-21
 
9-20-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-22
 
9-20-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-23
 
9-20-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-24
 
10-18-95
 
98.15


95-25
 
10-4-95
 
131.08


95-26
 
10-4-95
 
32.105 - 32.109


95-27
 
11-1-95
 
111.28, 111.30


95-28
 
10-1-95
 
T.S.O. VIII


95-29
 
10-18-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-30
 
10-18-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-31
 
10-18-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-32
 
11-15-95
 
T.S.O. IX


95-34
 
11-15-95
 
T.S.O. III


95-35
 
11-15-95
 
T.S.O. II


95-36
 
11-15-95
 
T.S.O. III


95-37
 
11-15-95
 
T.S.O. II


95-38
 
11-15-95
 
T.S.O. III


95-39
 
11-15-95
 
T.S.O. II


95-40
 
11-15-95
 
95.04


95-41
 
11-15-95
 
95.05


95-42
 
11-15-95
 
32.095, 32.096


95-43
 
12-6-95
 
155.03


95-44
 
12-6-95
 
150.022


95-48
 
12-20-95
 
T.S.O. III


95-49
 
12-20-95
 
T.S.O. III


96-01
 
1-3-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-02
 
1-17-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-03
 
1-17-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-04
 
2-7-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-05
 
2-7-96
 
T.S.O. III


96-06
 
2-7-96
 
T.S.O. II


96-07
 
2-7-96
 
T.S.O. III


96-08
 
2-7-96
 
T.S.O. II


96-11
 
2-7-96
 
72.15, 72.99


96-12
 
2-7-96
 
131.09


96-14
 
2-21-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-15
 
4-3-96
 
115.001 - 115.009, 115.020 - 115.022, 115.030 - 115.045, 115.055 - 115.071,
115.090 - 115.098, 115.110 - 115.137, 115.150 - 115.168, 115.999


96-16
 
3-6-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-17
 
3-20-96
 
152.01 - 152.05, 152.99


96-19
 
5-15-96
 
T.S.O. VIII


96-20
 
4-17-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-21
 
5-15-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-22
 
6-5-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-25
 
8-7-96
 
T.S.O. I


96-26
 
8-21-96
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


96-28
 
10-16-96
 
T.S.O. IX


96-29
 
10-16-96
 
T.S.O. III


97-01
 
1-15-97
 
Adopting Ordinance


97-02
 
2-5-97
 
T.S.O. VII


97-03
 
2-5-97
 
T.S.O. X


97-04
 
2-5-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-05
 
2-5-97
 
T.S.O. III


97-07
 
2-19-97
 
T.S.O. X


97-09
 
4-16-97
 
31.140 - 31.143


97-10
 
4-16-97
 
31.028


97-11
 
4-23-97
 
31.150 - 31.153


97-13
 
5-21-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-14
 
5-21-97
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I and Ch. 76., Sch. I


97-16
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-17
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. III


97-18
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. II


97-19
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. VIII


97-20
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. III


97-21
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. II


97-22
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. VIII


97-23
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. II


97-24
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. II


97-25
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. VIII


97-26
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. III


97-27
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. II


97-28
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. VIII


97-29
 
7-2-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-30
 
7-2-97
 
111.27, 111.28, 111.30


97-31
 
7-2-97
 
73.30 - 73.43


97-32
 
7-2-97
 
31.127, 31.128


97-34
 
7-16-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-36
 
8-20-97
 
91.65 - 91.67


97-37
 
8-20-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-38
 
9-3-97
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


97-39
 
9-17-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-40
 
9-17-97
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


97-42
 
10-15-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-43
 
11-19-97
 
Adopting Ordinance


97-44
 
11-5-97
 
33.085 - 33.095


97-45
 
11-19-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-46
 
11-19-97
 
T.S.O. IX


97-47
 
11-19-97
 
33.105 - 33.106


97-48
 
11-19-97
 
33.115 - 33.118


97-51
 
12-17-97
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


98-01
 
2-18-98
 
T.S.O. V


98-02
 
3-4-98
 
111.23


98-03
 
3-4-98
 
31.116 - 31.118


98-04
 
3-18-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-05
 
5-20-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-06
 
5-20-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-07
 
6-17-98
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


98-08
 
6-3-98
 
71.04


98-11
 
6-17-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-12
 
6-17-98
 
71.04


98-13
 
6-17-98
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


98-14
 
7-1-98
 
150.005, 159.121


98-16
 
7-15-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-17
 
7-15-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-19
 
7-15-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-22
 
8-19-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-23
 
8-19-98
 
33.040


98-24
 
9-16-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-26
 
9-16-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-29
 
10-7-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-30
 
10-7-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-31
 
10-7-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-32
 
10-21-98
 
T.S.O. VIII


98-33
 
10-21-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-34
 
11-18-98
 
T.S.O. IX


98-35
 
12-16-98
 
Adopting Ordinance


99-02
 
1-6-99
 
T.S.O. II


99-03
 
1-20-99
 
133.04, 133.99


99-04
 
1-20-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-05
 
9-1-99
 
T.S.O. X


99-06
 
4-7-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-07
 
2-17-99
 
110.07, 155.48, 159.180


99-08
 
2-17-99
 
33.116


99-09
 
3-3-99
 
92.15.1, 150.020.1, 150.025, 150.035, 150.075, 150.105, 155.06


99-10
 
4-7-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-12
 
5-26-99
 
30.04


99-13
 
5-26-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-14
 
5-26-99
 
T.S.O. III


99-15
 
5-26-99
 
71.04


99-18
 
6-16-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-19
 
6-16-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-20
 
7-7-99
 
T.S.O. III


99-21
 
8-18-99
 
155.03


99-22
 
8-18-99
 
114.04, 114.06, 114.12


99-23
 
9-15-99
 
38.01 - 38.06


99-26
 
10-20-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-27
 
10-20-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-28
 
10-20-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-29
 
10-20-99
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I, Ch. 76, Sch. I


99-30
 
10-20-99
 
32.070


99-32
 
11-3-99
 
T.S.O. II


99-33
 
11-3-99
 
T.S.O. VIII


99-34
 
11-17-99
 
T.S.O. IX


99-36
 
12-1-99
 
34.05


2000-02
 
5-17-00
 
35.001 - 35.007, 35.010 - 35.021, 35.030 - 35.032, 35.040 - 35.052, 35.060 -
35.063, 35.065 - 35.076, 35.085 - 35.094, 35.096 - 35.099


2000-03
 
1-5-00
 
73.05, 73.99


2000-04
 
1-5-00
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2000-05
 
1-19-00
 
T.S.O. X


2000-06
 
1-19-00
 
T.S.O. X


2000-07
 
1-13-00
 
T.S.O. X


2000-08
 
1-19-00
 
155.08


2000-09B
 
3-15-00
 
155.08


2000-10
 
6-7-00
 
T.S.O. IX


2000-11
 
7-21-00
 
35.008


2000-13
 
7-19-00
 
31.129, 31.130


2000-14
 
7-19-00
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


2000-16
 
8-16-00
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2000-17
 
8-16-00
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


2000-19
 
10-18-00
 
T.S.O. IX


2000-20
 
11-1-00
 
153.02, 153.05, 153.07


2000-21
 
11-1-00
 
71.10


2000-22
 
11-1-00
 
73.21


2000-23
 
11-15-00
 
T.S.O. IV


2001-02
 
1-17-01
 
Adopting Ordinance


2001-03
 
1-17-01
 
T.S.O. X


2001-04
 
2-7-01
 
33.130


2001-05
 
2-7-01
 
33.140 - 33.156


2001-06
 
2-7-01
 
33.031


2001-07
 
4-18-01
 
91.05, 91.06


2001-09
 
5-16-01
 
T.S.O. IX


2001-010
 
6-6-01
 
153.02, 153.05, 153.09, 156.54


2001-011
 
6-6-01
 
35.008


2001-012
 
6-6-01
 
T.S.O. VI


2001-013
 
6-20-01
 
Ch. 75, Sch. VI


2001-014
 
6-20-01
 
134.01 - 134.05


2001-015
 
6-20-01
 
T.S.O. VI


2001-016
 
6-20-01
 
T.S.O. X


2001-17
 
7-11-01
 
T.S.O. IX


2001-18
 
7-11-01
 
T.S.O. IX


2001-021
 
10-17-01
 
Adopting Ordinance


2001-022
 
11-7-01
 
T.S.O. IX


2001-023
 
11-7-01
 
T.S.O. IX


2001-024
 
11-7-01
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-002
 
5-15-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-003
 
5-15-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-004
 
6-6-02
 
35.008


2002-005
 
6-20-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-006
 
6-20-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-007
 
6-20-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-009
 
7-17-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-011
 
8-21-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-012
 
8-21-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-013
 
8-21-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-015
 
9-4-02
 
110.01, 110.02, 110.07, 113.21, 150.005, 150.035, 150.085.1, 150.144,
150.200, Ch. 150 App., 152.03, 155.03, 155.46, 155.48, 157.04, 159.180,
Repeals 150.095


2002-016
 
9-18-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-017
 
10-16-02
 
150.191


2002-018
 
10-30-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-021
 
11-20-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2002-022
 
12-4-02
 
33.020


2002-023
 
12-4-02
 
33.030 - 33.032


2002-024
 
12-4-02
 
111.28


2002-025
 
12-18-02
 
111.28


2002-026
 
12-18-02
 
T.S.O. IX


2003-002
 
1-15-03
 
Adopting Ordinance


2003-005
 
3-5-03
 
T.S.O. VII


2003-006
 
5-7-03
 
T.S.O. IX


2003-007
 
4-16-03
 
T.S.O. IX


2003-008
 
4-16-03
 
155.46


2003-009
 
4-23-03
 
111.28


2003-010
 
5-7-03
 
T.S.O. IX


2003-011
 
5-7-03
 
T.S.O. IX


2003-012
 
6-4-03
 
Ch. 150 App., 155.46


2003-013
 
6-18-03
 
35.008


2003-015
 
8-20-03
 
T.S.O. IX


2003-016
 
8-20-03
 
Adopting Ordinance


2003-017
 
9-3-03
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


2003-019
 
9-17-03
 
T.S.O. IX


2003-022
 
12-3-03
 
110.01, 110.02, 110.07


2003-023
 
12-3-03
 
T.S.O. VIII


2003-024
 
12-17-03
 
T.S.O. IX


2004-003
 
4-7-04
 
35.015


2004-004
 
4-21-04
 
37.01 - 37.04, 37.99


2004-007
 
6-16-04
 
35.008


2004-008
 
6-16-04
 
150.055 - 150.062


2004-010
 
7-7-04
 
T.S.O. IX


2004-011
 
7-7-04
 
T.S.O. IX


2004-012
 
8-18-04
 
T.S.O. IX


2004-013
 
8-18-04
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2004-017
 
12-8-04
 
T.S.O. II


2005-002
 
1-5-05
 
T.S.O. V


2005-003
 
1-5-05
 
32.120 - 32.132


2005-004
 
2-16-04
 
Adopting Ordinance


2005-006
 
3-16-05
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2005-007
 
3-16-05
 
T.S.O. II


2005-008
 
4-6-05
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2005-009
 
5-18-05
 
T.S.O. VIII


2005-010
 
6-15-05
 
35.008


2005-011
 
6-15-05
 
150.020.1, 150.075, 150.078, 150.105


2005-019
 
9-7-05
 
T.S.O. X


2005-020
 
9-7-05
 
T.S.O. VIII


2006-004
 
1-18-06
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2006-005
 
2-15-06
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-006
 
3-15-06
 
T.S.O. VIII


2006-007
 
3-15-06
 
T.S.O. IX, X


2006-008
 
3-15-06
 
T.S.O. VIII, IX, X


2006-009
 
3-15-06
 
T.S.O. III


2006-010
 
4-5-06
 
35.089


2006-0011
 
4-19-06
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-012
 
6-7-06
 
35.008


2006-013
 
6-7-06
 
Adopting Ordinance


2006-014
 
6-21-06
 
92.20 - 92.24, 92.99


2006-016
 
7-19-06
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-017
 
7-19-06
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-018
 
7-19-06
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-019
 
8-2-06
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2006-020
 
8-16-06
 
72.16, 72.20 - 72.24, 72.99, 73.99


2006-021
 
8-16-06
 
131.10, 132.03 - 132.06, 132.99, 135.01 - 135.03, 135.99, 136.01 - 136.05,
136.99


2006-022
 
9-20-06
 
92.15.1, 150.025, 150.035, 150.045, 150.085.1, 150.191, 150.200, 150.999, Ch.
150 App.


2006-023
 
9-20-06
 
71.10


2006-024
 
9-20-06
 
T.S.O. X


2006-026
 
9-20-06
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-027
 
10-18-06
 
71.10


2006-028
 
11-15-06
 
32.120 - 32.132


2006-029
 
11-15-06
 
39.30 - 39.45


2006-030
 
12-20-06
 
93.70 - 93.74


2007-003
 
1-17-07
 
30.06


2007-004
 
1-17-07
 
92.16


2007-005
 
2-21-07
 
111.22, 111.24, 111.27, 111.28, 111.30


2007-006
 
5-16-07
 
T.S.O. IX


2007-008
 
6-20-07
 
35.008


2007-009
 
6-20-07
 
T.S.O. IX


2007-011
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. VIII


2007-012
 
7-17-07
 
Adopting Ordinance


2007-013
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. IX


2007-014
 
7-17-07
 
T.S.O. IX


2007-015
 
9-5-07
 
154.01 - 154.23, 154.99


2007-016
 
9-19-07
 
T.S.O. III


2007-018
 
10-17-07
 
T.S.O. VIII


2007-021
 
12-19-07
 
32.071


2008-003
 
3-5-08
 
111.21, 111.27, 111.28, 111.30


2008-004
 
3-5-08
 
71.10


2008-005
 
3-5-08
 
98.15, 156.54


2008-006
 
3-19-08
 
T.S.O. VIII


2008-007
 
4-2-08
 
111.28


2009-002
 
3-4-09
 
10.99, 70.99, 71.99, 72.99, 73.99, 74.99, Ch. 75, Schs. I, II, IV, V, VI


2009-003
 
4-1-09
 
72.01, 72.99


2009-004
 
5-6-09
 
33.165, 33.166


2009-005
 
5-20-09
 
T.S.O. IX


2009-006
 
7-1-09
 
35.008


2009-009
 
8-18-09
 
T.S.O. IX


2009-010
 
9-16-09
 
Adopting Ordinance


2009-011
 
10-21-09
 
32.160 - 32.165


2009-012
 
12-2-09
 
115.180 - 115.182


2010-001
 
1-20-10
 
115.195 - 115.200


2010-003
 
5-5-10
 
91.80 - 91.90


2010-004
 
5-19-10
 
T.S.O. IX


2010-007
 
7-7-10
 
131.06


2010-009
 
7-7-10
 
72.35 - 72.47, 72.99


2010-010
 
7-20-10
 
35.008


2010-012
 
8-18-10
 
T.S.O. IX


2010-013
 
12-15-10
 
92.15.1, 92.15.2, 150.008, 150.020.1, 150.035, 150.085.1, 150.105


2010-014
 
9-22-10
 
111.28


2010-018
 
12-15-10
 
Adopting Ordinance


2010-019
 
12-15-10
 
T.S.O. III


2011-001
 
3-2-11
 
T.S.O. IX


2011-002
 
3-16-11
 
Ch. 150 App.


2011-003
 
4-20-11
 
T.S.O. III


2011-004
 
6-15-11
 
35.008


2011-007
 
8-3-11
 
73.40


2011-008
 
8-17-11
 
Ch. 75, Schs. III, IV


2011-010
 
9-7-11
 
T.S.O. IX


2011-011
 
12-21-11
 
Adopting Ordinance


2011-012
 
12-21-11
 
111.27, 111.28, 111.30


2011-013
 
12-7-11
 
35.100


2012-001
 
1-4-12
 
111.28


2012-002
 
3-7-12
 
110.07, 112.01


2012-003
 
3-7-12
 
111.28


2012-004
 
4-18-12
 
T.S.O. IX


2012-005
 
3-21-12
 
110.09 - 110.12


2012-007
 
4-18-12
 
73.40


2012-008
 
4-18-12
 
32.068


2012-009
 
4-18-12
 
73.99


2012-010
 
5-2-12
 
132.05


2012-012
 
6-20-12
 
T.S.O. III


2012-014
 
7-18-12
 
35.008


2012-015
 
8-15-12
 
111.27, 111.28, 111.30


2012-018
 
10-17-12
 
150.010, T.S.O. III


2012-021
 
12-19-12
 
32.068


2013-001
 
1-16-13
 
111.27, 111.28, 111.30


2013-002
 
5-1-13
 
Adopting Ordinance


2013-005
 
8-21-13
 
T.S.O. IV


2013-006
 
8-21-13
 
T.S.O. IX


2013-008
 
10-2-13
 
111.45


2013-009
 
11-20-13
 
T.S.O. III


2014-001
 
1-16-14
 
111.27, 111.28, 111.30


2014-002
 
3-19-14
 
72.25, 72.99


2014-005
 
9-17-14
 
92.17


2014-006
 
11-5-14
 
T.S.O. VIII


2014-009
 
12-17-14
 
T.S.O. IX


2014-010
 
12-17-14
 
T.S.O. IX


2015-001
 
1-21-15
 
32.068


2015-002
 
2-4-15
 
Adopting Ordinance


2015-003
 
3-18-15
 
71.10, 130.04, 130.99, 131.99, 132.99, 133.99, 134.99, 135.99, 136.99


2015-005
 
6-17-15
 
35.008


2015-006
 
6-17-15
 
T.S.O. IX


2015-008
 
8-5-15
 
32.068


2016-001
 
2-3-16
 
131.99


2016-002
 
3-16-16
 
35.066


2016-004
 
8-17-16
 
T.S.O. IX


2016-005
 
8-17-16
 
T.S.O. VIII


2017-002
 
1-18-17
 
92.15.1, 92.15.2, 150.010, 150.020.1, 150.020.2, 150.035, 150.085.1,
150.085.2, 150.105; Repeals 150.002, 150.008, 150.188


2017-003
 
2-1-17
 
Ch. 150, App.


2017-004
 
4-19-17
 
35.051, Ch. 35, App. B


2017-005
 
4-19-17
 
33.165, 33.166


2017-006
 
5-3-17
 
10.99


2017-007
 
5-17-17
 
39.70


2017-008
 
6-21-17
 
91.07


2017-009
 
6-21-17
 
35.008


2017-011
 
7-19-17
 
154.19


2017-013
 
10-4-17
 
35.008


2017-016
 
12-20-17
 
35.095


2018-001
 
1-17-18
 
T.S.O. I


2018-002
 
2-21-18
 
100.01 - 100.06, 100.99


 
 
 
 
 




 



 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




94-19
 
7-20-94
 
T.S.O. III


95-11
 
3-1-95
 
T.S.O. IV


95-12
 
3-15-95
 
T.S.O. III


95-13
 
3-15-95
 
153.25


98-09
 
4-1-98
 
T.S.O. III


99-08
 
1-15-99
 
T.S.O. III


99-29
 
11-17-99
 
39.01 - 39.17, Ch. 39, Apps. A and B


99-32
 
11-14-99
 
T.S.O. III


2000-PAR-013
 
6-7-00
 
T.S.O. III


2000-PAR-014
 
6-7-00
 
T.S.O. I


2002-006
 
2-20-02
 
T.S.O. III


2004-R-051
 
2-1-04
 
T.S.O. III


2004-1006
 
2-18-04
 
T.S.O. III


2004-1014
 
5-5-04
 
T.S.O. III


2004-1015
 
5-5-04
 
T.S.O. III


2004-1021
 
9-1-04
 
T.S.O. III


2005-1003
 
2-2-05
 
32.145


2005-1006
 
2-16-05
 
T.S.O. III


2007-1014
 
4-4-07
 
T.S.O. III


2007-1015
 
4-4-07
 
T.S.O. III


2007-1022
 
5-16-07
 
153.25


2007-1024
 
6-20-07
 
T.S.O. I


2008-1024
 
5-20-08
 
T.S.O. III


2008-1031
 
11-5-08
 
39.55 - 39.62


2009-1010
 
3-4-09
 
39.07, 39.09, 39.15, 39.18


2009-1011
 
3-18-09
 
T.S.O. I


2009-1016
 
4-28-09
 
T.S.O. III


2012-1006
 
2-15-12
 
T.S.O. III


2013-1016
 
7-17-13
 
T.S.O. III


2014-1008
 
3-19-14
 
T.S.O. III


2015-1017
 
5-6-15
 
T.S.O. III


2015-1021
 
8-5-15
 
T.S.O. III


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO AGREEMENTS



 

Agr. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




99-08
 
9-30-98
 
T.S.O. III


99-20
 
7-7-99
 
T.S.O. III


99-27
 
10-4-99
 
T.S.O. III


99-33
 
9-16-99
 
T.S.O. III


99-34
 
10-14-99
 
T.S.O. III


2000-PAR-04
 
1-19-00
 
T.S.O. III


2000-PAR-12
 
5-4-00
 
T.S.O. III


2001-PAR-004
 
4-18-01
 
T.S.O. III


2002-PAR-021
 
8-7-02
 
T.S.O. III


2002-PAR-022
 
9-10-02
 
T.S.O. III


2002-PAR-027
 
11-20-02
 
T.S.O. III


2002-PAR-028
 
12-4-02
 
T.S.O. III


2004-1018
 
6-2-04
 
T.S.O. III


2004-1025
 
10-20-04
 
T.S.O. III


2005-1005
 
2-16-05
 
T.S.O. III


2005-1020
 
4-6-05
 
T.S.O. III


2005-1021
 
6-8-05
 
T.S.O. III


2006-1016
 
6-21-06
 
T.S.O. III


2006-1020
 
9-20-06
 
T.S.O. III


2006-1021
 
9-20-06
 
T.S.O. III


2006-1027
 
12-6-06
 
T.S.O. III


2007-1030
 
11-21-07
 
T.S.O. III


2007-1033
 
12-5-07
 
T.S.O. III


2008-1006
 
1-16-08
 
T.S.O. III


2008-1021
 
4-16-08
 
T.S.O. III


2008-1025
 
5-20-08
 
T.S.O. III


2008-1030
 
11-19-08
 
T.S.O. III


2009-1001
 
1-7-09
 
T.S.O. III


2009-1026
 
11-4-09
 
T.S.O. III


2009-1028
 
12-2-09
 
T.S.O. IV


2010-1009
 
5-19-10
 
T.S.O. III


--
 
6-1-10
 
T.S.O. III


2010-1023
 
6-16-10
 
T.S.O. III


2010-1031
 
10-20-10
 
T.S.O. III


2011-1024
 
- -11
 
T.S.O. III


2012-1004
 
2-1-12
 
T.S.O. III


2012-1005
 
2-1-12
 
T.S.O. III


2012-1010
 
2-3-12
 
T.S.O. III


2013-1025
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. III


2014-1019
 
7-16-14
 
T.S.O. III


2014-1020
 
8-6-14
 
T.S.O. III


--
 
1-21-15
 
T.S.O. III


--
 
1-21-15
 
T.S.O. III


2015-1018
 
2-6-15
 
T.S.O. III


2015-1019
 
7-1-15
 
T.S.O. III


 
 
 
 
 




 


